FUNGOPHOBIA 
BRING home what looks like a wild onion for dinner,and noonegivesitasecond 
thought-despite the fact it might be a death camas you have, especially if you 
didn't bother to smell it. But bring home a wild mushroom for dinner, and watch 
the faces of your friends crawl with various combinations of fear, anxiety, 
loathing, and distrust! Appetites are suddenlyand mysteriously misplaced, vague 
announcements are hurriedly mumbled as to dinner engagements elsewhere, until 
you're finally left alone to "enjoy" your meal in total silence. 
For there are few things that strike as much fear in your average American as 
the mere mention of wild mushrooms or "toadstools." Like snakes, sl ugs, worms, 
and spiders, they're regarded as unearthly and unworthy, despicable and inex- 
plicable-the vermin of the vegetable world. And yet, consider this: out of several 
thousand different kinds of wild mushrooms in North America, only five or six 
are deadly poisonous! And once you know what to look for, it's about as difficult 
to tell a deadly Amanita from a savory chanterelle as it is a lima bean from an 
artichoke. 
This irrational fear of fungi is by no means a universal trait. The media and 
medical profession have done their part to perpetuate it, but they are certainly not 
responsible for its origin. To a large extent, we inherited our fungophobia from 
the British. William Delisle Hays, an astute Englishman writing in the 1800's, 
expressed it this way: 
(All mushrooms) . . . are lumped together in one sweeping condemnation. 
They are looked upon as vegetable vermin only made to be destroyed. No 
English eye can see their beauties, their office is unknown, their varieties not 
regarded. They are hardly allowed a place among nature's lawful children, 
but are considered something abnormal, worthless, and inexplicable. By 
precept and example children are taught from earliest infancy to despise, 
loathe, and avoid all kinds of "toadstools:' The individual who desires to 
engage in the study of them must boldly face a good deal of scorn. He is 
laughed at for his strange taste among the better classes, and is actually 
regarded as a sort of idiot among the lower orders. No fad or hobby is 
esteemed so contemptible as that of "fungus-hunter," or "toadstool-eater." 
This popular sentiment, which we may coin the word "fungophobia" to 
express, is very curious. If it were human-that is, universal-one would be 
inclined to set it down as an instinct, and to revere it accordingly. But it is not 
human-it is merely British. It is so deep and intense a prejudice that it 
amounts to a national superstition. . . 
It is a striking instance of the confused popular notions of fungi in England 
that hardly any species have or ever had colloquial English names. They are 
all "toadstools," and therefore are thought unworthy of baptism. Can any- 
thing more fully demonstrate the existence of that deep-rooted prejudice 
called here "fungophobia"? . . . 
A century later, in America, Alan Snitow echoes similar sentiments in the 
San Francisco Bay Guardian: 
I wander through Bay Area woods and fields looking for mushrooms. When 
I first started, I thought my new hobby offered final proof positive that I am 
-well, a weird person. I didn't know anyone else "into" mushrooms. My 
friends' puzzled looks seemed to confirm my view that I must suffer from a 
form of repressed necrophilia, a perverse fascination with things rotted 
and decayed. . . 
(That some mushrooms can be eaten helps) . . . to justify the quest, espe- 
cially to friends who raise their eyebrows at the mention of fungi. If I am off 
looking for mushrooms, they think I have a rational purpose to my actions. 
Otherwise they would say: "He's off walking around in the rain again:' 
Rather than pitying looks at the soggy human who returns, they see a slightly 
eccentric, but productive, worker, toiling to bring back something for the 
evening's table. 
Mushrooms can be every bit as beautiful as birds, butterflies, shlls, and flowers, 
yet we never think to describe them in such flattering terms. When novelists or 
poets want to conjure up an emotion of fear, loathing, total revulsion, and 
imminent decay, they inevitably drag in the mushrooms and toadstools- 
malignant instruments of death and disease that appear only in the dankest and 
most abominable of situations. Witness Shelley: 
And agarics and fungi, with mildew and mould 
Started like mist from the wet ground cold 
Pale, fleshy, as if the decaying dead 
With a spirit of growth had been animated. . . 
And Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, bygone creator of Sherlock Holmes: 
. . . A sickly autumn shone upon the land. Wet and rotten leaves reeked and 
festered under the foul haze. The fields were spotted with monstrous fungi of 
a size and colour never matched before-scarlet and mauve and liver and 
black-it was as though the sick earth had burst into foul pustules. Mildew 
and lichen mottled the walls and with that filthy crop, death sprang also from 
the watersoaked earth. 
And D.H. Lawrence, that chronic belittler of the British bourgeoisie: 
How beastly the bourgeois is 
especially the male of the species- 
Nicely groomed, like a mushroom 
standing there so sleek and erect and eyeable- 
and like a fungus, living on the remains of bygone life, 
sucking his life out of the dead leaves of greater life than his own. 
And even so, he's stale, he's been there too long, 
Touch him, and you'll find he's all gone inside 
just like an old mushroom, all wormy inside, and hollow 
under a smooth skin and an upright appearance. 
Full of seething, wormy, hollow feelings 
rather nasty- 
How beastly the bourgeois is! 
Standing in their thousands, these appearances, in damp England 
what a pity they can't all be kicked over 
like sickening toadstools, and left to melt back, swiftly 
into the soil of England. 
FUNGOPHOBIA 
3 
And that prim American poet Emily Dickinson: 
Had nature any outcast face 
Could she a son condemn 
Had nature an lscariot 
That mushroom-it is him. 
Has any group of organisms been so unjustly maligned? Actually, Dickenson's 
limp effort should come as no surprise, since she was a virtual recluse. Prejudice 
is largely a measure of ignorance! 
And yet, if you go to continental Europe, you'll find that fungo phobia is the 
exception and not the rule. Most Europeans, especially those who live close to 
the woods, know which mushrooms to pick and how to cook them. They bestow 
upon each species an individual name and sell them in the markets. Many 
Americans, on the other hand, are completely oblivious to the fact that there is 
more than one fungus among us-those of recent European or Oriental ancestry 
being notable exceptions. 
The farther east you go in Europe, the more passionate is the love for mush- 
rooms. Which brings us to Russia. The Russians go absolutely bananas over 
fungus. Mushrooming is a commonplace tradition there, not the hallowed turf of 
the academic or connoisseur. Instead of talking about the weather, strangers 
often engage in polite conversation about how the mushroom season is 
progressing. And Russian children are raised on mushroom lore from earliest 
infancy. Many family names are derived from fungi: Bribov, Borovikov, 
Gruzdjov, Ryshikov, Opjonkin. Another oneis Griboyedev, or"Mr. Mushroom- 
eater." The poet Majokovsky was a mushroom addict. (Poetry, like mushroom 
hunting, is a great tradition there. A Russian poet draws 5,000 toa poetry reading 
-here you're lucky to draw 50.) Even Lenin is said to have been possessed by a 
razh or "mushroom passion." 
In this country, it is only with the renewed interest in natural foods and the 
desire to return to the earth (and what's good for you) that mushrooms are being 
noticed again. Mycological societies are sprouting up in the major cities. And 
of course, business is capitalizing on the trend. Polka-dotted mushrooms have 
appeared in startling profusion on curtains and calendars, pottery and stationery, 
potholders and incense holders, bumper stickers and birthday cakes. 
And yet, when it comes down to actually eating wild mushrooms, most 
Americans are still afraid. Instead they opt for something more familiar and not 
half as good, such as Grape Nuts or Malt Balls. Yet it stands to reason that if 
mushroom-eating were an inherently dangerous activity, it could not exist to the 
extent it does in Europe. And the mycological societies in America would be in 
dire need of new members, their ranks depleted annually by the insidious "Mush- 
room Menace." Like driving, swimming, walking, or breathing, mushroom- 
eating is only made dangerous by those who approach itfrivolously. 
If you treat mushrooms with discrimination and respect, you can learn to pick 
your own edible wild mushrooms without fear of confusing them with poisonous 
types-mushrooms which are nutritious, far more flavorful than the mass- 
produced cultivated variety, and best of all, free! It does, however, require time 
and effort-a willingness to plunge into the woods, to uncover their secrets, to 
learn their characteristics, to penetrate their haunts. That's what this book 
is about. 
WHAT IS A MUSHROOM? 
FUNGI are neither plants nor animals. They don't contain chlorophyll like 
green plants, and as a result cannot manufacture their own food. In this respect 
they resemble animals, because they feed themselves by digesting other organic 
matter. However, they lack the nervous system, specialized organs, and mobility 
characteristic of most animals. Furthermore, fungi reproduce by means of 
microscopic reproductive units called spores. These are far simpler in structure 
than seeds or eggs, and in fact, usually consist of only one cell. 
The term mushroom is most often used to describe the reproductive structure 
(fruiting body) of a fungus. In this sense a mushroom, like a potato or 
persimmon, is not an organism, but a part of an organism. However, the term 
"mushroom" can also mean any fungus which produces a fleshy fruiting body 
(that is, one that has substance). By this definition, not all fungi qualify as 
mushrooms. Athlete's foot fungus, bread molds, water molds, yeasts, and 
mildews are examples of fungi which do not form fleshy fruiting bodies. The 
term "mushroom" can also be applied in a more restricted sense to those fleshy 
fungi like the cultivated mushroom whose fruiting bodies bear spores on 
radiating blades called gills. 
Many fungi are exquisitely constructed, and their life cycles are among the 
most complex to be found. It is not the purpose of this book to explore their 
biology, but it is necessary to consider briefly how mushrooms grow and 
reproduce. All of the mushrooms in this book belong to two subdivisions of the 
true fungi. Most of them produce their spores on the exterior of microscopic 
clu b-shaped cells called basidia (singular: basidium), hence they are called 
Basidiomycetes. A smaller number produce their spores inside microscopic 
saclike mother cells called asci (singular: ascus), hence they are called 
Ascomycetes. 
The fruiting bodies of the Basidiomycetes and Ascomycetes vary greatly in 
detail and design, but their function is always the same-they perpetuate their 
species by disseminating spores. A typical gilled mushroom (the most common 
type of fruiting body) is a straightforward structure consisting of a cap, gills, 
and (usually) a stalk (see diagram). A protective covering called a veil may also 
be present, and if so, will frequently form a ring (annulus) and / or a volva when 
it ruptures. The parts of a gilled mushroom are discussed in more detail on pages 
14-18, and fruiting bodies of a radically different structure, such as puffballs, are 
illustrated and discussed in their respective chapters. 
Spore formation. At left is a typical club- 
shaped basidium, with four small stalks 
(sterigmata) on which the spores form. 
At right is an ascus, inside of which spores 
(usually eight) form. 
annulus or ring 
(partial nil remnants) 
cap 
.¥ umbo 
gills 
. 
mycelium 
\'01\'8 
(uni\'ersal nil remnants) 
a.. 
Parts of a gilled mushroom. Mature Amanita at left has cap, stalk, gills, annulus, and volva. The 
partial veil covers the gills when young and breaks to form a ring (annulus) on the stalk, while the 
universal veil at first envelops the entire fruiting body and breaks to form a volva (sack, collar, or 
series of concentric rings) at base of stalk. Development of fruiting body is shown on pp. 270-271. 
At right is a mature Marasmius. which has neither annulus nor volva, but often has an umbo (knob) 
on cap. 
In a gilled mushroom, millions of spores are produced on basidia which line 
the gills. These spores are subsequently discharged and carried by air currents to 
new localities. Each is theoretically capable of germina tion, but only a small 
percentage land in a favorable environment. Spores germinate by sending out a 
germ tube which branches to form many threadlike cells called hyphae. When 
two spores of different but compatible strains (or "sexes") germinate in close 
proximity to each other, their hyphae merge to form hyphae with two nuclei (one 
from each parent). These hyphae grow rapidly, forming an intricate network of 
filaments called the mycelium or spawn (see photo on p. 43). The mycelium is 
the vegetative portion of the fungus. The tips of the mycelial hyphae liberate 
enzymes which digest food to support growth. 
Once the mycelium has established itself and built up an adequate food 
reserve, it becomes capable of producing mushrooms. Under favorable 
conditions (for most species this means damp but not soggy, cool but not cold), 
some hyphae bundle together to form knots of tissue which gradually develop 
into fruiting bodies. When these fruiting bodies are differentiated but not fully 
developed (that is, after they have a cap and stalk but before the cap expands), 
they are called buttons. The stalk then elongates, pushing the cap above the 
surface ofthe ground (or other substrate). Finally, the cap opens and the veil (if 
present) breaks, exposing the gills on which spores form. The mature fruiting 
body is essentially a bundle of threadlike hyphae (each with two nuclei), but the 
filaments in the bundle terminate in either spore-producing cells (basidia), 
specialized sterile cells (cystidia), or unspecialized cells (basidioles, or in some 
cases, paraphyses). (See illustration on p. 6.) 
Though they lack the sexual organs of plants and animals, mushrooms 
reproduce sexually, i.e., genes are recombined so that offspring are not 
genetically identical to parents. Gene exchange takes place in the basidium (or in 
Ascomycetes, a spedal cell called the ascogonium). The two parent nuclei fuse, 
doubling the chromosome number, then divide twice while replicating their 
chromosomes only once-thereby reducing the chromosome number to half 
Cross-section of a single gill 
as seen under the micro- 
scope. The edge of the gill is 
at the bottom ofthis section. 
that after fusion. The four remaining nuclei migrate to the tip of the basidium, 
and walls form behind them to produce four spores-two of each stram 
("sex"), each with one nucleus. With their subsequent discharge the life cycle 
is completed. 
The above life cycle is typical of most Basidiomycetes, except that it is 
often complicated by the presence of more than two strains Uust as our life cy- 
cle would be unimaginably complicated by the existence of more than two 
sexes!). Also, some mushrooms are capable of forming spores asexually. 
MUSHROOMS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
IT IS the "role" of fungi to break things down, to give things back. One of the 
more obvious laws of nature is that existing life must die if new life is to flourish. 
Stale air must go out the window if fresh air is to come in. If there were no vehicle 
for the disposal of dead matter, there would soon be no need for one-we would 
all be buried under a blanket of inert matter. Fungi, along with bacteria. are 
precisely that vehicle. They are nature's recyclers, the soil's replenishers. Plants 
deplete the soil by extracting minerals to manufacture their food. Animals, in 
turn, devour plants. In feeding on dead (or occasionally living) matter, fungi and 
bacteria reduce complex organic compounds to simpler building blocks, thereby 
enabling plants to re-use them. Thus, in a very profound sense, fungi are life- 
givers as well as destroyers. To associate them only with death and decay-as so 
many people do-is to do them, as well as our own ability to perceive, an 
injustice. 
Fungi can be divided into three categories based on their relationship to their 
substrate (immediate environment). Parasitic fungi feed on living organisms. 
Most serious fungus pests (such as wheat rust) fall in this category, but relatively 
few mushrooms are parasitic. Their ranks include Cordyceps species (on insects, 
insect pupae, insect larvae, and other fungi); Asterophora and Hypomyces 
species (on other mushrooms); various polypores (on trees); and Sparassis 
crispa (on tree roots). Some, like the common honey mushroom, Armillariella 
mellea, are parasitic under certain conditions and saprophytic (see below) under 
others. 
Saprophytic fungi subsist on dead or decaying matter (wood, humus, soil, 
grass, dung, and other debris). When there is an even distribution of nutrients in 
the environment, the mycelium of a terrestrial fungus may grow outward at the 
6 
 
... 
" ' 
.. 
.. - 
.- 
.. .... ... 
.. 
 
-' 
. 
'..- .. 
." 
.. 
.All 
'" 
"" .. 
r 
.. 
A large fairy ring of Marasmius oreades. 
same rate in all directions, periodically producing circles of mushrooms on its 
outer fringes. These circles or arcs are called fairy rings. presumably because 
people once thought fairies danced in them. Many mushrooms are capable of 
forming fairy rings, including the aptly named fairy ring mushroom (Marasmius 
oreades), which grows on lawns. Each year the fairy ring gets larger as the 
mycelium grows outward, until something finally impedes its progress (usually a 
lack of food), and the mycelium dies or breaks up into arcs. By measuring the 
annual growth rate. it has been estimated that some fairy rings in the Midwest 
prairies are six hundred years old! 
Mycorrhizal fungi comprise the third category. They form a symbiotic or 
mutually beneficial relationship with the rootlets of plants (mostly trees) called 
mycorrhiza (from myco, fungus, and rhiza, root). The mycelium forms a sheath 
of hyphae around the rootlets of the host and an exchange of nutrients takes 
place. The rootlets provide the fungus with moisture and organic compounds 
(such as carbohydrates), while the fungus aids the roots in the absorption of 
phosphorus, inorganic nitrogen, and other minerals, and apparently also 
provides added resistance to certain diseases. As a rule, mycorrhizal fungi cannot 
grow without their hosts, and studies have shown that trees deprived of their 
mycorrhizal partners do not compete successfully with those that have their 
normal complement. This is especially true in poor or exposed soils, where trees 
need all the help they can get, and mycorrhizal fungi have proved invaluable 
in reforestation projects. 
Many mycorrhiza-formers are host-spt:cific, i.e., they grow only with one kind 
of tree. For instance, Suil/us pungens grows principally with Monterey pine, 
while Amanita rubescens is monogamous with live oak (in our area). A tree, 
however, may have several mycorrhizal associates whose relationships with the 
tree are qualitatively different (Alexander Smith reports finding over 50 species 
of mycorrhizal mushroms under an isolated Douglas-fir). In other words, each 
type of mushroom occupies a different ecological niche. Many factors are 
encompassed by the concept of niche, some of which we don't understand. A 
niche is not so much an organism's habitat as its "profession"-what it does for 
a living, or the "role" it plays in its biological community. Each kind of mush- 
'7 
8 
MUSHROOMS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
room reproduces and germinates successfully within a certain humidity 
and temperature spectrum. Each extracts particular nutrients from its 
environment. Thus two species may occur in the same habitat, but occupy 
different niches. One may be taking the lignin from a log, another, the cellulose. 
Or one may be feeding on the heartwood, another on the sapwood. Or returning 
to the mycorrhizal fungi, one may be supplying phosphorus to the tree, and 
another, nitrogen. Succession also occurs-as one type of mushroom exhausts 
its nutrient supply, another takes its place. A living tree may harbor certain types 
of fungal growth. As soon as it dies, new species will appear. Eventually the 
wood is reduced to fragments or powder, at which point still other mushrooms 
take over, with growth habits better suited to the changed conditions. 
NAMES AND CLASSIFICATION 
NAMES, like automobiles, are largely vehicles of convenience. You can't claim 
to have a profound knowledge of human beings without knowing at least some 
of them on an individual basis. Recognition is a prerequisite to getting to know 
someone, and a name is helpful in associating that person with a unique set of 
identifying characteristics, whether it be his big nose and hairy face, or her long 
legs and swift smile. Rather than saying "the 6 ft. 7 in. acrobatic forward of the 
Philadelphia 76ers," we say "Julius Erving" or "Doctor J." Instead of "you 
know, that bright red mushroom with white spots that grows under pine," we say 
Amanita muscaria, or "fly agaric." 
Names can also be descriptive. For instance, the red-headed woodpecker has a 
red head and pecks wood. What's more, names can reflect common bonds. Your 
last name identifies you as a member of a group with similar genes, and provides 
a clue as to your origins. Your first name defines you as an individual entity 
within that group. 
Unfortunately, relatively few mushrooms have colloquial English names-a 
tribute, as pointed out previously, to our fungophobic roots. In this book I have 
used popular names where they exist, and in some cases have capriciously coined 
common names, but to do so in every case would only create confusion, as there 
is no assurance they would be accepted. Therefore, if you really want to get to 
know mushrooms, it is necessary to know their scientific names. People usually 
groan when they hear this, and to be sure, the long Latin names are intimidating. 
But so, at first, is a can opener-it's just a question of familiarity. In fact, you 
may already have mastered some Latin (scientific) names without realizing it- 
e.g., Euca(vptus. Rhododendron, Hippopotamus. Memorization is made easier 
by learning the meanings of the names. For instance, Lactarius rubrilacteus 
(rubri=red, lacteus=milk) exudes a red "milk" when cut. See "What It All 
Means" on p. 899 for more details. Don't get bogged down in pronounciation.1t 
doesn't really matter how you say something as long as you communicate it. 
Even taxonomists don't agree on how some names should be pronounced! 
As you begin to use scientific nomenclature, you'll discover its many advan- 
tages. Common names do not necessarily reflect natural affinities. Hedge nettle 
is not a nettle, and poison oak is by no means an oak. Likewise, the names 
meadow mushroom, honey mushroom, matsutake, and horse mushroom 
provide no clues as to which, if any, have common bonds or similar charac- 
teristics. Also, common names are not universal. For instance, Boletus edu/is 
has dozens of regional names, and memorizing all of them would be almost as 
difficult as getting everyone to agree on one of them! 
NAMES AND CLASSIFICATION 
9 
In contrast, scientific nomenclature transcends cultural and regional barriers. 
It is used by naturalists and biologists throughout the world. and it is designed to 
reflect natural relationships. It employs a binomial system in which each kind 
of organism has two names. The second name, the species, is the kind of 
organism; the first name, the genus (plural: genera) is a collection of species 
with very similar traits. The species epithet is meaningless without the genus 
name (or its abbreviation) attached (we never sign a check with only our first 
name!). The names are mostly Latin because that language was universally 
fashionable in learned circles when the binomial system was devised. The beauty 
of the binomial system is that it indicates commonality while simultaneously 
expressing singularity.* Amanita calyptrata (the coccora) and Amanita 
phalloides (the death cap) are different species belonging to the same genus,just 
as Canis lupis(woIO, Canis latrans(coyote), and Canisfamiliaris(dog) belong to 
the same genus. Yet the common names of these organisms don't indicate that 
they are closely related! 
Some kinds of similarities are clearly more fundamental than others. 
Therefore, it was deemed necessary to erect a hierarchy of classification to 
indicate the degree of commonality. Genus and species are only two levels in that 
hierarchy. Just as species with common characteristics are grouped in a genus, 
several genera with common features are grouped in a family (e.g., the red fox, 
Vulpes fulva, belongs to the same family as the dog, but not to the same genus). 
Families are in turn grouped in an order, orders in a class, classes in a 
subdivision or division (or in the case of animals, in a phylum), and divisions 
in a kingdom. At the other end of the scale, slightly different populations of a 
single species are designated as subspecies, varieties, or forms.** Here is the 
complete classification scheme for three mushrooms-the blewit, shaggy mane, 
and inky cap. 
Category 
Kingdom 
Division 
Subdivision 
Class 
Order 
Family 
Genus 
Species 
Blewit 
Fungi 
Eumycota 
Basidiomycotina 
Hymenomycetes 
Agaricales 
T richolomataceae 
Clilocybe 
nuda 
Shaggy Mane 
Fungi 
Eumycota 
Basidiomycotina 
H ymenom ycetes 
Agaricales 
Coprinaceae 
Coprinus 
comalus 
Inky Cap 
Fungi 
Eumycota 
Basidiomycotina 
Hymenomycetes 
Agaricales 
Coprinaceae 
Coprinus 
alramenlarius 
All three of these organisms are fungi-they possess neither photosynthetic 
compounds nor seeds, and their vegetative phase is comprised of threadlike cells 
(hyphae). Since none are ameba-like, they are not slime molds and hence 
belong to the division Eumycota. All three produce their spores on microscopic 
cells called basidia, hence they belong to the subdivision Basidiomycotina. All 
forcibly discharge their spores from basidia which form on radiating blades 
(gills), therefore they belong to the class Hymenomycetes and the order 
Agaricales. However, the blewit has pinkish spores while the shaggy mane and 
inky cap have black spores-which is one reason they are placed in different 
families. Not only do the shaggy mane and inky cap belong to the same family 
(the Coprinaceae), but they also belong to the same genus, Coprinus, because 
*The singularity of a population of organisms; our personal names, on the other hand, indicate the singularity of 
individual organisms. 
10 
NAMES AND CLASSIFICATION 
both have gills that deliquesce (liquefy) at maturity. However, the shaggy mane 
has a tall, shaggy, cylindrical cap while the inky cap has a smoother, broader, 
oval or conical cap; consequently they are recognized as distinct species. 
Note the suffixes at the levels above genus: -ceae denotes a family; -ales 
indicates an order; and -cetes denotes a class or larger category. 
It must be remembered, however, that this elaborate classification scheme is 
contrived. It is our attempt at boxing and categorizing nature. There are 
common gene pools and definite lines of evolution, but no such clearcut 
categories exist. Thus, the definition and interpretation of species, genera, 
families, etc., is largely a matter of opinion. Disputes invariably arise, many of 
which have not been resolved. For instance, at the genus level and above, there 
is the problem of deciding which similarities among fungi are fundamental 
(indicators of common origin), and which are coincidental or superficial, or the 
result of convergent evolution. * The microscope has been a tremendous help in 
uncovering "hidden" similarities, but it has also exacerbated the confusion by 
introducing a vast new set of criteria on which to pass judgment. The result is a 
nomenclatural nightmare, from the upper echelons of the hierarchy right on 
down to the species level. 
Mycological literature is as riddled with contradictions as a Suilllus pungens is 
with maggots. Anyone who has used more than one mushroom book can testify 
to the frustration of finding different names applied to the same fungus 
(synonyms), or one name applied to several different fungi (homonyms). For 
instance, Clitocybe nuda (the blew it) is better known as Lepista nuda, and was 
formerly known as Tricholoma nudum. It has been incorrectly called Tricho- 
loma personatum, and in Europe is also known as Rhodopaxillus nudus! For an 
even more confusing example, see the list of synonyms for Trametes occidentalis 
on p. 550. 
This confusion is partly the result of disagreement as to what exacly con- 
stitutes a "genus" or "species" -a difference in philosophy that is known in 
taxonomic circles as the battle between the "lumpers" and "splitters." The 
"lumpers" are conservative in their approach. They interpret genera or species 
broadly, allowing for a good deal of variation-in other words, they tend to stress 
similarities between mushrooms rather than differences. ..Splitters," on the other 
hand, are forever describing new genera and species based on the most minute- 
but not necessarily insignificant-differences. Both approaches have their 
advantages and drawbacks, and both are self-defeating when carried to an 
extreme. ** 
The important thing to realize is that the system of classification used in this 
book is by no means definitive. It represents an amalgamation of various inves- 
tigators' views of the fleshy fungi, plus the overriding consideration of usefulness 
to the amateur (since this book is designed for amateurs). Some of the names 
used will undoubtedly be invalidated in the near future. A few have not been 
validly published and are therefore placed in quotation marks. Synonyms have 
been provided and homonyms elucidated. But the inherent advantages of the 
binomial system of nomenclature will not be fully realized until stabilization is 
achieved and one name is agreed upon for each kind of mushroom. In 
exceptional cases like that of the blew it, it is perhaps easiest in the meantime to 
use the common English name-if there is one. 
*The fins and torpedo-shaped bodies of sharks and killer whales are independent adaptations to a similar en- 
vironment, not indicators of common origin. This phenomenon is called convergent evolution. 
**One radical "lumper" ) know recognizes only two kinds of mushrooms-the "pickers" and the "kickers" (those 
that deserve to be picked, and those that deserve to be kicked!). 
COLLECTING MUSHROOMS 
MUSHROOM hunting is not simply a matter of traipsing through the woods 
after it rains. It is an art, a skill, a meditation, and a process. If you proceed at a 
careful, deliberate rate, you'll enjoy much more success than if you rush around 
frantically picking whatever mushrooms you see, then stuff them in your basket, 
bring the whole mess home and dump it on your table. Mushrooms collected 
in this manner are likely to wind up in the garbage, unidentified and unappre- 
ciated. 
Don't just collect, but observe the mushrooms-and their surroundings. In 
the process you'll discover many other clandestine wonders you were previously 
unaware of (see photographs on pp. 28-29). Be selective-pick only distinctive 
species in good condition. You enhance your chances of successful identification 
immeasurably by collecting several specimens of each kind ofmushroom. This is 
absolutely essential, because you have no other means of assessing variation 
within a given species. Since mushrooms decay rapidly and identification can 
be a time-consuming process, don't pick every kind you see. I t's better to fill your 
basket with many good examples of a few distinctive species (in which case your 
chances of identification are good) than with one or two specimens of many 
species (in which case your chances of identification are very poor). 
Don't assume, however, that two mushrooms are the same species simply 
because they're growing together. Judge each on its own merits. If you're 
uncertain, assume for safety s sake that they're different, and treat them as such. 
As you become more adept at observation, your ability to identify fleshy fungi 
will "mushroom"- but only after a solid foundation or "mycelium" of ex- 
perience is laid. 
It is far better to learn a few species well than a large number superficially. The 
novelty of the "Easter egg" approach wears off quickly as its futility becomes 
apparent. If possible, choose a specific quarry for each hunt. Suppose it's 
January and you're going for a walk in a local live oak woodland. By using the 
chart on pp. 48-5] and consulting the description of the blewit (Clitocybe nuda), 
you find that the blewit is often abundant under oak in January. The next step is 
to familiarize yourself with its field marks: bluish-purple color, stocky stature, 
absence of a veil, citrus odor, etc. Your mushroom hunt is thus transformed into 
a blewit hunt. Of course, nothing stops you from gathering other interesting 
fungi you encounter, but focusing your attention on the blewit insures that you'll 
learn something about blewits even if you don't find any (namely, that the 
locality and/or weather conditions were not conducive to its fruiting). 
The desirability of this approach is underscored by the excitement it lends to 
the hunt. It is much more gratifying to find something you are specifically trying 
to find. And you'll be more likely to remember what it looks like and where it 
grows, so you can return to harvest more. By focusing on several species as the 
season unfolds, you will develop a quicker and keener appreciatIon of what 
grows where and what environmental factors they respond to. Many of the more 
distinctive species occur throughout the world, so the knowledge you 
accumulate will serve you elsewhere! 
4 
. , "..\ 
. "l. . 
.,.. , 
." 
4/ 
.. 
.t. 
.. 
. 
. . 
: "" .' 
J. "\ 
" 
#' . 
. ... 
, . ,. 
"t 
. 
.. 
Always dig up unknown mushrooms so as not to miss the volva, if present. There's no room for care- 
lessness, as shown here: Agaricus arvensis, at left, lacks a volva and is edible; Amanita ocreala, at 
right, is furnished with a volva and is deadly poisonous! 
EQUIPMENT 
Foraging for fleshy fungi requires little in the way of sophisticated para- 
phernalia. The bare essentials are: 
A rigid container for carrying the mushrooms. There's no point in picking mushrooms 
unless you transport them home in decent condition. A broad, shallow basket is best,but a 
cardboard box or bucket will do unless it's raining. Paper bags sag and the mushrooms 
get crushed. DON'T USE PLASTIC BAGS! Mushrooms, like people, have to "breathe." 
Plastic bags trap moisture, making the mushrooms "sweat" and rot more rapidly. 
Waxed paper is necessary when collecting mushrooms for identification. It provides 
support for mushrooms within the basket and also keeps them separated. Never mix 
unknown species together. Wrap each type separately and arrange them carefully in the 
basket with the heavier ones on the bottom. Tall specimens like Agaricus and Amanita 
species will bend unless placed upright (mushrooms exhibit negative geotropism: their 
caps turn away from gravity so as to orient the gills downward). Small paper bags are 
useful when harvesting familiar edible species, but again, don't use plastic bags! 
A knife or trowel is a must for digging up mushrooms or detaching them from trees. A 
knife is also handy for cleaning edible species you are already familiar with, but always dig 
up unknown mushrooms so as to ascertain whether or not a volva (sack) or "tap root" is 
present. The telltale volva of the deadly Amanitas is usually buried in the ground! 
A pencil and small notebook or index cards are useful for taking field notes and spore 
prints. 
Bread, cheese, and fruit are essential if you're always hungry like I am. I make a practice 
of stocking my basket generously. Then each time I put a mushroom in my basket, I'm 
compelled to put something from the basket in my mouth! If you find some edible 
Agaricus buttons, put them in a sandwich! Not known for wasting opportunities, the 
French carry this tradition one step further-they bring wine, goblets, and a table cloth, 
and pause for a picnic every half hour. The advantage of this strategy is obvious-you 
needn't find any mushrooms to have a good time! 
12 
EQUIPMENT 
13 
Binoculars are handy in open country (e.g., pastures). They enable you to distinguish at 
a distance giant puffballs (Calvalia species) and horse mushrooms (Agaricus arvensis and 
A. osecanus) from rocks and other assorted "pseudocarps. ... And of course, they allow you 
to watch birds and mammals as well. 
A three- or four-pronged rake or cultivator and a small hand cultivator are necessary 
if you want to find truffles and false truffles, unless you have the services of a truffle 
hound or muzzled pig. The rakes will enable you to locate these elusive underground 
fungi by sifting through the forest duff and scraping the topsoil beneath it. (But re- 
member: this practice can be unsightly as well as destructive, so don't do it on a wide- 
spread basis, be discreet, and always cover up the holes you dig.) See the chapter on 
truffles for more details. 
Other optional equipment includes: a hand lens, compass, stick (for probing brambles 
and "mushrumps"), a field guide (for leisurely use on a sunny day), small jars orvials (for 
delicate specimens, such as Mycenas), a damp cloth or brush for cleaning edible species, 
rainboots and other rain gear, gloves for frigid winter mornings, and photographic 
equipment (usually too cumbersome except for special picture-taking expeditions). 
FIELD NOTES 
Is it growing on the ground or on a log? Is it near a tree? What kind(s)? Are 
familiar types of mushrooms growing nearby? Which ones? If it's growing on 
wood, is the wood coniferous or hardwood? Living, recently felled, or in an 
advanced stage of decay? If on the ground, is the humus layer deep? Is the ground 
disturbed? Is there a road, trail, parking lot, or laundromat nearby? 
You should automatically ask yourself these questions every time you find a 
mushroom. Observation begins in the field. After all, in picking a mushroom 
you are leaving behind the vegetative portion of the fungus. It is folly to depart 
without some idea of the niche that fungus occupies in the larger scheme of 
things. Field (or mental) notes should include: 
Date, weather conditions, abundance (how many times you observed a 
particular species), growth habit (solitary, scattered, gregarious, clustered, 
in fairy rings, etc.), substrate (humus, soil, grass, moss, dung, wood, etc.), 
vegetation (the kinds of trees and shrubs within 50 feet). 
If growing on wood: stage of decomposition, type of wood (hardwood or 
conifer), type of tree (if discernible), effects on the wood (see chapter on 
polypores on p. 549). 
If growing on dung: type of dung, stage of decomposition 
If growing on ground: type of ground (disturbed, cultivated, hard-packed, 
sandy, charred, etc.) 
Don't restrict your observations to specimens that you collect. After you've 
gathered a representative sampling of a particular species, continue to note its 
habitat each time you encounter it. 
With terrestrial fungi, it is important to note all types of trees within 50 feet 
because mycorrhizal species grow in association with rootlets that may be quite a 
distance from the trunk of the host. Usually there are several kinds of trees in the 
vicinity, and you have no way of knowing which (if any) is the mycorrhizal 
associate. However, through repeated observation many possibilities can be 
eliminated. For instance, if you find Sui/lus pseudobrevipes growing under pine, 
you cannot conclude that there is a relationship between the two. But if you find 
that Sui/Ius pseudobrevipes always grows with pine and nowhere else. then an 
intimate relationship of some kind can be inferred. 
IDENTIFICATION AND TERMINOLOGY 
IF YOU take the time to seek out mushrooms, it only makes sense to exercise the 
extra care and trouble necessary to get them home in beautiful condition. Handle 
them gingerly, don't leave them in stuffy places like cars, and don't shift them 
unnecessarily from box to box. Always conduct your studies on fresh material, 
preferably the day you pick them. Coprinus species digest themselves in a few hours, 
and many types quickly lose their original color or are devoured overnight by 
maggots. If you're pressed for time, at least sort them out and separate the worm- 
riddled specimens. Then refrigerate the ones you wish to save or spread them out in a 
cool, dry place where they can "breathe." 
Now let's assume you've taken field notes, brought several species home, and are 
ready to study them. For the diligent and disciplined toadstool taxonomist, a 
detailed written description of each species is a must. For practically everyone else, 
compiling a written description is a tedious affair which tends to detract from the 
enjoyment and spontaneity ofthe hunt. However, it is an ideal tool for learning how 
to look at mushrooms critically, so try it at least a few times. 
The basic terminology for identifying and describing gilled mushrooms is outlined 
here. Fruiting bodies with a radically different structure, such as puffballs, are 
illustrated and discussed in their respective chapters. Unfamiliar terms not 
illustrated or defined here can be looked up in the glossary. Remember to base your 
observations on as many specimens of each species as possible. The value of written 
descri ptions is enhanced when accompanied by sketches, photographs, and spore 
prints of fresh material. 
MACROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
SIZE 
Size is important for purposes of comparison. The terms large, medium, small, and 
minute cannot be given absolute measurements, but they communicate a characteristic 
size range that you will quickly learn to appreciate. The size of a fruiting body is 
dependent on three major factors: age, amount of moisture available, and genes. Since 
mushrooms grow very quickly, those that fruit during rainy weather are apt to be larger 
than those that fruit during a dry spell-subject, of course, to genetic constraints. 
The measurements given in descriptions and keys represent average size ranges; those 
in parentheses indicate unusual dimensions, but do not take into account extremes due to 
extraordinary conditions. The metric system is used, but a conversion rule is provided on 
the back cover of this book. Also, it's easy to remember that 1 inch equals approximately 
2'l2 centimeters, or 2 inches equals 5 centimeters (or 50 millimeters). 
COLOR 
Color is one of the most noticeable features of any fungus, but is also one of the most 
deceptive and variable. Unfortunately, beginners tend to attach undue importance to 
color at the expense of more critical characteristics. This inevitably leads to 
misidentification because many mushroom pigments are highly sensitive to 
environmental influence. Direct sunlight or prolonged rain can bleach a mushroom 
drastically, and I will never forget my experience following a prolonged rainy spell in 
which practically every mushroom growing under redwood had a reddish cap! 
(Apparently pigments from the redwood had dissolved in the drip-off and been absorbed 
by the mushrooms.) None ofthese mushrooms would have keyed out properly unless this 
phenomenon were taken into account! Color may also depend on age. An immature sea 
MACROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
15 
gulJ is brown, while an adult is black and white. Likewise, an immature Hygrocybe conica 
is red, orange, or yelJow, but blackens as it ages. 
Therefore, color should always be used in c01ifunction with other characteristics. The 
most striking feature of Amanita muscaria is its bright red cap, but a slew of other mush- 
rooms are also bright red. Furthermore, Amanita muscaria has a yelJow-capped and 
white-capped form, and even the red-capped variety will fade to orange or even whitish. It 
is the red cap combined with the presence of warts and a volva that render A. muscaria 
distinct. 
The color of the stalk is not as variable because it is sheltered by the cap, but the gill 
color often changes as the spores mature. In fact, the disparity in gill col9r may be so great 
that young and old specimens can be mistaken for different species unless intervening 
stages are found. 
Describing color is another problem. Color pictures are a great help, of course, but 
even they can't show the degree of variation within a given species. Standardized color 
charts are available, but they represent an extra expense and pose problems oftheir own. 
In this book, colors are described using familiar terms where possible, plus a few specific 
ones (e.g., vinaceous) which are defined in the glossary. 
COLOR CHANGES 
The tissue of many mushrooms oxidizes when exposed to the air-that is, it undergoes 
one or more color changes when bruised. This may occur instantaneously, like the blueing 
of the tubes and flesh in Boletus erythropus, or slowly (over several hours), like the red- 
dening of the flesh in Amanita rubescens. Bruising reactions should be looked for on the 
surface of the cap, gills, and stalk, and on the cut flesh within the cap and stalk. 
TEXTURE 
The texture of the fruiting body is often significant-i.e., soft, watery, spongy, brittle, 
tough, leathery, corky, woody, etc. The dried fruiting bodies of some types (notably 
Marasmius) revive completely when moistened. 
ODOR AND TASTE 
It comes as a pleasant surprise to many people that mushrooms have distinctive tastes and 
odors. For instance, Lactarius torminosus is excruciatingly hot (peppery), while Agaricus 
subrufescens is sweet. M arasmius copelandi reeks of garlic and is often smelled before it is 
seen, Clitocybe odora smells like anise, Russula fragrantissima like maraschino cherries, and 
Phy/lotopsis nidulans like sewer gas, while Armillaria ponderosa has a spicy odor-a 
provocative compromise between red hots and dirty socks. 
The problem with odor and taste is in the terminology. They are essentially chemical tests, 
but each person's "laboratory" is different. What smells like sauerkraut to one person smells 
like sweet-and-sour sauce to another. Moreover, mushrooms with a "mild" odor may be very 
pungent when crushed, or may only develop an odor at maturity, and odoriferous species may 
be odorless if waterlogged. Consequently, odor and taste are not noted in this book except 
where useful in identification. 
Incidentally, almost any mushroom can be safely tasted by chewing on a small piece of the 
cap and then spitting it out. However, it is not a good policy to sample unkown mushrooms, 
particularly Amanitas. Do so only when it is called for in the keys or descriptions. 
CAP 
The cap (or pileus) is the structure that supports the spore-producing surface (gills, pores, 
etc.). The skin ofthe cap is called the cuticle (or pellicle, if it peels easily). A viscid cap is 
sticky when moist, often glutinous (slimy) when wet, and sometimes assumes a glossy 
appearance as it dries. Debris stuck to the cap surface is a telltale sign that it was viscid when 
moist. Also, if you press your lip or wet finger against the surface, it will cling or feel 
slightly sticky. A hygrophanous cap appears watery (or even translucent) when moist and 
opaque when dry, and fades dramatically as it loses moisture (Psathyrella candolleana, a 
16 
IDENTIFICATION AND TERMINOLOGY 
common lawn lover, is a good example). A dry cap is neither viscid nor hygrophanous. It 
often has a dull, unpolished appearance, but will naturally be moist or soggy in wet weather. 
Other features to note are: size, shape (p. 17), color and color changes, surface 
characteristics (whether smooth, scaly, granulose, fibrillose, warty, etc.), and margin (inrolled, 
incurved, straight, or uplifted; and striate, translucent-striate, or not striate). 
FLESH 
Note color, color changes, texture, thickness, odor when crushed, and taste (don't 
swallow!). 
GILLS 
Gills (or lamellae) are the thin, radiating blades found on the underside of most 
mushrooms, including the commercially cultivated variety. Features to note include: mode of 
attachment to the stalk (p. 17), spacing, thickness, depth, forking pattern (if any), and color (in 
both immature and mature specimens). Shorter gills (Iamellulae) are often interspersed with 
longer ones, but they don't usually have taxonomic significance. 
STALK 
The stalk is the stemlike structure on which the cap is mounted. Its function is to thrust the 
cap above the ground so the spores can be discharged into the air. Many wood-inhabiting 
forms lack a stalk because the wood serves the same purpose. The technical term for stalk is 
stipe, but I see no reason to clutter our vocabulary with yet another monosyllable starting 
with st-. Hereafter, the terms stalk and stem are used interchangeably. 
Features to note include: size, color and color changes, shape (p. 17), position (p. 17), 
texture (fleshy or cartilaginous, hollow or solid or stuffed with a pith), surface characteristics 
(fibrillose, scaly, smooth, etc.), viscidity, and presence or absence of an annulus and volva 
(see below). Stalk width should be measured at the top unless otherwise indicated. 
VEIL 
A veil is a layer of specialized tissue that initially protects the developing mushroom and 
then breaks up or collapses so the spores can be released. Some mushrooms have more 
than one veil, others have only one veil, and many lack a veil altogether. A persistent veil 
leaves visible remnants on the stalk and/ or the cap after breaking; an evanescent veil 
disappears and consequently can only be detected in the button stage. A membranous veil is 
skinlike or kleenexlike and usually persistent; a fibrillose veil is hairy (composed of fine 
fibers) and either disappears or forms a belt of collapsed hairs on the stalk; a cortina is a 
cobwebby fibrillose veil; a glutinous (slimy) veil is either evanescent or deposits a layer of 
slime on the stalk and/ or cap. 
There are two basic types of veils: a partial veil (or inner veil) extends from the margin of 
the cap to the stalk; it covers the gills (or pores) when young and frequently forms an annulus 
(collar or ring) on the stalk. A universal veil (or outer veil). on the other hand. surrounds 
most or all of the button mushroom. Sometimes it forms a volva (see below) after breaking; 
sometimes it adheres to the underside of the partial veil (as in Agaricus arvensis); in other 
instances it forms a "stocking" of scales on the stalk (as in Lepiota clypeolaria), and in still 
others it completely disappears. Needless to say, not all veils fit conveniently into one or the 
other of these two categories, and in this book the all-encompassing term veil is used for both 
universal and partial veils except when the difference between the two is clearcut and of critical 
importance (e.g., in Amanita). 
ANNULUS 
If an annulus (ring) is formed by the veil, note the color, texture (whether membranous or 
fibrillose), shape (collarlike, skirtlike, or sheathlike), and position on the stalk (superior or 
apical, median, inferior or basal). 
MACROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
SHAPE OF THE CAP 
cylindrical 
Li £( ?9 
conical 
bell-shaped 
umbonate 
convex 
uuu)FY 
plane 
uplifted 
umbilicate 
depressed funnel-shaped 
ATTACHMENT OF THE GILLS TO THE STALK (as seen in longitudinalsection) 
 ......  ...,......  .......,.,......"......  _................  .......,:.,....."".. 
.............. -.- . ..................-..... "," ................ . - ".\,.................. . ....."... . 
............-_.;....- . :...."::.:.-::.. .". ", ::":.". ::.- ." . ..:......::::::. .:_:.:' :.' . ....-. - 
free adnexed 
(not attached) (narrowly attached) 
SHAPE OF THE STALK 
tapering downward 
POSITION OF THE STALK 
equal 
central 
sinuate adnate decurrent 
(notched) (broadly attached) (running down 
the stalk) 
tapering upward enlarged below 
( club-shaped) 
bulbous 
r :::::t:.::::}':::..:...._. Je ...:..<::;::......."".  }::/::...:....:.::..:..:.:..._.":....- 
,'" ........... 0'- "... 
:.:.. .:!i.;:i::.. .;.:.:..-' '.. 
0':/" .).::::. ..". ". :::;:..:2::-':""" 
-.. . - 
off-center 
(eccentric) 
lateral 
absent 
(sessile) 
18 
IDENTIFICATION AND TERMINOLOGY 
VOlVA 
In some mushrooms the universal veil is developed to such an extent that, upon breaking, it 
leaves visible remains at the base of the stalk in the form of a sack, free collar, or series of 
concentric scales or rings. These remains are called the vol va The different types of vol vas are 
illustrated under Amanita on p. 264. Volvariella. the stinkhorns, and certain stalked 
puffballs also have a volva. If small pieces of volval (universal veil) tissue adhere to the 
cap, they are called warts; a large piece of tissue is called a volval patch. 
MYCELIUM 
The mycelium is a loosely organized mass ofthreadlike cells(hyphae) which are invisible 
to the naked eye except when they bundle together to form thicker strands (called 
rhizomorphs). Close scrutiny of the forest humus will usually. reveal the presence of 
numerous mycelial strands, but they are virtually indistinguishable from each other without 
fruiting bodies present. There are a few exceptions, like Chlorosplenium aeruginascens, an 
Ascomycete which stains its substrate (a log or piece of wood) bluish-green. As a rule, 
however, it is the fruiting body alone that provides clues to the identity of a fungus. This is one 
reason why the classification of mushrooms has lagged behind that of plants-we're 
handicapped at the outset because our studies are restricted to only one aspect of the 
organism, its "fruit." 
SPORE COLOR AND SPORE PRINTS 
Spore color is an extremely useful character, particularly in the gilled mushrooms. Unlike 
the color oft he fruiting body, it is relatively constant for each species and not as susceptible 
to environmental influence. Though individual spores can't be seen with the naked eye, their 
color in mass can be ascertained by taking a spore print. Just cut off the cap of any mature 
mushroom and lay it gills down on a piece of white paper (covering it with a glass or bowl 
helps protect it from air currents). In 2.{) hours you'll usually have a spore print. Fruiting 
bodies which are too young or too old, or too soggy or too dry, will not give spore prints, and 
sterile specimens are sometimes encountered. Spore prints can also be obtained from boletes, 
teeth fungi, chanterelles, coral fungi, and sometimes polypores. 
Always take a spore print to determine the spore color of an unknown mushroom, 
especially if you want to eat it. Thecolorofthe mature gills may indicate the spore color, but 
not often enough to be completely trusted. If you are frustrated by the delay, carry white 
index cards with you when you forage. Then each time you collect several individuals of the 
same species, you can decapitate one, place it on a card, wrap it in waxed paper, and put it gills 
Black spore prints of Panaeo/us campanu/arus. 
. 
--- £ 
 .  
I..\ 
.;. .' - -, 
,\\\' 
 
"\  
r , 
MACROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
19 
down in the basket in such a way that it won't be crushed. By the time you get home you'll have 
a spore print! 
There are several short cuts for determining spore color, but I recommend them only for 
experienced collectors because they are not completely reliable. When mushrooms grow in a 
cluster, the lowermost caps will often be covered with spore dust from the upper ones (a wet 
finger will remove it). Spores borne aloft by air currents will often coat the cap of any 
mushroom, and falling spores are often trapped by the veil remnants (if present) or by the 
stalk, especially if it is sticky. 
Spore color is traditionally broken down into several broad categories, and assigning your 
spore print to the correct category can be tricky at first. For instance, don't expect "pink" 
spores to be bright pink or "purple-brown" spores to be purple. "Pinkish" spores are really 
closer to flesh-color, while "purple-brown" describes spores which could just as well be called 
"oil-slick aubergine" (deep brown in mass and dark reddish-brown under the microscope). 
Only through practice and comparison will you learn to assess the color of a spore print 
correctly. The thickness of the spore print also affects the color (the heavier the deposit, the 
darker it will be), as does the moisture content. 
Always take a spore print on white paper (a colored background distorts color perception). 
White spores will show up on white paper when viewed at an angle. Or you may wish to 
position the cap so that half of it is on white paper and half on black. Special cards can be 
designed for this purpose. 
MICROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
The microscope has had a great impact on the taxonomy offungi, especially in the last fifty 
years. However, the vast majority of people do not have access to a microscope, so 
microscopic features are not stressed in this book. For those who do have a microscope, spore 
characteristics (shape, size, and ornamentation) have been listed for each species, as spores are 
the most easily seen microscopic cells. Spore size is measured in microns (or micrometers). 
A micron is one thousandth of a millimeter. For each family or order of mushrooms, some 
typical spores have been illustrated-not for the purpose of identification so much as to give 
those without a microscope an idea of what they look like. 
Other microscopic criteria used in the taxonomy of gilled mushrooms may be even more 
ARRANGEMENT OF THE GILL HYPHAE (as seen in cross-section) 
interwoven 
parallel 
divergent 
convergent 
STRUCTURE OF THE CAP CUTICLE 
CYSTIDIA 
- ()[J 
cellular 
filamentous 
lance- 
shaped 
flask- 
shaped 
horned harpoon- 
like 
20 
MICROSCOPIC CHARACTERISTICS 
significant than spore characters. but are not as easily observed. These criteria include: 
orientation of the hyphae in the gill tissue, structure of the cap cuticle, and shape and size of 
cystidia (specialized sterile cells) on the gills, stalk, and cap. 
Spores can be examined by taking spore dust from a spore print and mounting it on a slide 
with a drop of water and a cover slip. Cystidia, basidia, and gill hyphae are best seen by 
making a thin cross-section of a gill with a razor blade and mounting it in a similar manner 
(it takes practice!). The cap cuticle. cap tissue. and stalk are also best observed 
in cross-section 
CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The ways in which mushrooms react to different chemicals have also assumed great 
importance in their classification. For instance, the genus Lyophyllum was erected to embrace 
various white-spored agarics whose basidia contain granules that darken when heated in 
aceto-carmine. Since most people are not equipped to conduct tests of this sort, they are not 
stressed in this book. But there are two particularly useful chemicals that every serious 
mushroom hunter should try to get: a 5-10% aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide 
(KOH), and an iodine solution called Melzer's reagent (see the glossary for formula). Spores 
which stain bluish-gray to bluish-black in Melzer's reagent are said to be amyloid. Spores 
which turn brown or reddish-brown are dextrinoid. Many spores are neither amyloid nor 
dextrinoid. The test is most useful on spores that are not deeply colored to begin with. It is 
easily observed under the microscope, but can also be assessed by placing spore dust on a glass 
slide (paper itself may be amyloid), treating it with Melzer's reagent, then holding the slide 
over a piece of white paper in order to easily see the color change, if any (the reaction 
takes place within a few minutes). One of the ingredients in Melzer's reagent, chloral hydrate, 
is difficult to obtain, but other iodine solutions can be used in a pinch. 
PRESERVING MUSHROOMS FOR FUTURE STUDY 
Part of mushrooms' mystique is their ephemerality-they're literally here today and gone 
tomorrow, and there is no adequate means of preserving their beauty. For scientific purposes, 
however, they can be preserved by simply drying them out-they shrink and fade in the 
process, but their anatomical (microscopic) features remain intact. Of course, for dried 
material to have value it must be accompanied by a spore print and precise description of the 
fresh fruiting bodies, plus a photograph if possible. Drying is best accomplished on a rack or 
screen. using a light bulb or hot plate as a heat source. It is more important for the air to 
circulate freely (thus carrying off moisture) than for the temperature to be extremely hot. For 
this reason ovens are not suitable except in a pinch. Small or very fragile specimens may 
"cook" when heated, and should instead be air-dried with the help of silica gel. 
For ornamental purposes, mushrooms can be freeze-dried or encased in cubes of plastic resin. Orthey 
can be sliced and pressed in a book, like this Chroogomphus. Preserving mushrooms for consumption 
is discussed in the chapter on mushroom cookery (p. 888). 
.. 
" 
.. 
 
. 
.  
" 
 
HOW TO USE THE KEYS 
IF DESCRIPTIONS and photographs are the meat of this book, then keys are its 
skeletal structure. Keys are tools designed to aid in the identification process. With 
the exception of the two pictorial keys (pp. 52-55 and 61-62), the keys in this book 
are dichotomous. That is, they consist of a series of contrasting paired statements 
(couplets). You are asked to decide which statement in a given couplet is applicable 
to the mushroom in question. Having made your choice, you are then referred to the 
number of another couplet, where you again make a choice. This process is repeated 
until you are given the name of a mushroom (or group of mushrooms) and its 
appropriate page number (if a page number is not given, it means that particular 
mushroom is not treated or described beyond the key). 
The dichotomous keys begin on p. 52 with "Key to the Major Groups of 
Fleshy Fungi." Under each major group of fungi you'll find a key to families; 
under each family, a key to genera; under each genus, a key to species. Keying will be 
a laborious process at first. However, as you gain experience you can take shortcuts. 
For instance, if you alread y know that your mushroom is an Agaricus, you needn't 
consult the keys to families and genera of gilled mushrooms. You can proceed 
directly to the Agaricus key in order to determine the species. 
The key to the proper use of a dichotomous key is an understanding of its 
limitations. The following key to a banana, banana slug, hat, rabbit, and sea urchin 
will admirably illustrate the assets and pitfalls ofthe dichotomous key. It's designed 
for the express use of creatures from the planet Fazoog, but I'm sure they won't mind 
if we use it here. 
I. a bject yellow......................... ....... ..... ...... ..... ...... ................. .............. 2 
I. Object not yellow............................................................................... 4 
2. Object more or less cylindrical........................................................... 3 
2. a bject not cylindrical ............ ..................... ........ .......... ..... .... ......... hat 
3. a bject peeling easily ................................................................ banana 
3. Object not peeling easily................................................... banana slug 
4. Object purple and spiny....................................................... sea urchin 
4. Not as above ...................................................................................... 5 
5. Object moving of its own accord when poked, with four stumps or 
projections on its underside ....................................................... rabbit 
5. Not as above ................................................................................... hat 
N ow let's pretend you're trying to identify a rabbit. You should always begin with 
the first couplet, which in this case asks you to decide whether or not the object is 
yellow. Presumably you'll choose "not yellow." Then, as indicated to the right of 
"object not yellow," you proceed to couplet #4 (thereby skipping #'s 2 and 3). Since 
the object is not purple and spiny, you move on to #5. At this juncture you are 
confronted with a more difficult decision. Does the object move of its own accord 
when poked and have four "stumps" (legs)? If so, it is a rabbit, at least according to 
the key. 
But keys can be worthless unless accompanied by detailed descriptions. For 
instance, if you tried to identify a tiger using this key, you would arrive at "rabbit." 
Unless a description of a rabbit is provided, you have no way of knowing whether it 
22 
HOW TO USE THE KEYS 
is indeed a rabbit you have, or an entity not included in the key. Furthermore, ifthe 
word "edible" or "harmless" appeared next to "rabbit," you would find yourself in 
serious trouble. Imagine the consequences of attempting to eat a tiger under the 
mistaken impression that it is a rabbit (more likely the tiger would eat you!). 
Similarly, a good key to mushrooms does not contain information on edibility. 
Instead it refers you to a detailed description of the mushroom. Always compare the 
mushroom you are trying to identify with the appropriate description as indicated in 
the key (in a few cases, no page number is given, which means that the mushroom is 
not treated or described beyond the key). Resist the urge to "fit" the mushroom to the 
description or vice-versa. A major discrepancy between your mushroom and the 
description has three possible explanations: 
(I) IT IS THE MUSHROOMS' FAULT. Mushrooms have not seen pictures or 
descriptions of themselves, and do not know what they are "supposed" to look like 
(even if they did know, why should they look the way they are supposed to-would 
you?). We can only summarize what a given species usually looks like. A good key 
will allow for a certain degree of variation. For instance, you will notice in the sample 
key that "hat" appears twice, because some hats are yellow and others, thank God, 
are not. The key does not account for other possibilities, however. Suppose you have 
a dead rabbit. Since it does not "move of its own accord when poked," it would be a 
hat according to the key. Or supposing you find a peeled banana, or a blackened 
banana (the kind my father likes to eat). It will not be yellow, and consequently will 
not key out properly. A better key would account for these possibilities, but a key 
cannot account for every possible variation without becoming hopelessly unwieldy. 
At first you'll have difficulty assessing just what is typical and what is not. The only 
solution to this problem is to use several specimens of each type of mushroom-at 
different stages of development if possible. You are then in a better position to decide 
what is typical (i.e., if you have ten rabbits and one of them is dead, you conclude 
there is something "wrong" with the dead one, and still use the key correctly.) 
(2) IT IS YOUR FAULT. People often go astray because they misread a couplet 
or inadvertently go to the wrong number, or exercise poor judgment. There are 
several ways to minimize these mistakes. First and foremost, always read both 
statements in a couplet before deciding which one is true. Second, if you are unsure 
of your choice (as you undoubtedly will be at times), make a notation and choose the 
one that seems most likely. If it later proves to be wrong, you can go back and try the 
other choice. Remember the purpose of a key is not to identify, but to eliminate. 
There are more than 1000 possibilities as to what any unknown mushroom can be. If 
the keys eliminate 996 of these possibilities, they have done their job. It is then up to 
you to carefully compare the descriptions of the remaining three or four species, and 
decide which-if any-is the correct one. In this respect, keys are like mazes-if you 
arrive at a dead end, you can always turn around and go back! 
Another pitfall to be aware of is language. Watch for qualifiers such as and, if, 
usually, sometimes, generally, typically, when young, and at maturity; i.e., "often" 
does not mean "always," and "typically" means "most often:' Also watch out for the 
statement "not as above," as in the following excerpt from a dichotomous key to the 
poems of an obscure but brilliant Santa Cruz poet. 
1. Poem with a pointed social comment ...................................... 2 
I. Not as above ................................................................ 77 
HOW TO USE THE KEYS 
23 
In this case, "not as above" means "social comment absent, or if present, then not 
pointed." However, if the first statement in the couplet said "social commment 
present, often pointed," then "not as above" would translate as "social comment 
absent." 
(3) IT IS THE KEY'S FAULT. If you have followed the key correctly, and are 
certain your mushroom(s) is not aberrant, then a discrepancy between the 
mushroom and the description means either that the key is flawed (no key is perfect) 
or that you have a mushroom that is not included in the keys (no mushroom book is 
complete and none should pretend to be-our inventory of mushrooms is still in the 
preliminary stages!). You may then either consult another book in hopes of finding 
it, seek the counsel of a mushroom expert, discard it altogether, or give it an informal 
name of your own. 
In addition to aiding in identification, keys can be effective teaching devices. In 
keying out a mushroom (instead of being told what it is or leafing through a bunch of 
pictures), you are forced to judge critically and develop an eye for detail. By the time 
you've keyed out a mushroom, you will have accumulated a considerable amount of 
information on what it is, as well as what it is not. You learn things about it that 
might otherwise go unnoticed. For instance, in keying out a banana slug using the 
sample key, you must try to peel it-something you ordinarily would not do. You 
would then learn that a banana slug does not peel easily. Another challenging 
activity is to try devising keys yourself-to common mushrooms, household objects, 
or people you know. You'll discover that it's not as easy as it looks! 
QUESTIONS ABOUT MUSHROOMS 
WHICH MUSHROOMS ARE GOOD TO EAT? 
Fortunately, there is no easy answer to this question. If there was, everybody 
would pick mushrooms and there wouldn't be enough to go around! 
The only way to determine the edibility of a mushroom is to eat it. 
O.K. 
But who wants to risk their life for the sake of one lousy (or marvelous) meal? 
Well, through just such a risky trial-and-error process we humans have 
painstakingly accumulated a reliable body of information on the edibility of 
many mushrooms. By systematically learning the identifying characteristics of 
these mushrooms, you can take advantage of other people's experiences-many 
of them unfortunate-by eating only the safest and most savory ones while 
avoiding the poisonous ones. 
If possible, seek out the help of an experienced and knowledgeable mushroom 
hunter. * There's a subtle gap between the mushroom in the book and the 
mushroom in the bush, and she or he can help you bridge that gap. If you don't 
have a mushroom mentor, proceed with caution. Just because you identify a 
mushroom as an edible species doesn't mean you should eat it. It is better to 
collect it several times first, so that you become thoroughly familiar with it. 
When you misidentify a rock or lizard, it doesn't really matter, because you're 
not (hopefully) going to eat the thing. With mushrooms, it's different. The 
* Mushroom hunters can be experienced witnout being knowledgeable. A knowledgeable hunter knows the names 
of the mushrooms she eats as well as those of all poisonous look-alikes. 
 
, ........ 
 
t 
" 
:'"" 
-" <. 
 --............... 
.-... -: 
........ 
\ 
\ 
, 
.. \ 
'.'- 
I t 
. .-,. 
Q.. 
... 
Even relatively sophisticated devices such as this "Toadstool Tester" are unreliable. There is no 
substitute for caution, experience, and a fundamental familiarity with the fleshy fungi. 
cardinal rule is: Don't eat any mushroom unless you are absolutely sure of its 
identity! Or-WHEN IN DOUBT, THROW IT OUT! In other words, you're 
better off not eating an edible mushroom than eating a poisonous one, and it's 
more important not to eat a poisonous mushroom than to eat an edible one. 
Empirical approaches such as the "silver coin" test are without exception pure 
poppycock. The lethal Amanitas do not blacken silver (fortunately, silver coins 
are a rarity nowadays, so this fallacious test is more difficult to carry out). 
Mushrooms partially eaten by mammals or insects are not necessarily fit for 
human consumption (one animal's meat is another's poison). Mushrooms that 
smell and taste good are not necessarily edible (again, the deadly Amanitas are 
said to be delicious. 
Most insidious of all is the "intuitive" approach now in vogue. Intuition can 
playa part in finding mushrooms, but not in determining their edibility. It is a 
sad comment on our times that intuition is so often peddled as a substitute for 
critical observation. If our intuitions were infallible insofar as mushrooms are 
concerned, there would be no need for books on the subject. It takes 
commitment and a good deal of conscious effort to identify mushrooms 
correctly. The "intuitive" approach is appealing, I suspect, precisely because it 
promises a maximum amount of satisfaction for a minimum amount of effort. 
24 
25 
WHATS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A MUSHROOM 
AND A TOADSTOOL? 
"Toadstool" usually carries the connotation of being poisonous, but since 
many people think that all wild mushrooms are poisonous, the two terms are 
virtually interchangeable in popular usage. The word ..toadstool" is perhaps a 
testament to the old folk belief that toads gave warts to people who handled 
them, and made mushrooms poisonous by sitting on them. 
WHEN AND WHERE DO MUSHROOMS GROW? 
learning to recognize a mushroom should not be an end in itself, but a means 
of getting to know thefungus. A field guide can teach you the physical features of 
the fruiting body (the mushroom aspect of the organism), but you must discover 
for yourself the traits of the fungal aspect-that is, its fruiting behavior and 
ecological idiosyncrasies. This fungal aspect can only be appreciated by 
spending a good deal of time in the woods and fields, and yet it is this aspect that 
is ultimately the most rewarding-getting to know organisms you can't see most 
of the time on an intimate basis. 
Fungally speaking, we are smiled upon most favorably. Our mild coastal 
climate allows for a long mush rom season (late October through March), and at 
least a few species can be found any month of the year (Agaricus augustus, for 
instance, fruits prolifically during the dry summer months). However, the peak 
months for most mushrooms are the wettest ones-November through 
February. As you move north along the west coast, the season is progressively 
-earlier (September through November or December) and more compressed; as 
you go south it is correspondingly later and more erratic. In the Rocky 
Mountains, on the other hand, the best time is usually August, while in eastern 
North America it is the summer and fall and in the Deep South it is the summer 
and winter or even year-round. 
Just as some wildflowers bloom in March and others in July, so each kind of 
mushroom has its own biological clock. In our area the sulfur shelf (Laetiporus 
sulphureus) fruits on eucaylptus stumps in September and October (before the 
fall rains arrive), while the horn of plenty (Craterellus cornucopioides) sedom 
shows up before Christmas, morels (M orchella species) appear in the spring, and 
the blewit (Clitocybe nuda) fruits continuously throughout the mushroom 
season. 
Since rainfall and temperature are major determining factors, no two 
mushroom seasons are quite alike. There are good mushroom years and bad 
mushroom years, but most typical is a year which favors the fruiting of some 
types at the expense of others. For instance, the warm winter rains of 1977-78 
produced a bumper crop of Agaricus in our area, but Chroogomphus was 
practically absent. The previous year, however, there was a preponderance of 
Chroogomphus and only a smattering of Agaricus. It can be seen, then, that the 
terms ..common" and ..rare" can be misleading. ..Common" means "often 
common," while "rare" actually means ..rarely common," because some species 
may be absent for many years and then, at the beckoning of some mysterious 
signal, fruit suddenly in unprecedented quantity. As a result, you can search the 
same locality for years and still find new species! 
26 
WHEN AND WHERE DO MUSHROOMS GROW? 
To the beginner practically every mushroom is "rare." Experienced hunters 
usually find more mushrooms because they know exactly where to go. They 
stake out secret mycelial "patches" of their favorite fungi which they visit 
regularly and guard zealously. So unless it's the peak of the season, you're likely 
to find little in the way of collectable delectables unless you know exactly what 
you are looking for and where it is likely to grow. For instance, you don  go 
looking for manzanita boletes (Leccinum manzanitae) under pine. If you do, 
you'll c9me home empty-handed, although without realizing it you may pass up 
some delicious hedgehog mushrooms (Dentinum repandum), especially if the 
area you search is overgrown with brambles and poison oak. The more you 
search, the more "patches" you discover and the more you develop an intuitive 
feel for when and where mushrooms grow. You learn to hunt as much with your 
nose and fingers and belly as with your eyes. Eventually you can walk through 
the woods when there are no mushrooms out, and successfully predict which 
kinds will come up when it's wetter. 
And yet, a large part of mushroom hunting is timing, and a large part oftiming 
is luck. So much depends on where you happen to be at what time. If you're too 
early, the mushrooms will be invisible, still under the mulch. If you're too late, 
they'll be "occupied" (riddled with maggots), already harvested, or too old to eat. 
Make as many generalizations and specifications as you like, and mushrooms 
will still defy them! 
This element of uncertainty, though at times the cause of considerable 
frustration, is also the reason for much of the excitement. No matter how 
experienced and knowledgeable you are, you can never really be sure of what 
you'll find-you can only increase to some degree your chances of success. There 
is the acute despair of not finding what you hoped for, the frenzied delight and 
disbelief at finding more than you dreamed possible, the sure and comfortable 
satisfaction of finding exactly what you "knew" would be there. 
CAN PEOPLE HARM MUSHROOMS BY PICKING THEM? 
Since mushrooms are the "fruit" of a fungus, picking them is like picking 
apples or blackberries or figs-no harm is done providing you gather them 
carefully and do not unduly disturb the environment. Nor does selective picking 
interfere seriously with their ability to reproduce. Most mushrooms you find 
have already shed spores (unlike flowers, which have yet to form seeds), and will 
continue to shed them after they're picked. Also, the parent mycelium is usually 
perennial and will produce mushrooms periodically, and there is some evidence 
to suggest that removing a few mushrooms can stimulate the mycelium to 
produce more. 
The last several years, however, have seen a tremendous increase in the amount 
of wild mushrooms being harvested commercially-particularly in northern 
California and the Pacific Northwest. These mushrooms are shipped to markets 
and restaurants all over the country as well as abroad. As commercial picking is 
only lucrative when large numbers of mushrooms are gathered, animosity is 
developing between those who pick for money and those who pick for pleasure. 
The commercial pickers and their distributors claim that commercial 
harvesting provides valuable jobs in depressed areas {though the actual 
CAN PEOPLE HARM MUSHROOMS BY PICKING THEM? 
27 
number is fairly small), and they augment this claim with the specious argument 
that they are providing a service to the public, i.e., making wild mushrooms 
available to a larger audience, or at least to more than just a select few. (The 
"select few", in this case, is almost any ambulatory person who wants to learn 
about mushrooms; the "larger audience" is anyone who has extra money with 
which to buy wild mushrooms, which are never cheap!) 
The "select few," on the other hand, profess concern about over-picking and 
the possibility that certain edible species will be driven to extinction. However, 
there is no hard evidence to suggest that the latter is happening-or about to 
happen. I suspect what is really upsetting these mushroom hunters is that 
their habitual stomping grounds are being ravaged by commercial exploi- 
tation. This is a perfectly legitimate concern, if you ask me, for there is 
hard evidence that some-perhaps only a few-commercial pickers have not 
only "raided" but completely "cleaned out" areas where mushroom hunters with 
less time or mobility have been foraging for years. There ought to be enough 
mushrooms out there to support both commercial and personal picking, but 
mushroom hunting is one of many activities where a single selfish, inconsiderate 
boor can spoil it for everyone else. So. you selfish inconsiderate boors-you 
know who you are! (Or if you don't, we do!) 
Returning, then, to the original question-mushrooms are a renewable 
resource, and the only sure way to eradicate a species is to eliminate its habitat 
(which, unfortunately, is becoming a common practice as wild areas succumb to 
pollution and the appetite of developers). So don't feel guilty about picking 
mushrooms, but don't, on the other hand, pick more than you can use (COLOR 
PLATES 79, 81). Respect the environment and be considerate of those who 
follow in your footsteps-you may be one of them! 
CAN PEOPLE HARM THEMSELVES 
BY PICKING MUSHROOMS? 
No. Handling wild mushrooms is not dangerous. You may want to wash your 
Poison oak (left) and poison ivy are the banes of many a would-be mushroom hunter. The leaves grow 
in threes, but are shed during the winter! If you're allergic to them, shower th oroughly after every hunt 
and put your clothes in the wash. Ticks (right) and boletivores (see p. 546) also cause problems. 
,'" 
........ 
I' : 
,. 
'"" 
" 
" 
.  
. 
.... 
tt 
. . 
Rattlesnakes are known to lurk near or under mushrooms, especially large boletes, and they do not 
always take kindly to being disturbed. (Maybe that's why boletivores carry long sticks!) 
hands after prolonged contact with deadly Amanitas, but poisonous mush- 
rooms can cause harm only if ingested. There are, however, some corollary 
dangers to mushroom hunting-see photos above and on previous page! 
DO OTHER ANIMALS EAT MUSHROOMS? 
Yes. As any mushroom hunter will tell you, many a marvelous meaty 
mushroom has been reduced in a matter of hours to a writhing mass of beatific 
maggots. These wiggly white "worms" with the black heads are the larvae of 
fungus gnats (Mycetophiladae). Eggs are usually laid at the base ofthe stalk, and 
the newly hatched maggots work their way up to the cap, gorging themselves 
One of the unsung rewards of mushroom hunting is the discovery of a host of other fantastic clan- 
destine creatures. Some of these, like slugs, love to munch on mushrooms. Others, like mantises and 
millipedes, use them for shelter or hiding places. Left: A banana slug grazing peacefully in a "fungal 
jungle" of oyster mushrooms. Right: A praying mantis, up close and personal. 
-"II Pi, 
.. 
I 
" ... 
. 
, 
, . 
t. 
-. t... 
, . ':: 
., 
. . 
'. 
. 
-" 
" 
.- 
 
.. 
, 
Close-up of a banana slug grazing on an oyster mushroom. Banana slugs can also be seen in Color 
Plates 57 & 152, and at the bottom ofp. 28. 
along the way. Many other insects feed on fungi, including springtails and 
various beetles, and flies like nothing better than to feast on stinkhorn slime. 
Sowbugs seem to be very fond of Agaricus augustus. Slugs gormandize 
mushrooms whenever possible (COLOR PLATES 57 & 152) and have special 
""fungus-detectors" to aid them in the search. Tortoises have been known to 
interrupt their imperturbable peregrinations to munch on a mushroom or two. 
Rodents-particularly squirrels and chipmunks-ae confirmed fungophiles. 
They're fanatically fond of various boletes and agarics and those odoriferous 
underground fungi called truffles and false truffles. (A study by Joseph Hall of 
San Francisco State University revealed that the summertime diet ofthe Kaibab 
squirrel of Arizona consists almost entirely of fungi; during the summer captive 
Kaibab squirrels rejected other food when mushrooms were made available.) 
Pigs have a passion for true truffles. In Europe they are used to hunt them 
down, but have to be muzzled so they don't devour them (see p. 842)! Even the 
ruminants--cattle, deer, etc.-occasionally indulge. I have seen cows grazing on 
giant puffballs, and Siberian reindeer are addicted to Amanita muscaria (like 
humans, they experience profound mental disturbances after eating it). They are 
also said to be extremely fond of human urine, and is it coincidence that the 
Siberians who ate A. muscaria also made a practice of drinking their own urine 
in order to recycle the intoxicants? R. G. Wasson, in SOMA: The Divine 
Mushroom of Immortality, quote Vladimir J ochelson, a Russian 
anthropologist: 
The reindeer have a keen sense of hearing and smell, but their sight is rather 
poor. A man stopping to urinate in the open attracts reindeer from afar, 
which, following the sense of smell, will run to the urine, hardly discerning 
the man, and paying no attention to him. The position of a man standing up 
in the open while urinating is rather critical when he becomes the object of 
attention from reindeer coming down on him from all sides at full speed. 
Some mushrooms, incidentally, are carnivorous! Cordyceps species feed on 
insects, and it has recently been shown that several wood-rotting fungi (in- 
cluding the oyster mushroom) supplement their diet by digesting nematodes. 
29 
30 
WHAT IS THE NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF MUSHROOMS? 
Mushrooms are esteemed primarily for their flavor, but they can also be a 
healthy supplement to your diet. Each type, of course, has a different chemical 
composition, but in general their nutritive value compares favorably to that of 
most vegetables. They are rich in the B vitamins (including choline, which acts as 
a protective agent for your liver in case of mushroom poisoning). vitamin D, and 
vitamin K. Some are also high in vitamin A (e.g, the chanterelle, Cantharel/us 
cibarius), and a few (e.g., Fistu/ina hepatica) contain vitamin C. Mushrooms are 
also rich in minerals such as iron and copper and various trace elements. 
Like fruits, vegetables, and human beings, mushrooms are mostly water (85- 
95%). They have a low fat and carbohydrate content, and as a result, almost no 
calories-unless, of course, they are cooked in oil or butter. Some types are high 
in protein (especially Agaricus, Lepiota, and Calvatia species), and on a dry 
weight basis Boletus edu/is contains more protein than any common vegetable 
except soybeans. However, some of this protein is indigestible. so mushrooms 
are not a viable substitute for meat or other high-protein foods. Cooking mush- 
rooms maximizes their nutritive value by increasing their digestibility. Over- 
cooking them, however, removes some of their vitamins and most of the flavor. 
WHAT IS THE MEDICINAL VALUE OF MUSHROOMS? 
Fungi contain many unique and powerful substances-penicillin, for instance, 
which was accidentally discovered in the bread mold Penicillium. Many mush- 
rooms contain antibiotic substances, particularly those that don't decay quickly. 
The Chinese prize several polypores as much as ginseng (e.g., Ganoderma 
lucidum, Grifola umbel/ata) because of their alleged beneficial effects on health. 
There is some evidence to suggest they may strengthen or stimulate the immune 
system. The Japanese attribute similar properties to the shiitake (Lentinus 
edodes). More research should be conducted to determine what healing proper- 
ties, if any, these and other fungi possess. It is a tribute to the general feeling of 
our society that mushrooms are harmful at worst and worthless at best that very 
little research of this kind is being done in this country. 
CAN YOU GROW WILD MUSHROOMS? 
Yes, but just howis beyond the scope of this book. Manywild mushrooms have 
been successfully cultivated on a commercial basis-particularly in Japan, a 
mushroom-loving country with relatively little wilderness in which to hunt them. 
Some of these mushrooms are now being grown in the United States, e.g., the 
shiitake (Lentinus edodes), enokitake (Flammulina velutipes), and oyster mush- 
room (Pleurotus ostreatus). In addition to the familiar cultivated mushroom 
(Agaricus bisporus), so-called "magic mushrooms" such as Psilocybe cubensis 
are also grown, albeit illicitly. Several species are better suited to homescale than 
commercial production, including C/itocybe nuda, Coprinus coma/us, Agaricus 
subrufescens, Hericium spp., and Stropharia rugoso-annulata. Still others, such 
as Boletus edu/is, Cantharellus cibarius, and Morchella species, stubbornly 
resist attempts to raise them. As a rule, mycorrhizal fungi are difficult to raise 
because of their nutritional requirements (tree rootlets), while those that grow on 
wood, compost, dung, or disturbed ground are relatively easy. For more infor- 
mation on how to grow mushrooms, see the bibliography. 
Human beings, incidentally, are not the only ones to cultivate fungi, and were 
.., 
\ 
, 
... 
'.11 
Left: The shiitake, Lentinus edodes, was probably the first mushroom cultivated by humans. A native 
of Japan, it is now grown in the United States and may establish itself in the wild. Thisclusterisfruiting 
from a shiitake kit (a "log" of compressed sawdust). Right: Morels are among the many delicious 
mushrooms that resist commercial cultivation. These are red morels (Morchella elata group, p. 790). 
by no means the first. That honor belongs to certain ants and termites who raise 
fungi in their nests. On almost any walk through a tropical rain forest you can 
see long files ofleaf-cutting ants carrying bits ofleaves to their nests. These leaves 
are not food for the ants, but food for fungi upon which.the antsfeed! 
HEY, MAAAAAAAAAN, DO ANY PSILOCYBIN MUSHROOMS 
GROW AROUND HERE? 
] am asked this question more often than any other, and] must confess it 
irritates me-not because I object to the use of hallucinogenic drugsper se-but 
because of the attitude that usually-but not necessarily-accompanies their 
use. Most of the people who ask this question would rather change their way of 
looking at reality than face the difficult and discouraging task of transforming 
reality itself. Hence they see mushrooms as means to their own ends. They go out 
to the pastures and stuff their plastic bags with all the "LBM's" (Little Brown 
Mushrooms) they can find, then either pop the whole rotten mess into their 
mouths (a dangerous practice!), or expect someone like me-whose time is 
presumably less valuable than theirs-to sort them out. While clinging to the 
moronic belief that they constitute a "counterculture," they share our society's 
overriding urge for expediency. They make no attempt to learn about the 
organisms they eat and it has always struck me as ironic that people with such a 
low level of consciousness should be seeking "higher consciousness." 
Excerpts from Good Times (January, 1971) epitomize their line of thinking: 
"Amanita Reality"; "us genetic revolutionaries the longhairs"; "circumcision of 
the second charka"; "magic mushroom generation"; "] could relate the black 
hole notion to the notion oftotal pollution in that either experience would seem 
kind of freaky"; and "Amanita muscaria is total revolt, and the revolution is just 
about won." From this mindless drivel it is clear why Marge Piercy laments: 
We grew up in Disneyland with ads for friends 
and believed we could be made new by taking a pill. 
We wanted instant revolution, where all we had to add 
was a little smoke. 
But there is no tribe who dance and then sit down 
and wait for the crops to harvest themselves 
and supper to roll over before the pot. . . 
32 
HEY MAAAAAAAAAN . . . 
To answer the original question-yes, there are hallucinogenic mushrooms in 
California and the rest of North America, and most ofthem contain psilocybin 
and/or psilocin. But if you're just looking for a new high, you really ought to 
take up hang-gliding or bottle-throttling, or take your chances with what you get 
on the street. If, on the other hand, you have a genuine interest in our co- 
inhabitants on this planet, and you wish to explore altered states of 
consciousness, then the safest approach is to buy a responsible field guide to 
hallucinogenic mushrooms and use it in conjunction with this book. Possession 
of psilocybin and psilocin, incidentally, is prohibited by federal law (the 
Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act). 
LBM'S: LITTLE BROWN MUSHROOMS 
THE CAP is brown, the stem a shade browner, the gills browner still. This can be 
said of nearly one half of all the mushrooms you find. On even the most casual 
jaunt through the woods, you'll find dozens and dozens of Little Brown Mush- 
rooms (COLOR PLATE 107) sprouting at your feet, and very likely under them 
as well. The fact is, Little Brown Mushrooms ("LBM's") are so overwhelmingly 
abundant and uncompromisingly undistinguished that it is more than just futile 
for the beginner to attempt to identify them-it is downright foolish. 
After spending a good 25% of my waking existence being downright foolish, I 
have come to the painful but inescapable conclusion that the only possible 
reason for there being more than one kind of Little Brown Mushroom is that 
their "creator" has an inexplicable fondness for prospective professionals in 
search of a profession, i.e., Little Brown Mushrooms provide an ever-expanding 
plethora of pleasant possibilities for lengthy treatises with intriguing and 
titillating titles such as, "A Preliminary Contribution toward a Partial 
Monograph of the Section Ignobiles of Subgenus Obfustucantes, Genus 
Immobilaria as it Occurs in Outer New Bunswick," or "More Useless and 
Uninteresting Agarics from Putrescent Point State Park." 
I wouldn't begrudge this in the least were it not for the fact that this same 
"creator" is unequivocally cruel when it comes to rank amateurs such as you and 
I, who are not paid to peer down the narrow barrel of a microscope until we are 
bug-eyed or get scholar's thum b from flipping through all those worn-out stacks 
of abstruse Ph.D. theses-and whose curiosity must consequently be swallowed 
rather than satiated as we slam our big red mushroom book against the wall and 
decapitate that unpretentious "LBJ" (Little Brown Job) that didn't asked to be 
picked and "demystified" in the first place, but which we went ahead and picked 
anyway, and have ever since been attempting in vain to identify. 
Though each new Little Brown Mushroom you find will bear a striking 
resemblance to the last Little Brown Mushroom you threw away, don't let this 
deceive you into assuming they are identical. Far from it! Somehow, each one 
finds' a new and more minute way to be different, whether it be that the 
incrustation of the pileal epidermis is cheeriose rather than pretzeloid, or that the 
hymenial pleurocystidia contain mysterious particles with a refractive content 
when mounted in a 10% aqueous solution of Pepto-Bismol. It is almost as if they 
were deliberately challenging the taxonomist, who must tax his or her creative 
powers to their utmost in order to uncover the differences. 
An "LBM" (Little Brown Mushroom), also known as an "LBJ" (Little Brown Job)., 
Actually, thanks to the diligence and expertise of the professionals, we are 
slowly accumulating a large mass of knowledge on the Little Brown 
Mushrooms. Not a completely coherent mass, mind you (in some ways it still 
resembles a mess more than a mass), but six hours' painstaking perusal of the 
current literature will produce the name of at least one out of 50 ofthe featureless 
little fellows instead of one out of 51, as it used to be. Part of the problem, I 
suspect, is that new species are being designed and disseminated at 
approximately the same rate that old ones are being defined and differentiated, 
so that we will never attain the level of taxonomic command that we have of, say, 
the Little Brown Lizards or the Big Brown Toads. 
Incidentally, to qualify as a bonafide Little Brown Mushroom, you ought to 
be little, and you most definitely have to be a mushroom, but you don't 
necessarily have to be brown, though it certainly simplifies things for you (by 
making it more difficult for us) if you are. That is to say, there are any number of 
boring buff Little Brown Mushrooms, wishy-washy white Little Brown 
Mushrooms, and gratuitous gray Little Brown Mushrooms (to say nothing of 
those whose color is so neutral or nebulous as to defy description), but there are 
no breathtakingly blue Little Brown Mushrooms, and by and large Little Brown 
Mushrooms are simply and unequivocally brown. 
The point I'm trying to make, folks, is that it's sheer folly to embark upon the 
purchase of a field guide with the expectation of identifying each and every 
fleshy fungal fructification you find. Please, for your sake, don't expect the 
"pegs" to fit neatly into the "holes." The "holes" are made by human beings and 
the "pegs" are not! Some "pegs" will fit a number of holes, some won't fit 
anywhere and must wait for a hole to be gouged out. A few will fit snugly into 
one hole and one hole only, and these are the ones you should get to know. By 
concentrating on these larger and/ or more distinctive types (see the chart on 
pp. 48-51), and proceeding at a measured, deliberate pace, you will experience a 
mounting satisfaction at your ability to demystify, identify, appreciate-and 
hopefully eat-some of the mushrooms you gather. Remember, what we know 
of mushrooms (or anything, for that matter) is substantially more than what we 
knew fifty years ago, but is still precious little compared to what we don't know. 
The bulk of this book deals with the larger, more easily recognized fleshy 
fungi. However, in the interests of providing a broad overview, some ofthe more 
noteworthy (or rather, less unnoteworthy) "LBM's" have been included. Almost 
every genus boasts a few, but the majority belong to Inocybe, Tubaria, Galerina, 
Collybia, Psathyrella, Marasmius, Mycena, Pholiota, and Cortin arius. 
\ 
, 
--- I 
..r 
,\, 
;ao. 
\ .- 
,,,- 
..;;;r- 
4. 
-- 
<t 
110 
An oak woodland, with clusters of honey mushrooms (Armillariella mellea) in the foreground 
(Nancy Burnett) 
HABITATS 
DEVELOPING an awareness of biological communities is essential to any 
nature study. In this chapter, some of the more common or distinctive 
mushrooms are grouped according to habitat-the type of place where they're 
most likely to be found, or the type oftree with which they commonly grow. The 
environmental aspect of collecting is frequently neglected by mushroom 
hunters, who eagerly remove mushrooms from their place of growth without 
taking note of their surroundings. In many instances the place of growth will 
provide clues to the identity of the mushroom-and you'll soon discover that 
certain mushrooms always seem to grow together; that is, they are indicators of a 
certain habitat or biological community. 
Most of the habitats discussed here are named according to dominant 
vegetation (oak, redwood, grass, etc.). Since only a few of our local trees are 
significant in mushroom identification, it makes a lot more sense to learn those 
trees before you learn the mushrooms, rather than trying to differentiate 
between several hundred kinds of mushrooms before learning the basic trees. 
Always bear in mind that the different habitats discussed here overlap, so that 
in a given area there are usually several habitats present. For instance, a lawn with 
a Monterey pine will feature grass-loving fungi as well as species mycorrhizal with 
pine. And a road through the woods will offer many types of mycorrhizal or 
humus-inhabiting mushrooms plus those that grow in disturbed ground (the 
roadside). Be sure to check the list of cosmopolitan mushrooms ("Anywhere and 
Everywhere"), for these will turn up in almost any habitat. Also remember that 
mycorrhizal fungi do not necessarily grow under their host-they are associated 
with the tree's rootlets, which may be quite a distance away from the trunk. The 
habitats described in the following pages include several widespread ones (e.g., 
lawns or disturbed ground) and several specific to our area (e.g., cypress and 
redwood). Space does not permit an exhaustive discussion offorest trees outside 
our area, but a few are briefly dealt with under the heading "Other Trees." 
34 
PINE 
(Pinus species) 
35 
Pine forests are favored by a melange of mycorrhizal mushrooms. plus multitudes of 
minute. saprophytic Mycenas. When the needle carpet is dry ("potato chip conditions".), 
the larger mushrooms often hide underneath, manifesting themselves as low mounds or 
"mushrumps." Prized edible species include Boletus edulis, Dentinum repandum, Clito- 
cybe nuda, Sparassis crispa, and Tricholoma flavovirens. Suil/us and Chroogomphus 
species often fruit together in enormous quantities, along with the green and orange 
Lactarius deliciosus and the bright red or pink Russula rosacea. But the most spectacular 
fungal feature of our pine forests is unquestionably Amanita muscaria, with its fiery red 
cap studded with white "stars." 
Of course, from region to region the different kinds of pines feature different mycor- 
rhizal partners, and even in the same area there are usually some differences in the fungal 
associates of each pine species. For instance, Suil/us pseudobrevipes and Chroogomphus 
pseudovinicolor grow with ponderosa pine in our area, Suil/us pungens with Monterey 
and knobcone pine, and Suil/us fuscotomentosus with knobcone and ponderosa pine, 
while Hygrophorus gliocyc/us is abundant inland under digger pine, but also occurs 
along the coast with Monterey pine, and Amanita caesarea and Lactarius indigo occur 
with ponderosa pine in Arizona but are absent from California's ponderosa pine forests. 
Agaricus subrUlilescens Cortinarius species 
Albatrellusfleuii CrYPlOporus volvarus 
Amanita aspera Dentinum species 
Amanita caesarea Endoptychum depressum 
Amanita muscaria Elaphomyces species 
Amanita pachycolea G ymnopilus sapineus 
Amanita pantherina Gymnopi/us spectabi/is group 
Armillaria ponderosa Hebeloma crustuliniforme 
Boletus barrowsii Hebeloma sinapizans group 
Boletus edu/is Helvella lacunosa 
Bolerus piperatus Hydnellum species 
Brauniel/ula nancyae Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca 
Ca/lislOsporium IUleo-olivaLeum Hygrophorus erubescens 
Chroogomphus species Hygrophorus gliocyc/us 
C/avulina cristata group Hygrophorus hypothejus 
ClilOcybe deceptiva Hygrophorus purpurascens 
C/ilOcybe nuda Inocybe species 
Clitocybe sderolOidea Inonotus IOmenlOsus 
C/ilOcybe species Laccaria species 
Collybia bUlyracea Lactarius de/iciosus 
Collybia dryophila Lactarius indigo 
Cortinarius cinnamomeus group Lactarius rufus 
Cortinarius mucosus Lactarius subflammeus 
Cortinarius obrusus group Lactarius vinaceorufescens 
Cortinarius phoeniceus Lentinus ponderosus 
DOUGLAS-FIR 
(Pseudotsuga species) 
Mycena species 
Marasmius sp. (unidentified) 
Mycena species 
NaemalOloma species 
Phaeolus schweinitzii 
Phellinus pini 
Pho/iota species 
PIUleus atromarginatus 
Rhizopogon species 
Russula alUlacea group 
Russula brevipes 
Russula emetica group 
Russula rosacea 
Russula sororia group 
Sparassis crispa 
Sui//us species 
Tricholoma flavovire ns 
Tricholoma imbricarum 
Tricholoma pessundarum group 
Tricholoma squarrulosum 
Tricholoma terreum group 
Tricholoma vaccinum 
Tricholoma zelleri 
Tricholomopsis rUlilans 
There are well over 1,000 kinds of mushrooms known to form mycorrhiza with Douglas- 
fir, and the great Douglas-fir forests of the Pacific Northwest are among the best fungal 
foraging grounds in the world. In our region, however, the Douglas-fir habitat is no 
better than average. The most prominent mycorrhizal associates are Suil/us, Gomphidius, 
Lactarius, and Russula species. Russula xerampelina is among our few choice edibles 
that grow principally with Douglas-fir. Laetiporus sulphureus is occasionally found on 
logs and stumps, and Cantharel/us cibarius and C. subalbidus are abundant under 
Douglas-fir farther north. Tuber gibbosum, when you can find it, is also excellent. 
· Potato chip conditions: when it's so dry that it sounds like you're walking on a bed of potato chips; equally unde- 
sirable are "tidepool conditions," when the humus layer is so soggy it sounds like you're traipsing across a bed of 
sea anemones (squish squish squish). 
36 
DOUGLAS-FIR 
The name "Douglas-fir" is hyphenated in this book because it is not really a fir. It is 
easily told from redwood (with which it often occurs locally) by its browner bark, spurred 
cones, and habit of dropping needles without twigs intact (redwood drops twigs with 
the reddish needles intact). 
Amanita pamherina 
Camharellus species 
Cortinarius species 
Fomilopsis cajanderi 
FomilOpsis pinicola 
Gomphidius species 
Hygrophorus agalhosmus 
Inocybe species 
Laclarius rubri/acleus 
Lactarius vinaceorufescens 
Lepiota clypeolaria 
Mycena species 
Olidea species 
Phaeolus schweinilzii 
Phel/inus pini 
Rhizopogon species 
Russula gracilis group 
Russula inlegra group 
Russula placita group 
Russula xerampelina 
Slrobi/urus Irullisalus 
Suil/us caerulescens 
Suil/us lakei 
Suil/us ponderosus 
Tricholoma lerreum group 
Truncocolumella cilrina 
Tuber gibbosum 
REDWOOD (Sequoia sempervirens) 
Ironically, our largest tree supports a fungal phantasmagoria of dainty, fragile fungi, 
but only a smattering of the large, fleshy types. Relatively few redwood-lovers are wood- 
rotters, and even fewer (if any) are mycorrhizal-a tribute to the redwood's unique 
position among the conifers. 
Caulorhiza (=Col/ybia) umbonata, with its conical or umbonate cap and long "tap 
root," is perhaps the most distinctive redwood-lover. Colorful waxy caps (H.vgrocybe 
species) and blue-black to purple-black Leptonias abound, but pickings for the table are 
meager, at least south of San Francisco-Agaricus augustus (but usually near roads or 
trails), Agaricus subrutilescens, Clitocybe deceptiva, and sometimes Can/harel/us 
cibarius. The largest inhabitant of our redwood forests is Leucopaxillus albissimus, 
which often forms impressive fairy rings, but unfortunately, is not a good edible. 
Agaricus auguslus 
Agaricus hondensis 
Agaricus praeclaresquamosus 
Agaricus subruti/escens 
Bolelus zelleri 
Camarophyllus species 
Camharellus cibarius 
Caulorhiza umbonala 
Clavaria vermicularis 
Clilocybe species 
Enloloma madidum 
Geoglossum species 
Helvella species 
Hygrocybe species 
Hygrophoropsis auramiaca 
Lepiola species 
LeplOnia species 
Leucopaxil/us albissimus 
M acrolyphula juncea 
Microglossum viride 
Mycena species 
Nolanea species 
Po()!porus hirlus 
Ramaria abielina 
Ramaria myceliosa 
Ramariopsis kunzei 
Slropharia ambigua 
Trichoglossum hirsutum 
Tricholomopsis rulilans 
Xeromphalina species 
CYPRESS (Cupressus species) 
Our cypress groves do not qualify as "woods" because nearly all of them were planted. 
They have few (if any) mycorrhizal associates, but there are a number of fleshy fungi that 
grow mainly under cypress. The harsh winds and salt spray to which coastal cypresses are 
subjected make for unpredictable hunting, but under favorable conditions there is a large 
burst of Lepiota and Agaricus species, many of them unclassified and/ or endemic to 
California. From a gastronomic standpoint the best cypress-lovers are Agaricus bisporus, 
A. lilaceps, A. bernardii, Lepiota rachodes, and Clitocybe nuda. In southern Arizona, 
incidentally, there are large forests of Arizona cypress, and it would be very interesting to 
compare the fungal flora of those cypress tracts to that of coastal California. 
Agaricus benesi 
Agaricus bernardii 
Agaricus bisporus 
Agaricus blandianus 
Agaricus californicus 
Agaricus fuscofibril/osus 
Agaricus fuscovelalus 
Agaricus lilaceps 
Agaricus pallersonae 
Agaricus perobscurus 
Agaricus species 
Agaricus xanlhodermus 
Ballarrea phalloides 
Camarophyllus species 
Clilocybe nuda 
Geaslrum species 
Hygrocybe species 
Lepiola rachodes 
Lepiola species 
Tyromyces basi/aris 
OAK (Quercus species) 
Oaks are endowed with a rich array of fleshy fungi that differ drastically from the 
conifer-lovers typical of northern California and the Pacific Northwest. In fact, oaks 
appear to have more mycorrhizal partners than any other angiosperms (hardwoods), and 
mushroom lovers are indeed fortunate that they are the dominant forest trees of the 
central California coast. Oaks also boast the longest mushroom season of any local forest 
type. The major fruiting, naturally, is in the fall and winter, but there is a characteristic 
spring crop highlighted by Lactarius fragi/is, L. rufulus, Clitocybe nuda, Tuber species, 
and a trio of Amanitas-A. ocreata, A. rubescens, and A. velosa. Wood-inhabiting 
bracket fungi are prominent year-round, including Trametes versicolor, Lenzites 
betulina, Stereum species, and Tremella mesenterica. But to inveterate fungophiles, our 
oak woodlands are synonymous with chanterelles and blewits (Cantharellus cibarius and 
Clitocybe nuda)-the two not only grow together, they go together (in a variety of 
delicious dishes). Other choice edibles include Boletus appendiculatus, B. regius, B. 
barrowsii, Craterellus cornucopioides, Lactariusfragilis, L. rufulus, Pleurotus ostreatus, 
Amanita velosa, and Tricholoma portentosum. But beginners be careful-our most dan- 
gerous mushrooms, Amanita phalloides and A. ocreata, are also associated with oak! 
The following list of oak-lovers applies mainly to live oak (Q. agrifolia and close 
relatives), the principal species in our area. Other kinds of oaks, mostly deciduous, occur 
inland and offer a more modest selection of fleshy fungi, perhaps because they receive less 
rainfall, or perhaps because they are deciduous. 
Agaricus albolutescens 
Agaricus californicus 
Agaricus hondensis 
Amanita baccata 
Amanita constricta 
Amanita magniverrucata 
Amanita ocreata 
Amanita pantherina 
Amanita pha//oides 
Amanita rubescens 
Amanita velosa 
Armi//arie//a me//ea 
Boletus appendiculatus 
Boletus barrowsii 
Boletus dryophilus 
Boletus erythropus 
Boletus flaviporus 
Boletus "marshi;" 
Boletus regius 
Boletus satanas 
Bulgaria inquinans 
Canthare//us cibarius 
Chlorociboria species 
Clavariadelphus pisti//aris 
ClilOcybe nebularis 
ClilOcybe nuda 
Co//ybia dryophila 
Cortinarius glaucopus group 
Cortinarius rega/is 
Cortinarius sodagnitus group 
Cortinarius species 
Cratere//us cinereus 
Cratere//us cornucopioides 
Crepidotus species 
Daldinia species 
EnlOloma species 
Exidia glandulosa 
Genea species 
Gyroporus castaneus 
Hebeloma crustuliniforme 
Hericium erinaceus 
Hericium ramosum 
Hygrophorus albicastaneus 
Hygrophoruseburneus 
Hygrophorus roseibrunneus 
Hygrophorussordidus 
Hygrophorus species 
Hymenogaster species 
Hysterangium species 
lnocybe sororia 
lnocybe species 
Lactarius alnicola 
Lactarius argi//aceifolius 
Lactarius fragi/is 
Lactarius rufulus 
Lenzites betulina 
Mycena species 
Omphalotus o/ivascens 
Otidea species 
Phe//inus gilvus 
PhY//OlOpsis nidulans 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
Plweus cervinus 
Plweus lwescens 
Polyporus decurrens 
Psathyre//a hydrophi/a 
Psathyre//a species 
Russula cyanoxantha 
Russulafragrantissima group 
Russula maculata group 
Russula subnigricans group 
Schizophy//um commune 
Stereum species 
Trametes versicolor 
Treme//afo/iacea 
Treme//a mesenterica 
Tricholoma pessundatum group 
Tricholoma portentosum 
Tricholoma saponaceum 
Tuber species 
Tylopi/usindecus 
Xylaria hypoxylon 
TANOAK (Lithocarpus densiflorus) 
Also known as tanbark oak, this close relative of the oaks forms dense stands with 
madrone at higher elevations in the coastal mountains, and also grows in sheltered basins 
with redwood. Among the prominent fungi of our tanoak woods are the lovely coral 
mushrooms (Ram aria species) and the diminutive garlic mushroom (Marasmius 
38 
TAN OAK 
copelandi). which is often smelled before it is seen. The best edibles are Agaricus 
silvicola. Armillaria ponderosa. Pleurotus ostreatus (on decaying logs), Boletus aereus. 
Boletus appendiculatus. Russula cyanoxantha. and Craterellus cornucopioides. 
Agaricus hondensis 
Agaricus si/vicola group 
Armil/aria ponderosa 
Boletus aereus 
Boletus appendiculatus 
Boletopsis subsquamosa 
Bulgaria inquinans 
Cantharel/us subalbidus 
Clavariadelphus pistillaris 
Cortinarius col/initus group 
Cortinarius cotoneus group 
Cortinarius in/ractus 
Cortinarius species 
Craterel/us cornucopioides 
Entoloma madidum 
Entoloma species 
Hydnel/um caeruleum 
Hydnum fuscoindicum 
Hygrophorus russula 
Lactarius argillaceifolius 
Lactarius subvillosus 
M acrotyphula juncea 
Marasmius copelandi 
Phellinus gilvus 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
Polyporus hirtus 
Ramaria species 
Russula albonigra 
Russula cyanoxantha 
Tricholoma saponaceum 
Tricholoma zel/eri 
CHINQUAPIN (Castano psis chrysophylla) 
Also spelled "chinkapin," this cousin of the chestnuts has chesnut-like burrs that 
contain small edible nuts. Most of the local chinquapins are rather runty and ragged- 
looking but farther north they attain heights of 75-100 feet. Chinquapins are also closely 
allied to tanoak, and as might be expected, support a similar fungus flora, including 
Ramaria species and Boletus aereus. Among the wood-inhabitors, three in particular 
stand out: the sulfur tuft (Naematoloma fasiculare) and jack-o-Iantern mushroom 
(Omphalotus olivascens) because of their brilliance, and the beefsteak fungus (Fistulina 
hepatica) because of its bizarreness. Boletus aereus is the best edible species. 
Boletus aereus 
Entoloma species 
Fistulina hepatica 
Marasmius copelandi 
N aematoloma fasciculare 
Omphalotus olivascens 
Ramaria species 
Stereum species 
Trametes versicolor 
MADRONE and MANZANITA (Arbutus menziesii and 
Arctostaphylos species) 
Madrone woods are my favorite foraging grounds. They boast their share of 
gastronomic delights (e.g., Amanita calyptrata. Craterellus cornucopioides. Leccinum 
manzanitae). but their chief attraction is their beauty. Madrones don't blot out the sun 
like redwoods, and they're more colorful (though not quite as venerable) as oaks. Every 
year they shed their reddish bark in sheets, revealing smooth, yellow, musclebound limbs 
beneath. I n the summer the rags of stripped bark sizzle audibly in the sunlight as they curl 
up like pencil shavings. In the fall, the stripped bark combines with the large leaves and 
clusters of bittersweet orange-red berries to form a deep, incomparably rich, reddish- 
black humus. In such splendid company, it's hard to keep your mind on mushrooms! 
Manzanitas are essentially miniature madrones. The most that can be said for foraging 
in manzanita thickets is that it's different-you spend the whole time crawling around on 
your hands and knees wishing you'd taken up stamp collecting or basket weaving or 
stayed home and watched the ball game. 
It is interesting to note that a number of mushrooms normally associated with conifers 
cross over to madrone (they just can't resist!) and I or tan oak. These include Amanita 
aspera. Amanita muscaria. Armillaria ponderosa. Tricholoma (=Armillaria) zelleri. 
Tricholoma aurantium. T. j7avovirens. Hygrophorus chrysodon. and H. eburneus. 
Amanita aspera 
Amanita calyptrata 
Armillaria ponderosa 
Boletus aereus 
Boletus amygdalin us 
Boletus flaviporus 
Cantharel/us subalbidus 
Cortinarius balteatus 
Cortinarius species 
Craterel/us cornucopioides 
Entoloma species 
Hydnumfuscoindicum 
.  
-'- 
\. 
Watching bark peel can be as exciting as watching a bicycle rust, unless it's madrone bark, shown here. 
Hygrophorus chrysodon 
Hygrophorus eburneus 
Leccinum manzanitae 
Leccinum species 
Lepiota atrodisca 
--- 
" 
I 
Omphalotus o/ivascens 
Phe//inus igniarius 
Russula cremoricolor 
Russula emetica group 
Tricholoma aurantium 
Tricholomaflavovirens 
Tricholoma manzanitae 
Tricholoma saponaceum 
Tylopilus humi/us 
EUCALYPTUS (Eucalyptus species) 
This messy, aggressive intruder was originally brought to this country in the hope that 
its noxious fumes would combat malaria. It grows quickly, and its greedy, shallow roots 
inhibit the growth of many native plants and mushrooms (Leucopaxillus albissimus. 
Coprinus plicatilis. Clitocybe nuda. and various Agaricus species are among the few 
humus-inhabitors with the poor sense to tolerate it). However, eucalyptus makes fairly 
good firewood and if you chop them down you will not only prevent them from barging 
into someone's bedroom during the next windstorm, but you're also liable to get a nice 
crop of succulent sulfur shelves (Laetiporus sulphureus) sprouting from the cut stumps! 
Agaricus californicus 
Agaricus xanthodermus 
Clitocybe nuda 
Coprinus species 
Hydnangium carneum 
RIPARIAN WOODLAND 
Hymenogaster albus 
Hysterangium fuscum 
Laccaria species 
Laetiporus sulphureus 
Lepiota rubrotincta 
Leucopaxi//us albissimus 
M arasmiellus candidus 
M arasmius plicatulus 
Psathyrella species 
Setche//iogaster tenuipes 
Streams and rivers being indisputably damp, many people assume they constitute an 
ideal setting for mushrooms. The mixed hardwoods (alder, cottonwood, willow, maple, 
etc.) of our stream valleys and ravines do indeed support a characteristic fungus flora, but 
it is a surprisingly modest one that does not yield the bountiful harvests of our oak and 
pine forests. Log-rotters abound (Pholiota. Psathyrella. Naematoloma. Armillariella. 
Pleurotus. etc.), while the best edibles are Armillariella mellea and Pleurotusostreatus in 
the fall and winter, Verpa and Morchella species in the spring. 
Armillarie/la mellea 
Clathrus archeri 
Clavaria vermicularis 
Coprinus micaceus 
Disciotis venosa 
F/ammu/ina velutipes 
Marasmiellus candidus 
Morchella species 
Mycena species 
Naematoloma species 
Pho/iota species 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
39 
Pluteus species 
Psathyrella species 
Sarcoscypha coccinea 
Stropharia ambigua 
Verpa bohemica 
Verpa conica 
40 
OTHER TREES 
HABITATS 
Only a few of our native trees have been discussed so far, but the remaining types are 
not particularly significant from a mushroom identification standpoint. That is, the 
mushrooms they harbor (either beneath or on them) are likely to be cosmopolitan (see the 
"Anywhere and Everywhere" category). For instance, almost nothing fungal grows 
under bay laurel, but the Ganoderma applanatum group (especially G. brownil) is 
abundant on bay laurel as well as many other trees. Similarly, species of Laccaria 
(omnipresent mushroom "weeds") occur in droves under acacia, while the bush lupines 
along the coast harbor nice crops of Flammu/ina velutipes and a brown-capped form of 
Pleurotus ostreatus (both edible), and huckleberry is home to Cortinarius balteatus and 
the C. cy/indripes group. 
A few trees of special interest to mushroom hunters that do not occur locally are 
discussed briefly below, but space does not permit a detailed listing of their fungal 
associates. 
LARCH (Larix)-Larches, or tamaracks as they are sometimes called, are deciduous 
northern conifers whose needles turn gold before dropping off. They feature a number 
of unique mycorrhizal fungi, particularly boletes, plus the usual array of wood-rotters 
and saprophytes. The following species favor larch over other conifers. 
Gomphidius mac:ulalus 
Hygrophorusspec:iosus 
FomilOpsis offii:inalis 
Fuscobolelinus species 
Suil/us c:avipes 
Suillus grevi//ei 
HEMLOCK (Tsuga)-Hemlocks are a common feature of the northern and montane 
forests of North America. In the West they usually mingle with other conifers, and so 
do their mycorrhizal mates. The following list includes only those species that seem 
overly fond of hemlock. Among them is Boletus mirabilis, a choice edible. 
Bolelus mirabilis 
Chroogomphus IOmenlOsus 
Corlinarius subfoelidus 
COrlinarius species 
Elaphomyc:es granulalus 
Ganoderma lsugae 
Hyslerangium separabile 
LaC:larius subpurpureus 
Pleurolus porrigens 
Ramaria species 
Rhizopogon rubesc:ens 
Russula xerampe/ina 
Tylopilus species 
SPRUCE (Picea)- The Sitka spruce stands of coastal northern California and the 
Pacific Northwest and the spruce forests of the North, Southwest, and Rocky Moun- 
tains are phenomenally rich in mycorrhizal mushrooms, particularly species of Russula 
and Cortinarius and the delectable Boletus edu/is. A sizable number of spruce addicts 
have already been listed under pine; these species are excluded from the following list. 
Agaricus smilhii 
Albalre//us confluens 
Albalre//us ovinus 
Armillaria albolanaripes 
Armi//aria ca/igala 
Bolelus pulc:herrimus 
Bolelus rubripes 
Calvalia fumosa 
Calvalia subcrelacea 
Camhare//us cibarius 
Calalhelasma imperia/is 
Calalhelasma vemricosa 
C lavaria purpurea 
Clavariadelphus species 
C/ilocybe odora 
Cortinarius species 
Gomphidius glutinosus 
Gomphus species 
Hydnum species 
HygropllOrus agathosmus 
Hygrophorus c:apreolarius 
Hygrophorus o/ivac:eoalbus 
Hygrophorus pudorinus 
Lac:larius alnic:ola 
Lac:larius represemaneus 
Lac:larius scrobiculalus 
Leccinum species 
Macowanites americanus 
Phaeoco//ybia species 
Phe//odon species . 
Polyoze//us multiplex 
Rhizopogon parksii 
Russula species 
Russula xerampelina 
Tricholoma saponac:eum 
Tricholoma virgalum 
Tylopilus pseudoscaber group 
OTHER TREES 
41 
FIR (Abies)-Firs, like hemlocks, usually occur in association with other conifers. 
They feature many of the same fungi as their close relatives, the spruces. Some species, 
however, seem to favor fir over other conifers. These include: 
Boletus calopus 
Boletus regius 
Cortinarius species 
Echinodontium tinctorium 
Gastroboletus turbinatus 
Hericium abietis 
Nivatogastrium nubigenum 
Oxyporus nobi/issimus 
Rozites caperata 
JUNIPER (Juniperus)-Junipers favor arid habitats (at least in the West) and have 
few if any mycorrhizal mates. Therefore, as might be expected, they offer a rather meager 
selection of fleshy fungi: a few saprophytes (e.g., Geastrum and Tulostoma species) plus 
some wood-rotters (e.g., Daedalea juniperinus. Gloeophyllum striatum. Truncospora 
demidoffil). Several of the species listed under cypress and "Sand and Deserts" also 
occur under juniper. 
CEDAR and INCENSE CEDAR (Thuja and Libocedrus)-Cedars and incense cedars 
are not "true" cedars. The "true" or Old World cedars are members of the pine family, 
whereas American cedars have scales rather than needles and are more closely related 
to juniper and cypress. Our "cedars" harbor several unique fungi (e.g., Tyromyces 
amarus. which causes a heart rot of incense cedar), but they have few if any mycorrhizal 
mates. Like redwood and cypress, they are blessed mostly with puny saprophytes that 
grow best in a mushroom-poor environment (e.g., Leptonia and Hygrocybe species). 
MAPLE (Acer)-See "Riparian Woodland." 
BIRCH (Betula)-As any northerner will tell you, birch has dozens of mycorrhizal 
associates. In California it does not occur naturally, but planted trees in lawns 
and parks often feature Lactarius torminosus. Lactarius pubescens. and/ or Paxil/us 
involutus. Birch forests, on the other hand, are rich in other Lactarii as well as Russulas, 
Amanitas, and tasty Leccinums. Several of the more distinctive birch lovers are: 
Amanita muscuria 
Amanita virosa group 
Cortinarius armi//atus 
Cortinarius pholideus 
Fomesfomentarius 
Lactarius pubescens 
Lactarius thejogalus 
Lactarius torminosus 
Lecc;num scabrum 
Lecc;num species 
Paxi//us involutus 
Phe//inus igniarius 
Piptoporus betu/inus 
Lactarius pubescens (see comments under L. torminosus on p. 73), left, and Paxi//us involutus 
(see p. 477), right, commonly grow on lawns where birches have been planted. Both are poisonous, 
at least raw, and both have a strongly in rolled cap margin when young. 
r 
 
..-...- 
Polyporus badius (p. 562) is a small polypore that commonly grows on dead aspen. Note dark cap, 
dark stalk, and minute whitish pores. 
ASPEN, POPLAR, and WILLO W (Populus and Salix)- In summer the aspen forests of 
northern and western North America are excellent foraging grounds for fungi, and in the 
fall they put on a dazzling display of leaf color (CO LOR PLATE 25). Aspens are not close 
relatives of birches, but resemble them in several ways. For instance, both kinds oftrees 
tend to have whitish bark and a northern distribution, and both feature many species of 
Leccinum (all edible) as well as the usual panoply of Russulas and Cortinarii. Cotton- 
woods (poplars) are in the same genus (Populus) as aspens, but usually occur near water. 
Among their mycorrhizal mates are the edible Tricholoma populinum; wood-rotters 
include Pholiota destruens and sometimes massive clumps of delectable oyster mush- 
rooms (Pleurotus ostreatus). Willows (Salix) are closely related to cottonwoods and 
often mingle with them; consequently their fungal flora is similar. A few of the more 
distinctive and prominent species associated with aspen, poplar, and willow are: 
Armillaria albolanaripes 
Armillaria species 
Armillaria straminea 
Clavicorona pyxidata 
Cyptotrama chrysopeplum 
Flammulina velutipes 
Helvella leucopus 
Hericium ramosum 
Lactarius controversus 
Leccinum species 
M orchella species 
Phellinus igniarius 
Pholiota aurivella group 
Pho/iota destruens 
Pholiota squarrosa 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
Polyporus badius 
Russula aeruginea 
Stropharia kauffmanii 
Tricholomaflavovirens 
Tricholoma leucophyllum 
Tricholoma populinum 
ALDER {Alnus)-Alders typically grow along streams (see --Riparian Woodland") 
or on logged-over or exposed areas with conifers. Characteristic alder addicts include: 
Agaricus subrutilescens 
Alpova diplophloeus 
DUNG AND MANURE 
Entoloma rhodopolium 
Pleurotus dryinus 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
Psathyrella species 
Cow patties-or almost any kind of dung-can be turned into miniature mushroom 
gardens by keeping them in a humid environment. They will yield a fascinating succession 
of dainty fungi, but few of them large enough to eat. The mycelium of a dung-inhabiting 
fungus has a shorter life span than that of other fungi due to the transient nature ofthe 
substrate. The spores are presumably ingested by cows (or other animals) with the grass 
they eat, but pass through the digestive system unscathed, and into the dung, where they 
germinate. In addition to the common dung addicts listed below, you'll find a multitude 
of minute Ascomycetes not treated in this book. Some ofthese are extremely specialized, 
living only on lizard dung, frog feces, oppossum excrement, etc. 
Agaricus bisporus 
Agrocybe pediades group 
Ascobolus species 
Bolbitius vitellin us 
Cheilymenia species 
Ciltocybe nuda 
Clitocybe tarda 
Conocybe species 
Coprinus species 
Coprobia species 
Cyathus stercoreus 
Panaeolus species 
42 
Pezizafimeti 
Peziza vesiculosa 
Psilocybe species 
Sphaerobolus stellatus 
Stropharia semiglobata 
V olvariella speciosa 
J 
': 
. 
... 
""'Y& 
\ 
? 
''t A '" 
t 
t 
 
i 
\:- 
I, :r 
Left This "meadow muffin" (chunk of cow dung) shows extensive mycelial growth. The mushrooms 
belong to the Agrocybe pediades group (p. 468). Right: This is one clump of Lentinus ponderosus 
(p. 143) that won't be eaten! 
PASTURES 
. I 
.. ill 
". 
Pastures and meadows offer a wide selection of easily identified edible mushrooms, 
notably Agaricus campestris. A. cupreobrunneus. A. arvensis. A. crocodilinus. and the 
A. osecanus group, plus Lepiota naucina and Calvatia species. Every fall there is a period 
of about one month when our grazed pastures are chock-full of mushrooms, and 
there is often another crop in the spring. The following list excludes mushrooms 
associated with trees (such as Amanita velosa), which frequently fruit at the edges of 
pastures, as well as those that grow on dung. It's interesting to note that several species 
which appear in pastures do not often grow on lawns (and vice versa). 
Agaricus arvensis 
Agaricus campestris 
Agaricus crocodilinus 
Agaricus cupreobrunneus 
Agaricus micromegathus 
Agaricus osecanus group 
Agaricus xanthodermus 
Agrocybe pediades group 
Amanita sp. (unidentified) 
LAWNS and GARDENS 
Astraeus species 
Bovista species 
Calvatia booniana 
Calvatia bovista 
Calvatia cyathiformis 
Calvatia gigantea group 
Clitocybe brunneocephala 
Clitocybe dealbata 
Clitocybe subconnexa group 
Clitocybe tarda 
Lepiota naucina 
Marasmius oreades 
Melanoleuca melaleuca group 
Nolanea sericea group 
Panaeolus campanulatus group 
Psilocybe semilanceata 
Stropharia species 
Vascel/um pratense 
To many people, mushroom hunting is synonymous with a day in the wild- 
plunging into the dripping depths of a forest, lunging through manzanita thickets, or 
meandering through puffball-pocked pastures. However, a mushroom hunt can and 
should begin in the mundane confines of your own yard (assuming you have one), and 
radiate outward gradually, like the mycelium of a fairy ring. After all, some ofthe most 
delicious (Marasmius oreades. Agaricus campestris) or bizarre (Phallus impudicus) 
mushrooms might be growing right outside your door! 
Agaricus is the most prominent group of mushrooms in lawns and gardens, and more 
than one species of Agaricus often grow together. A. campestris. A. bisporus. and A. 
bitorquis are delicious, but care must be taken not to confuse them with A. californicus 
and A. xanthodermus. which are poisonous to some people. Other choice morsels include 
43 
 i ',--t - 
j : '" 
. \ 
. 
, 
 
\  
,.. 
..  
r-..... 
.. ' .... 
" 
f  t' 
. ..: 
.: 
"" ., "':'".... 
, 
4\ 
11;.-. 
:: 
. 
.. ... 
.,,> . 
.. 
" 
I 
.,.. . C 
.;. . 
Don't overlook your toolshed when looking for mushrooms! This hefty morel would have rotted 
away uneaten if my wife hadn't insisted that it was my turn to mow the lawn. 
Lepiota rachodes, L. barssii, L. naucina, the omnipresent Marasmius oreades, and an 
occasional morel (Morchella). 
Lawns and gardens are actually two distinctly different habitats, but are treated 
together here because they so frequently overlap. Vo/variella speciosa and Agaricus 
bisporus, for instance, grow in gardens but not on lawns, whereas Agaricus campestris 
and Marasmius oreades grow on lawns but not in gardens. Mushrooms associated with 
trees are excluded from the following list though they often appear in people's yards. 
Most yards also qualify as "disturbed ground," and some may have dung or manure (in 
the form of compost or mulch) present. 
Agaricus arvensis 
Agaricus augustus 
Agaricus bernardii 
Agaricus bisporus 
Agaricus ca/ifornicus 
Agaricus campestris 
Agaricus comtu/us 
Agaricus cupreobrunneus 
Agaricus micromegathus 
Agaricus osecanus group 
Agaricus perobscurus 
Agaricus subrufescens 
Agaricus xanthodermus 
Agrocybe pediades group 
Agrocybe praecox group 
Agrocybe sororia 
Bo/bitius vitel/inus 
Bovista species 
Ca/vcybe carnea 
Ca/vatia species 
Ch/orophyllum mo/ybdites 
INDOORS 
C/athrus ruber 
C/itocybe brunneocepha/a 
C/itocybe dea/bata 
C/itocybe nuda 
C/itocybe tarda 
Conocybe /actea 
Conocybe tenera group 
Coprinus atramentarius 
Coprinus comatus 
Coprinus micaceus 
Coprinus p/icati/is 
Coprinus species 
Gymnopi/us species 
Hohenbuehe/ia peta/oides group 
Lepiota americana 
Lepiota barssii 
Lepiota cepaestipes 
Lepiota /utea 
Lepiota naucina 
Lepiota rachodes 
Lepiota species 
Lysurus cruciatus 
Lysurus mokusin 
Marasmius oreades 
Me/ano/euca species 
Morchella species 
Naemat%ma auran/iaca 
N o/anea sericea 
Panaeo/us foenisecii 
Panaeo/us subba/teatus group 
Phallus hadriani 
Phallus impudicus 
Pho/iota species 
Pho/iota terrestris 
P/uteus petasatw. 
Psathyrella candolleana 
Psathyrella species 
Psi/ocybe species 
Scleroderma species 
Stropharia species 
Vascellum pratense 
V o/variella speciosa 
In some cases a mushroom hunt can begin inside your house. The brown cup fungus, 
Peziza domiciliana, is commonly found on walls, floors, carpets, tile, and plaster. Lepiota 
/utea consistently pops up in flower pots, though it sometimes finds its way outdoors 
44 
INDOORS 
45 
Several fungi are pests of structural timber (e.g.. Serpula lacrymans), and a mysterious 
Coprinus invaded the floor of my '67 Chevy Nova. However. the majority offungi found 
indoors occur outside as well. 
Coniophora puteana 
Conocybe species 
Coprinus species 
Galerina species 
Gymnopilus species 
Hohenbuehelia peraloides group 
DISTURBED GROUND 
Lepiota cepaestipes 
Lepiota lutea 
Lepiota rachodes 
Melanotus textilis 
Mycena species 
Peziza domiciliana 
Pluteus species 
Poria species 
Serpula lacrymans 
Thelephora species 
V olvariella species 
"Disturbed" ground means roadsides. paths ides. gardens. vacant lots. building sites. 
and the perimeters of parking lots. Of course. it overlaps with lawns and gardens (or 
"cultivated ground"). but we do have a very distinct roadside fungus flora exemplified by 
the shaggy mane (Coprinus comatus). 
Just what makes certain mushrooms prefer (or even require) disturbed ground is a 
mystery. Obviously. the process of disrupting. overturning. or paving the soil must release 
certain otherwise inaccessible nutrients. and perhaps the moisture-absorbing properties 
and! or pH of the soil are changed. An unsurpassed edible mushroom like Agaricus 
augustus could be raised commercially if this puzzle were solved. Some mushrooms. such 
as the Lyophyllum decastes group. seem to require disturbed ground whereas other 
mushrooms only prefer it. Some show a liking for asphalt and will even poke up through 
it-notably Coprinus comatus, Lyoph),'lIum decastes, Agaricus bitorquis, Piso/ithus 
tinctorius, and Scleroderma geaster. Shaggy manes have even ruined tennis courts! 
One asset of these fungi is that they're easily spotted from the road (or trail). 
Consequently. they are tailormade for people who have an extreme allergy to poison oak. 
And many are worth stopping for!-Agaricus augustus, A. bitorquis, Coprinus comatus, 
Lepiota naucina, Lepiola rachodes, and Lyophyllum decastes. The following list does 
not include species that commonly occur in undisturbed as well as disturbed ground. 
Agaricus august us 
Agaricus bernardii 
Agaricus bitorquis 
Agaricus californicus 
Agaricus praeclaresquamosus 
Agaricus species 
Agaricus xanrhodermus 
Aleuria auranria 
BURNED AREAS 
Astraeus species 
Calvatia gigantea group 
ClilOcybe dUatata 
Coprinus atramenrarius 
Coprinus comatus 
Coprinus micaceus 
Lepiota naucina 
Lepiota rachodes 
Lyophyllum decastes group 
Morchella species 
Pholiota terrestris 
Pisolithus tinctorius 
Scleroderma geaster 
Scleroderma species 
Many plants are adapted to growing in burned-over areas. The cones of the knobcone 
pine. for instance. release their seeds only when subjected to extreme heat. Similary. 
certain mushrooms fruit only in burnt ground. and others show a definite fondness for it. 
After the eruptions of Mt. St. Helens. mushrooms were among the first organisms to 
"colonize" the devasted slopes of the volcano. and the most reliable way to cultivate 
morels is still to set fire to some woods and return the following spring! (This practice 
actually had to be outlawed in Europe.) 
Anrhracobia species 
Ascobolus carbonarius 
Coltricia species 
Coprinus species 
Geopyxis species 
Lyophy//um species 
Morchella species 
Myxomphalia maura 
Peziza praetervisa 
Peziza proteana 
Peziza violacea 
Pholiota brunnescens 
Pholiota carbonaria 
Ph 0 lio ta fulvozonata 
Pholiora highlandensis 
Plicaria species 
Psathyrella carbonicola 
Psathyrella species 
Pulvinula species 
Pyronema omphalodes 
Rhizina undulata 
Tarzella species 
46 
SAND and DESERTS 
HABITATS 
Odd as it may seem, a number of mushrooms grow in sand or sandy soil, including the 
delicious Lepiota rachodes (which I have found on Ano Nuevo Island) and various 
morels (Morche//a species). The deserts of the West support a fascinating but 
exasperatingly elusive fungal flora in which the Gasteromycetes (puffballs and allies) 
figure prominently. Deserts do not necessarily have sandy soil, but there is considerable 
overlap in the two categories, so they are listed together here; those species which grow 
exclusively in the desert are marked with an asterisk. 
Astraeus hygrometricus 
Battarrea species 
Ca/vatia species 
Carbomyces species* 
Ch/amydopus meyenianus* 
Coprinus asterophorus* 
Dictyocepha/os attenuatus* 
SNOWBANKS 
Disciseda species 
Geastrum species 
Geopora species 
Longu/a texensis 
Montagnea arenarius* 
Morchella species 
Myriostoma co/iforme 
Phellorina strobi/ina* 
Podaxis pistil/aris* 
Schizostoma /aceratum* 
Scleroderma species 
Tu/ostoma species 
The mountains of western North America feature a very characteristic collection of 
spring fungi. Some are popularly known as "snowbank mushrooms" because they fruit 
around the edges of melting snowbanks; others are more common shortly after the snow 
has disappeared. The "snowbank mushrooms" and other spring fungi are more 
dependent on snowmelt than rain for their moisture, but the latter can also have a 
stimulating effect. Obviously, the higher you go, the later the snow melts, so that in some 
areas the spring "snowbank" flora doesn't appear until early or even mid-summer. 
This is one category in which Ascomycetes are more preponderant than 
Basidiomycetes. Morels (Morche//a species) and false morels (Gyromitra and Helvella 
species) are what make the spring fungus flora famous, but dozens of other species occur 
also. Many of the larger agarics develop under the duff and show themselves only as low 
mounds or "mushrumps" in the humus. The following list includes some typical 
"snowbank mushrooms," plus many that fruit within a month after the snow disappears. 
The list does not include fungi with perennial fruiting bodies or species such as Boletus 
edu/is that may occur in the spring but are more common in the summer and fall. 
Agaricus si/vico/a group 
Agrocybe praecox group 
Amanita ca/yptrata 
Amanita gemmata group 
Armillaria a/bo/anaripes 
Armillaria o/ida 
Auricu/aria auricula 
Ca/osc ypha fu/gens 
Ca/vatia species 
Choiromyces a/veo/atus 
C/itocybe a/birhiza 
C/itocybe species 
Co//ybia a/bipi/ata 
Cortinarius species 
Cudonia montico/a 
Discina species 
Disciotis venosa 
Gautieria species 
Geopora cooperi 
Guepiniopsis a/pinus 
Gyromitra escu/enta 
Gyromitra gigas 
He/vella /eucome/aena 
Hygrophorus goetzii 
Hygrophorus marzuo/us 
H ygrophorus purpurascens 
H ygrophorus suba/pinus 
Lyophyllum montanum (p 175) usually grows nearly melting snow in the spring. 
. 
-.r 
.-..,... 
.. . 
to,. ,... " 1\ 
.... 
". 
 
"to. '" 
 
-). . 
 
- 
. 
,. " 
... 
SNOWBANKS 
umine//us momanus 
Lyophyllum momanum 
Lyophyllum species 
Melanoleuca species 
Mitrula species 
Morchella species 
Mycena griseoviridis 
Mycena overhollzii 
SPECIALIZED HABITATS 
NivalOgaslrium nubigenum 
Nolanea verna group 
Peziza species 
Phaeolus albolureus 
Pholiota species 
Plectania nannfeldlii 
Plectania species 
Ramaria botrytis 
47 
Ramaria magnipes 
Ramaria rasi/ispora 
Sarcosoma species 
Sarcosphaera crassa 
Tyromyces leucospongia 
Verpa bohemica 
Verpa conica 
Without specialization there would be far less diversity and little-if any-evolution. 
All fungi are to some extent specialized, but in some cases the specialization is more 
bizarre or extreme-or at least more apparent to us. For instance, it is said that certain 
poorly known Laboulbeniomycetes grow only on the left anterior appendage (left front 
foot) of their insect host! 
Some kinds of fleshy fungi grow only in deep moss or in Sphagnum bogs. Others 
grow exclusively on other mushrooms: Asterophora species, Claudopus parasitic us, 
Collybia tuberosa, Collybia racemosa, Collybia cookei, Collybia cirrhata, Volvariella 
surrecta, Boletus parasiticus, Psathyrella epimyces, and Hypomyces species. Cordyceps 
species parasitize insects and certain truffles; and several Omphalina species are asso- 
ciated with algae. Many wood-rotters can grow on cones, but Auriscalpium vulgare 
(as well as Baeospora myosura and several Strobilurus species) are restricted to cones. 
The very specialized niche has helped Auriscalpium to survive, but if and when conifers 
disappear from the earth (as they are slowly doing), so will Auriscalpium! 
ANYWHERE and EVERYWHERE 
No habitat list is complete without mentioning some of our cosmopolitan fungi or 
"mushroom weeds." Many of these are restricted to wooded areas, others (those marked 
by an asterisk) are not. The best of the lot from an edibility standpoint are Armillariella 
mellea, Clitocybe nuda, and Morchella species. 
Agaricus californicus* 
Agaricus hondensis 
Agaricus praeclaresquamosus 
Agaricus silvicola group 
Agaricus subruri/escens 
Agaricus xamhodermus* 
A leu ria auramia* 
Amanita gemmata group 
A manila pachycolea 
Amanita pamherina 
Amanita vaginata 
Armi//arie//a mellea* 
Bolelus chrysemerun 
Bolelus spadiceus 
Bolelus subtomentosus 
Bolelus lruncatus 
Bolelus zelleri 
Camharellus cibarius 
Cantharellus subalbidus 
Clavaria vermicularis* 
C/itocybe inversa 
C/itocybe nebularis 
ClilOL}'be nuda* 
ClilOcybe subconnexa group* 
C/ilOpi/us prunulus* 
Co//ybia dryophila 
Co//ybiafuscopurpurea group* 
Cortinarius glaucopus group 
Corrinarius species 
Elaphomyces species 
FomilOpsis pinic.'ola 
Galerina species* 
Ganoderma applanatum group* 
(Jeastrum species* 
Helvella lacunosa* 
Inocybe geophy//a 
InoCJ'be soruria 
InoL}'be species 
Lan'aria species 
Lactarius chrysorheus 
Lactarius fragilis 
Lactarius vinaceorufescens 
Laeliporus sulphureus* 
Lepiota rachodes* 
uucopaxillus albissimus 
uucopaxillus amarus 
Lycoperdon species* 
Melanoleum melaleuca group* 
orchella species* 
Mycena species* 
N aemar oloma fasciculare* 
Peziza species* 
Phe/linus pini 
Pho/iota lerreslris* 
Phyllotopsis nidulans 
Plureus cervinus* 
Poria species* 
Psathyre//a candolleana* 
Psarhyre//a species* 
RhodoL}'be nuciolens 
Russula albonigra 
Russula brevipes 
Russula soruria group 
Russula species 
Scleroderma cepa group* 
Scleroderma cilrinum 
Scleroderma species* 
S,ereum species* 
Thelephora species* 
Trameles versicolor* 
Trichaplum species* 
Tricholoma saponaceum 
Tuharia species* 
Tyrumyces species 
V olvariella speciosa* 
48 
SEVENTY DISTINCTIVE MUSHROOMS 
(A quick-reference check list) 
COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME EDIBILITY 
0 Delicious Milk Cap Lactarius deliciosus edible 
(p. 68; plate 2) 
0 Bleeding Milk Cap Lactarius rubrilacteus edible 
(p. 68; plates 3, 6) 
0 Indigo Milk Cap Lactarius indigo edible 
(p. 69; plate 4) 
0 Candy Caps Lactarius fragilis, edible 
(pp.. 80-82; plate 10) L. rufulus. L. camphoratus 
0 Short-Stemmed Russula Russula brevi pes edible 
(p. 87) 
0 Emetic Russula Russula emetica group poisonous 
(p. 97) 
0 Rosy Russula Russula rosacea poisonous 
(p. 99; plate 13) 
0 Witch's Hat Ilygrocybe conica doubtful 
(p. 116; plate 19) 
0 Ivory Waxy Cap Hygrophorus eburneus edible 
(p. 119) 
0 Oyster Mushroom Pleurotus ostreatus edible 
(p. 134; plates 27, 28) 
0 Jack-O-Lantern Mushrooms Omphalotus species poisonous 
(pp. 146-148; plates 40, 41) 
0 Blewit Clitocybe nuda edible 
(p. 153; plate 32) 
0 Man On Horseback Tricholoma flavovirens edible 
(p. 179; plate 33) 
0 White Matsutake Armillaria ponderosa edible 
(p. 191; plate 37) 
0 Honey Mushroom Armillariella mellea group edible 
(p. 196; plates 39,42) 
0 Fairy Ring Mushroom M arasmius oreades edible 
(p. 208; plates 38, 47) 
0 Death Cap Amanita phalloides deadly 
(p. 269; plate 50) poisonous 
0 Destroying Angels Amanita ocreata. A. verna. deadly 
(pp. 271-273; plate 53) A. virosa, A. bisporigera pOisonous 
0 Fly Agaric Amanita muscaria pOisonous 
(p. 282; plates 58, 59) 
-. 
"'" 
- 
 
.. 
.l.4JI'- 
-. 
. 
,... - 
., 
..... 
.' 
4 
.. 
Armillaria ponderosa. better known as the matsutake or white matsutake, is a mushroom well worth 
knowing. Its odor is unique: something like a cross between "red hots" and dirty socks. 
COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME EDIBILITY 
0 Caesar's Amanita Amanita caesarea group edible 
(p. 284; plate 60) 
0 Coccora Amanita cabptrata edible with 
(p. 284; plates 61-63) caution 
0 Grisette Amanita vagi nata edible 
(p. 288) 
0 Green-Spored Parasol Chlorophyllum molybdites poisonous 
(p. 295) 
0 Shaggy Parasol Lepiota rachodes edible with 
(p. 297; plates 69) caution 
0 Parasol Mushroom Lepiota procera edible 
(p. 298) 
0 Meadow Mushroom Agaricus campestris edible 
(p. 318; plate 71) 
0 Yellow-Staining Agaricus Agaricus xanthodermus poisonous 
(p. 329) 
0 Horse Mushrooms Agaricus arvensis, edible 
(pp. 332-334; plate 78, 79, 81) A. osecanus group 
0 The Prince Agaricus augustus edible 
(p. 337; front cover, plate 77) 
0 Shaggy Mane Coprinus comatus edible 
(p. 345; plate 85) 
0 Sulfur Tuft Naematoloma fasciculare poisonous 
(p. 382; plate 92) 
0 Scaly Pholiota Pholiota squarrosa doubtful 
(p. 389; plates 96, 97) 
0 Violet Cortinarius Cortinarius violaceus edible 
(p. 446; plate 109) 
0 Pine Spikes Chroogomphus species edible 
(pp. 484-487; plate 113) 
49 
,. .. 
t 
"": 
Boletus aereus is one of many delectable boletes. These young specimens are easily recognized by 
their white pore surface and dark cap that is covered with a fine whitish bloom 
COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME EDIBILITY 
0 Slippery Jacks Sui/lus species edible 
(pp. 498-505; plates 114-121) 
0 Admirable Bolete Boletus mirabilis edible 
(p. 521; plates 127, 129) 
0 Butter Boletes Boletus appendiculatus, edible 
(pp. 525-526; plates 133, 134) B. regius 
0 Satan's Bolete Boletus satanas poisonous 
(p. 527; plate 137) 
0 Apple Bolete Boletus frostii edible 
(p. 528; plate 139) 
0 White King Bolete Boletus barrows;; edible 
(p. 529; plate 141) 
0 King Bolete Boletus edu/is edible 
(p. 530; plates 142-144) 
0 Queen Bolete Boletus aereus edible 
(p. 531; plate 140) 
0 Manzanita Bolete Leccinum manzanitae edible 
(p. 539; plate 145) 
0 Aspen Boletes Leccinum insigne & edible 
(pp. 540-541; plate 147) close relatives 
0 Old Man Of The Woods Strobilomyces floccopus edible 
(p.543) 
0 Beefsteak Fungus Fistu/ina hepatica edible 
(p. 553; plate 152) 
0 Hen Of The Woods Grifola frondosa, edible 
(pp.564-565) G. umbel/ara 
0 Sulfur Shelf Laetiporus sulphureus edible with 
(p. 572; plates 154, 155) caution 
0 Artist's Conk Ganoderma applanatum not edible 
(p.576) group 
50 
SEVENTY DISTINCTIVE MUSHROOMS 51 
COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME EDIBILITY 
0 Varnished Conks Ganoderma lucidum, not edible 
(pp. 577-578; plate 156) G. tsugae, G.oregonense 
0 Turkey Tail Trametes versicolor not edible 
(p. 594; plate 158) 
0 Hericiums Hericium species edible 
(pp. 613-616; plates 163. 164) 
0 Hedgehog Mushrooms Dentinum repandum, edible 
(pp. 618-619; plates 161, 162) D. umbilicatum 
0 Pink- Tipped Coral Mushroom Ramaria batrytis edible 
(p.656) 
0 Cauliflower Mushrooms Sparassis species edible 
(p. 657; plate 172) 
0 Scaly Chanterelle Gomphus floccosus group doubtful 
(p. 661; plate 174) 
0 White Chanterelle Cantharellus subalbidus edible 
(p. 662 plate 179) 
0 Chanterelle Cantharellus cibarius edible 
(p. 662; plates 175. 177, 178) 
0 Horn Of Plenty Craterellus cornucopioides, edible 
(pp. 666-668; plate 182) C. fallax 
0 Witch's Butter Tremella mesenterica edible 
(p. 673; plate 170) 
0 Giant Puffballs Calvatia gigantea group. edible 
(pp. 682-684; plates 184, 186) C. booniana 
0 Sierran Puffball Calvatia scu/pta edible 
(p.684) 
0 Dead Man's Foot Piso/ithus tinctorius not edible 
(p. 712 plates 185. 188. 189) 
0 Stinkhorns Phallus impudicus & edible 
(pp. 768-770; plates 193, 194) close relatives 
0 Dog Stinkhorns M utinus caninus, edible 
(p. 771; plates 195, 196) M. elegans 
0 Morel M orchella esculenta & edible 
(p. 787; plate 203) close relatives 
0 Black Morel M orchella elata group edible 
(p.790; plates 199,202) 
0 False Morel Gyromltra esculenta edible/ 
(p. 801; plate 206) poisonous 
0 Fluted Black Elfin Saddle Helvella lacunosa edible 
(p.815) 
0 Orange Peel Fungus A leuria aurantia edible 
(p. 837; plate 208) 
52 
KEY TO THE MAJOR GROUPS OF FLESHY FUNGI 
1. Spores produced on mother cells called basidia; fruiting body variously shaped 
(see pp. 52-54) ................................... Basidiomycotina, p. 57 
1. Spores produced inside mother cells called asci; fruiting body variously shaped 
(see p. 55) ....................................... Ascomycotina, p. 782 
" 
close-up of the 
veined underside 
of a chanterelle 
BASIDIOMYCETES 
11 
longitudinal section 
showing the tube layer 
r ... 
.......... - - . 
. . 
°.10 
Fruiting body with a cap and stalk, or just 
a cap; spores borne on gills (radiating 
blades) on underside of cap; spore print 
obtainable (if spores are being produced) 
............................. AGARICS (GILLED 
MUSHROOMS), p. 58 
Fruiting body with a cap and stalk, 
usually vase-shaped or trumpetlike at 
maturity, not gelatinous; fertile under- 
side of cap smooth, wrinkled, or with 
decurrent veins or folds ......................... 
..................... CHANTERELLES, p. 658 
Fruiting body with a cap and stalk, fleshy 
(not tough or woody); underside of cap 
with a spongy, often separable layer of 
tubes or pores; stalk more or less central; 
usually on ground but occasionally on 
wood ........................ BOLETES, p. 488 
Fruiting body shelflike, bracketlike, 
crustlike, or with a cap and stalk; usually 
tough or woody but sometimes fleshy, 
usually on wood but sometimes terres- 
trial; spores produced in a layer of tubes 
or pores that usually line underside of cap. 
Stalk when present usually off-center or 
lateral (but sometimes central); tube 
layer not normally peeling away easily 
from cap . POL YPORES & BRACKET 
FUN GI, p. 549 
(but if fruiting body is black and char- 
coal-like with concentrically zoned flesh, 
see Flask Fungi, p. 878) 
MAJOR GROUPS OF FLESHY FUNGI 
 . 
-=--- -. -". .. 
- r. 
 
v 
spines on underside 
of cap are exaggerated 
in this sliced specimen 
longitudinal 
section 
53 
Fruiting body variously shaped (with or 
without a cap), but always gelatinous or 
very rubbery; usually growing on wood 
.......................... JELLY FUNGI, p. 669 
Fruiting body crustlike or bracketlike 
or occasionally with a cap and stalk, 
usually tough, not gelatinous; fertile 
surface smooth, wrinkled, veined, or 
warted but lacking pores, tubes, or spines; 
usually growing on wood ......... CRUST 
& PARCHMENT FUNGI. p. 604 
(also see Morels, Elfin Saddles, & Cup 
Fungi, p. 783) 
Fruiting body bearing its spores on 
downward-pointing spines or "teeth"; 
spines either lining the underside of a cap 
or suspended like icicles from a cushion 
of tissue or a branched framework; stalk 
present or absent; on ground or wood .. 
......................... TEETH FUNGI, p. 611 
Fruiting body erect, unbranched (club- 
like) or profusely branched from a 
common base or "trunk" (coral-like); 
cap absent; spores borne on the smooth 
to slightly wrinkled surfaces of the 
upright clubs or branches ...................... 
............ CORAL & CLLB FUNGI, p. 630 
(also see Earth Tongues, p. 865) 
Fruiting body reminiscent of an un- 
opened, aborted, or deformed agaric: 
consisting of a spore case or "cap" and 
stalk; stalk long or very short, usually 
percurrent (i.e., extending all the way 
to top of fruiting body); spore mass or 
fertile tissue usually composed of plates, 
branching cavities, or contorted "gills" 
which mayor may not be exposed; spore 
print not obtainable; found mainly in 
deserts and mountains ........................... 
............. GASTROID AGARICS, p. 724 
54 
longitudinal sections 
longitudinal 
section 
 
: . -. 
0_4".. :'.? _ 
- 
MAJOR GROUPS OF FLESHY FUNGI 
Fruiting body round to oval or pear- 
shaped, or the outer skin splitting into 
starlike rays; interior (spore mass) firm 
when young but powdery or dusty at 
maturity; spores borne inside a spore 
case or numerous lentil-like capsules; 
stalk absent or present only as a narrowed 
sterile base or rootlike fibers; usually 
growing above the ground ..................... 
PUFFBALLS & EARTHSTARS, p. 677 
Fruiting body with a puffball-like spore 
case mounted on a well-developed, 
clearly differentiated stalk; spore mass 
(interior of spore case) dusty or powdery 
at maturity; stalk terminating at base of 
spore case (i.e., not percurrent); often 
found in deserts, sand, or waste places .. 
.......... STALKED PUFFBALLS, p. 715 
Fruiting body minute (often less than 
I cm broad), shaped like a miniature 
bird's nest with one or more small "eggs" 
inside (but top of "nest" often covered by 
a layer of tissue when young) ................ 
.............. BIRD'S NEST FUNGI, p. 778 
Fruiting body emerging from an "egg" 
whose skin forms a volva (sack) at base 
of mature fruiting body; fruiting body 
with a cap and stalk or just a stalk, or 
with arms, tentacles, or a branched or 
latticed framework; inside or outside 
surfaces of fresh fruiting body coated 
with a foul-smelling, greenish to brown 
to blackish spore slime .......................... 
.......................... STINKHORNS, p. 764 
Fruiting body usually underground, 
round to oval or knobby; interior (spore 
mass) firm to spongy or gelatinous but 
not often powdery, usually composed of 
small chambers or cavities or occasionally 
plates; columella (internal stalk) present 
or absent.. FALSE TRUFFLES, p. 739 
MAJOR GROUPS OF FLESHY FUNGI 
 
interiors, 
one hollow and 
one solid but marbled 
55 
ASCOMYCETES 
    ; t1'\1 
-; .. '-W 
"\ , 
exterior 
 
e 
.__._ 
 
 ."."-- 
. "... 
" 
i 
Fruiting body usually underground, 
round to oval or knobby; interior hollow 
or with several large cavities or with 
canals or interior solid and marbled with 
sterile veins; texture of interior firm or 
sometimes powdery but not gelatinous; 
columella (internal stalk) only rarely 
present ................... TRUFFLES, p. 841 
Fruiting body growing on insects, spiders, 
or truffles or engulfing other mushrooms 
in a pimpled, powdery, or lumpy layer of 
tissue or growing on wood; if on wood 
then dark brown to black (or black 
beneath white spore powder) and tough, 
hard, or charcoal-like ............................ 
......................... FLASK FUNGI, p. 878 
Fruiting body disc-shaped (flat) to cup- 
shaped, vaselike, or earlike (with or 
without a stalk) or fruiting body with 
a stalk and clearly differentiated cap; cap 
when present cup-shaped to saddle- 
shaped, irregularly lobed, brainlike, 
thimble-like, or pitted ............................ 
MORELS, ELFIN SADDLES, & CUP 
FUN GI, p. 783 
(also see Earth Tongues, p. 865) 
Fruiting body usually erect, simple, and 
unbranched (clublike), but usually with 
a differentiated (often flattened or 
swollen) fertile "head" or even a small, 
rounded or wrinkled cap; fruiting body 
usually small, if with a small cap then 
usually tough or gelatinous .................... 
.................... EARTH TONGUES, p. 865 
(also see Morels, Elfin Saddles, & Cup 
Fungi, p. 783) 
\.. 
... 
f 
, 
\ 
\, 
" 
. ' 
The shaggy mane, Coprinus comatus (p. 345), is one of many Basidiomycetes. It is a familiar sight 
along roads and parking lots in cool wet weather. 
57 
Basidiomycetes 
BASIDIOMYCOTINA 
THE Basidiomycetes are a large group (subdivision) of fungi that bear spores on (but not 
inside) specialized cells called basidia. Two major classes of Basidiomycetes produce 
fleshy fruiting bodies or "mushrooms"-the Hymenomycetes and the Gasteromycetes, 
keyed below. Other classes of Basidiomycetes, such as the rusts and smuts, are not treated 
in this book. 
Key to the Basidiomycetes 
I. Basidia and spores borne externally (on the exposed surfaces of gills, tubes, spines, branches, 
lobes, etc.); spores forcibly discharged at maturity, i.e., a spore print often (but not always) 
obtainable; fruiting body with a cap and stalk, orclublike, or branched, or bracketlike, or crust- 
like (without a stalk or sometimes without a cap) or lobed or bloblike, etc. ............. 2 
1. Basidia and spores borne internally (inside the fruiting body or inside a spore case or small ca p- 
sules); spores not forcibly discharged, thus a spore print unobtainable Gasteromycetes, p. 676 
2. Fruiting body at first egglike with a gelatinous interior, the outer skin then breaking and an 
unbranched (often phallic), branched, or lattice-like fruiting body emerging; spores contained 
in a greenish to brown or black, foul-smelling slime that coats all or part of the fresh fruiting 
body (but slime dispersed by flies or rain); gills and tubes absent ... Gasteromycetes, p. 676 
2. Not as above .............................................. Hymenomycetes, below 
HYMENOMYCETES 
IN this large divison of the Basidiomycetes the spore-bearing cells (basidia) form a layer 
or palisade (hymenium) on an exposed surface or surfaces of the fruiting body, and the 
spores are forcibly discharged at maturity. Terrestrial forms are usually furnished with a 
cap and stalk, but many of the wood-inhabiting types are shelflike, hooflike, bracketlike, 
crustlike, or bloblike. In the more primitive forms the hymenium is smooth to slightly 
wrinkled or warted, while in the more specialized (advanced?) types it takes the form of 
gills, tubes, spines, or upright branches. 
The Hymenomycetes are traditionally divided into two orders: the Agaricales include 
the gilled mushrooms (agarics) and fleshy tube fungi (boletes), while the Aphyllophorales 
are an artificial group embracing the polypores, crust fungi, coral fungi, chanterelles, 
and teeth fungi. A third group, the jelly fungi (Tremellales, Dacrymycetales, and Auri- 
culariales), are treated in this book as Hymenomycetes, although some taxonomists 
consider them to be only distantly related. 
In the absence of a detailed fossil record, there is a great deal of speculation as to 
whether the Hymenomycetes evolved from the Gasteromycetes or vice-versa. It may 
actually be that evolution has flowed both ways. Spore dispersal is enhanced if the spores 
are actively (forcibly) discharged as in the H ymenomycetes, but the enclosed fruiting bod y 
of the Gasteromycetes is advantageous to spore development because it affords greater 
protection against the environment. Thus, many Hymenomycetes have adapted to 
inhospitable (cold, hot, or arid) environments by fruiting underground and/ or never 
exposing their hymenium-thus becoming ..gastroid" and losing their ability to discharge 
spores in the process. On the other hand, there may be lines of evolution leading from 
primitive Gasteromycetes to certain Hymenomycetes through the incremental develop- 
ment of a hymenium, stalk, and cap. 
.Since most fungi decay quickly, they are far less apt to be fossilized than plants 
58 
HYMENOMYCETES 
Key to the Hymenomycetes 
I. Underside of cap with hundreds of pores (tube mouths) which maybe obvious or very minute; 
tube layer visible when fruiting body is cut longitudinally (perpendicularly) ............ 2 
I. Not as above; pores and tubes absent ............................................. 3 
2. Fruiting body fleshy, rapidly decaying, usually but not always terrestrial; stalk typically central 
or nearly so; tubes usually-but not always-easily separable from cap (and often from each 
other); veil present or absent .............. Boletaceae (a family in the Agaricales), p. 488 
2. Fruiting body usually (but not always!) tough in age and usually (but not always!) growing 
on wood; stalk absent or lateral to off-center, or if central then tube layer not easily separable 
from cap; veil absent ....................................... Aphyllophorales, p. 548 
3. Underside of cap with radiating blades (gills) ........................ Agaricales, below 
3. Gills absent (but spines, warts, folds, veins, or wrinkles may be present) ................ 4 
4. Fruiting body gelatinous Uellylike) or very rubbery; usually (but not always) growing on wood; 
basidia partitioned or forked (under the microscope) ......... Tremellales & Allies, p. 669 
4. Not as above .............................................. Aphyllophorales, p. 548 
Agarics (Gilled Mushrooms) 
AGARICALES 
THE agarics, or gilled mushrooms, bear their spores on radiating blades or plates called 
gills. They are by far the most familiar, numerous, and complex group of fleshy fungi, and 
are thought to have arisen from several different ancestors. All of the gilled mushrooms 
were originally grouped in a single massive genus, Agaricus. but in the 19th century a 
Swedish naturalist, Elias Fries (the "father" of mushroom taxonomy), divided Agaricus 
into a number of smaller genera based on easily ascertained features such as attachment 
of the gills, texture of the stalk, presence versus absence of a veil, and color of the spores. 
In the ensuing years, agaricologists have tried to achieve a more "natural" classification 
(i.e., one that reflects common ancestry rather than superficial similarities), and in so doing 
have come to rely heavily on microscopic and chemical characters, such as the shape and 
arrangement of the cells in the gill tissue and cap cuticle and the shape, ornamentation, and 
amyloidity of the spores. Over one hundred genera of gilled mushrooms are now recog- 
nized, including most of Fries' original genera, albeit often in modified form (for example, 
Agaricus (not to be confused with the term "agaric"), in its modern sense, is restricted to 
the cultivated mushroom and its close relatives). The ""Friesian" system, however, has 
remained popular among amateurs or "toadstool-testers" because of its simplicity. 
Since modern agaric taxonomy is based on so many seemingly esoteric characters, and 
since most people have neither a microscope, nor the requisite chemical reagents, nor the 
necessary training to correctly use a microscope and reagents if they had them, a com- 
promise between the modern and Friesian systems has been used in this book, to wit: most 
of the modern genera and families have been recognized, but the characters used to dis- 
tinguish them are largely Friesian (macroscopic). The Agaricales have been divided into 
fourteen families, which are keyed out here. The boletes constitute a fifteenth family, but 
are treated separately. In order to use the key it is necessary to know the spore color- 
preferably by taking a spore print. It is also necessary to have some patience-or at least 
to realize that subjectivity (e.g., waxy versus non-waxy gills) andfallibility are the ineluc- 
table byproducts of any key that relies on macroscopic (field) characters, when the critical 
distinctions between the different entities are in fact microscopic. 
AGARICALES 
59 
A pictorial chart of gilled mushroom genera has also been provided on pp. 61-62, 
thereby circumventing the family category. It is by no means infallible, but as already 
pointed out, neither is the dichotomous key, nor for that matter, are you and I. 
Key to the Agaricales 
1. Gills deformed or contorted or branched to form large cavities, sometimes never exposed; spores 
not forcibly discharged, hence spore print not obtainable; found mostly in deserts and 
mountains ......................................... (see Podaxales & Allies, p. 724) 
1. Not as above; spores forcibly dischltl"ged, hence a spore print obtainable if spores are being 
produced; gills exposed at maturity; common and widespread. . . . . . .. .. . . . .. . . . .. . . . . 2 
2. Spore print white to buff, yellow, yellow-orange, or lilac-tinged ....................... 3 
2. Spore print some other color (pinkish, salmon, yellow-brown, brown, rusty-orange, rusty- 
brown, chocolate-brown, purplish, greenish, black, etc.) ........................... 10 
3. Universal veil enveloping young specimens and forming a volva at base of stalk when it ruptures 
and/ or leaving numerous remnants (warts or flat patches) on cap .... Amanitaceae, p. 262 
3. Neither volva nor warts present (but cap and stalk may have scales or fibrils) ............ 4 
4. Gills typically free and veil present; veil usually forming an annulus (ring) on stalk, or if not then 
stalk typically scaly or slimy below the veil ....................................... 5 
4. Not as above; veil absent, or if present then gills normally attached to stalk ............. 6 
5. Cap slimy or viscid when moist; stalk sometimes viscid also; gills tissue divergent (under the 
microscope); not common ..................................... Amanitaceae, p. 262 
5. Cap dry or only slightly viscid when moist; stalk dry; gill tissue not divergent; common ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lepiotaceae, p. 293 
6. Gills decurrent and foldlike (at least when young), i.e., gills thick, blunt, shallow, and usually 
forked or with cross-veins .............................. (see Cantharellaceae, p. 658) 
6. Not as above; gills usually platelike or bladelike :................................... 7 
7. Gills and/ or flesh exuding a latex (milk or juice) when broken; stalk typically more than 3 mm 
thick; spores with amyloid warts or ridges .......................... Russulaceae, p. 63 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Fruiting body brittle and rather rigid, the stalk snapping open cleanly like a piece of chalk (i.e., 
without fibrous context); cap usually plane to depressed at maturity; stalk typically at least 
3 mm thick; veil absent; usually but not always terrestrial; cap and stalk tissue typically con- 
taining nests of sphaerocysts; spores with amyloid warts or ridges ...... Russulaceae, p. 63 
8. Not with above features ........................................................ 9 
9. Gills soft and clean, with a waxy appearance or texture; cap often brightly colored; stalk more 
or less central; usually terrestrial; basidia long and narrow (at lest six times as long as the 
spores); spores smooth ..................................... Hygrophoraceae, p. 103 
9. Not as above; gills not normally waxy; stalk central to lateral or absent; on ground or wood 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tricholomataceae, p. 129 
10. Spore print pinkish to flesh-colored, salmon, pinkish-cinnamon, or sordid reddish ...... 11 
10. Spore print some shade of orange, brown (including cinnamon-brown), green, purple, gray, or 
black ...................................................................... 16 
11. Universal veil present, usually forming a saclike volva at base of stalk .... Pluteaceae, p. 253 
1 L Not as above; volva typically absent ............................................. 12 
12. Gills typically free at maturity; growing on wood (but wood sometimes buried!) or sawdust or 
sometimes in lignin-rich humus; spores not angular .................. Pluteaceae, p. 253 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Odor strong (fishy or like cucumber) and stalk velvety or arising from an underground, often 
hollow "tuber" or found on wood and fruiting body pinkish to yellow-orange with a reticulate 
(veined) cap surface; spores not angular; not common .......... Tricholomataceae, p. 129 
13. Not as above; common ........................................................ 14 
14. Spore print pale pinkish, pinkish-buff, or pinkish-cream; gills sometimes purple or purple-tinged 
when fresh; spores not angular ............................. Tricholomataceae, p. 129 
14. Spore print usually deeper in color (flesh-colored to sordid reddish, salmon, etc.); gills not often 
purple; spores usually angular in end and/ or side view ............................. 15 
60 AGARICALES 
15. Usually growing in clusters; flesh fragile; spores not angular; not common, at least in the western 
states ....................................................... Coprinaceae, p. 341 
15. Not as above; spores typically angular in end and/ or side view; very common and widely 
distributed ............................................... Entolomataceae, p. 238 
16. Spore print greenish to grayish-olive ............................................ 17 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
17. Gills ad nate to decurrent ..................................... Gomphidiaceae, p. 481 
17. Gills free or only slightly attached ............................................... 18 
18. Gills blood-red to reddish to dark brown ........................... Agaricaceae, p. 310 
18. Gills white to dull greenish or grayish .............................. Lepiotaceae, p. 293 
19. Spore print purple-brown to purple-gray, purple-black, smoky-gray, black, chocolate-brown, 
or deep brown .............................................................. 20 
19. Spore print rusty-orange to rusty-brown, cinnamon-brown, yellow-brown, dull brown, bright 
brown, cigar-brown, etc. (but may appear darker in heavy deposits!) ................. 26 
20. Gills usually decurrent (but sometimes adnate); spore print smoky-olive to smoky-gray to black; 
associated with conifers ............................ _ . . . . . . . . Gomphidiaceae, p. 481 
20. Not as above; gills free to adnexed, adnate, or occasionally decurrent ................. 21 
21. Gills and/ or cap auto-digesting (Le., turning into an inky black mass) at maturity; spore print 
black ....................................................... Coprinaceae, p. 341 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Veil present, usually forming an annulus (ring) on stalk; gills free or nearly free at maturity, 
whitish to pinkish when young but becoming chocolate-brown or darker in age; cap not deeply 
striate; spore print chocolate-brown .............................. Agaricaceae, p. 310 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
23. Cap brightly colored (yellow, green, orange, red, etc.) ............. Strophariaceae, p. 367 
23. Cap dull (some shade of brown, buff, gray, white, etc.) ............................. 24 
24. Gills decurrent; cap margin inrolled when young; spore print reddish-brown or cocoa-brown 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Paxillaceae, p. 476 
24. Not as above .................................................... _........... 25 
25. Cap usually viscid when moist (but may dry out!); fruiting body fragile or not fragile; cap cuticle 
typically filamentous (under microscope) ....................... Strophariaceae, p. 367 
25. Cap usually not viscid; fruiting body usually quite fragile; cap cuticle typically cellular (see 
. illustrations on p. 19) ......................................... Coprinaceae, p. 341 
26. Growing on other mushrooms ............................... Tricholomataceae, p. 129 
26. Not as above ................................................................ 27 
27. Stalk absent or rudimentary; usually growing shelflike on wood ..................... 28 
27. Stalk present; on wood or ground ............................................... 30 
28. Fruiting body very tough, leathery, or corky ........... (see Polyporaceae & Allies, p. 549) 
28. Not as above; fruiting body fleshy ............................................... 29 
29. Gills forked or with cross-veins or even with pores near base of cap ..... Paxillaceae, p. 476 
29. Not as above ............................................... Cortinariaceae, p. 396 
30. Fruiting body small, fragile, often withering quickly; cap usually oval to conical or bell-shaped; 
usually growing in grass, dung, or gardens; cap cuticle typically cellular (see illustrations on 
p.19) ........................................................ Bolbitiaceae, p. 466 
30. Not with above features ....................................................... 31 
31. Gills typically decurrent, often forked (or even forming pores near stalk)and often peeling easily 
from cap; margin of cap usually inrolled when young; veil absent; spore print yellowish to 
brown; stalk fleshy ............................................ Paxillaceae, p. 476 
31. Not as above; gills occasionally decurrent but usually not; veil present or absent; spore print 
variously colored (rusty-orange, rusty-brown, dull brown, etc.); very common .. _ . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Cortinariaceae, p. 396 
..:oc 
  Q. 
- - GI 
.cQ., GI 
C i 
.i:Q.0 
Q.cc 
 
s  
c 
  
 i 
.c 0 
. .. 
..I? 
 g 
.. E 
S III 
C c 
.5 
o U GI 
..  Doll 
.c c c 
_  III 
.5   
".c · 
i 
 s 2 
Q. Gi .. 
 o 
.5 0 0  
..........- 
Q..c .c 0 
.. 't 
o..:oc'O.c 
Q..5 "2 :l 
 Q...C 
i..! 
!os == 
..:Gi"2 
.... DoII 
::I  C 
.c .c .- 
'" - 
0.- 
-   
= .. 
.- GI.c 
i .2 
c:;  
.g,  
GI.!!1  
.. ..:oc c 
&.5 e 
 Q. 0 
PICTORIAL KEY TO GILLED MUSHROOMS 
"I 
.a 
 
. 
 
. 
'" "I 
 
:s 
]. 
UQ"Q:: 
:g 
.s:g 
"Q 
:.:::: 
E< 
QQ" 
"I 
:S . 
"I CiII 
.5  
t: 
I:: CiII «:s 
 
'" 
: 
.!!1 
.. 
 
U 
III 
.. 
III 
.c 
U 
.: N 
GI . :tI: 
c-gQ) 
:;o 
a::::I-:' 
og 
i 8 
C GI.- 
GI"'C>- 
.i:; 
 .. '" ::2 
o 0 Doll :g 
U  C 
=s f .ji . 
:! 
.!!DoII 
..  
'" "I 
:::s :::I 
. .S 
... .. 
 
 
"I 
.:! 
 
 
.. 
C 
 
 
 
'i:: 
ts 
 
C 
;::.. 
S 
'i: 
ts 
E 
 
C 
GI 
'" 
.c 
III 
'" 
::I 
-; 
C 
C 
III 
c 
 . c 
 c  
Q..o 
III GI cU 
  
o 
:> 
N  
-S! 
:g:g"E 
.. 
«:s 
cr; 
 
-c 
 
C 
s:: 
(3 
«:s 
C 
 
«:s 
E 
«:s 
6 
E 
 
 
«:s 
 
" s:: 
«:s «:s 
E 
::S 
E 
 
]. 
  ts 
.s 
E  
 
- 
 
:tI: 
Q) 
 
Doll:)   
C ;'i! :tI: 
.- C::I Q) 
EE1I  
,£E-o 
.s1l  B 
] 
'" GI.... .. 
: 
c :: 0 0 
.aGI 
6::!..c:: 
Q. c III 'C:j .-:: 
::111-;;'O 
Glccc.... 
 III 0 III g 
;g ts 
E 
E .... oS CiII.5! 
2,    
C  ts E .c:: 
C IE C  
.. C CiII:::: .. 
eQ:t;; 
ts 
:c 
ts  ,j. 
"Qt1 
-';i 
s::-CCQ" 
.....Q"Q:: 
"I "I 
CiII.:!  «:s 
  
.I:: 1::-- 
!:'EE 
8 
«:s ts 
"I -S! . E 
:::I -- «:s oS 
   
I:: E :::s. 
::s 
 ts 
.5! E  
..s", 
I:::;::Q)C!: 
E E   
 .... 
'- 
..... 
'-" 
'" - 
  
.-c'O Q) 
E e;  
,£'O '" 
 DoII  
:;.   
6!=  
::I - III Q) 
.: . 
.a 'i 
6 
;-;;::! 
'Qi c C III .... 
lIIo-;;g 
  
;g 
-C"l 
.:: 
c:$! 
-c 
  
C 
 
GI 
Q. 
 
'0 
'0 
.c 
.5 
'0 
GI 
11 
U 
:a 
.5 
GI 
.. 
as 
III 
.. 
GI 
C 
GI 
011 
C 
o 
E 
E 
o 
U 
GI 
.. 
o 
E 
GI 
.c 
 
Qi 
o 
Z 
 
"I 
i:! '" 
"I «:s C  
 .9 J'.E 
-5] ].a 
Q"Q,,Q:: 
'" "I 
 .::! «:s 
E 
"S::I::..9-c 
I:.EE 
8 
 
.a  
;o..'... 
  C 
.,,:::.,,::: 
 
. 
"I 8  
.s!::::::s:::s'" E 
..... __ :s 
:gCillts::::: ... tsoS 
.1:: ...      "Q ",..... C 
I:: I:;<.-«:s ..-c 
 CiII  c=:--  E :::I::: . 
CiII CiII ;;...,<r:: <r::L" 
  CQ" .... 
"I .a 
:S "I  "I 
 ;g CiII..i:! 
 i  :L i i.5!.a 
-ct  ccc"" 
E - c.- _ ......  ts 
1::.-= ts  
aae<r:: 
SGi (0 
i  
c '0  
till", 
'" 0  
GI_ ::2 
;   
t.Q  
.. c Q) 
0111:> 
C "2 
:l 
 t: C .-:: 
=:5 
GI GI III .... 
'O-;;g 
vi 
'- 
..... 
'-" 
StFP(PCP 
62 
.:.c 
  c. 
- - 'II 
 C. . 'II 
C -a.'O 
.C c.   
c.';;c. 
'II CI C C 
 
 S   
c 
  
E i 
o 
. .. 
 
'" C 
::I 0 
.. E 
S CI 
C C 
.s 
o  'II 
..  DII 
 C C 
_  CI 
.S E  
..  . 
c...... 
Q1";;; 
.. 0 ::I 
0- .. 
c. 'ii .. 
00 .... 0 
- 
.2 S S £ 
c..c .c 0 
f.!l.!l t:t 
0.:.c'O.c 
c..S 'g  
00 c... I;: 
.!4.! 
£= 
 'ii '0 
t:: ....  
.E-5 
0.- 
-   
.c 
i oa::'a 
c IS  
.C  DII 
c..=  
f;;rf 
8o.s  
ooc.o 
PICTORIAL KEY TO GILLED MUSHROOMS 
 
E 
oS eo,   
Q  
;...c- 
 
 
 
:cs ..., 
 ;: 
QQ 
 
c- 2 ::::::::: 
Q.E' 
 
..., ..., 
\I,I.:!:S  
  E 
c-.s r::  
EE 
8 
\1,1 
E 
._  ... oS  
 
t)Q:; 
.13 
   
E Q 
...,:5 EE 
::S?-.QoSoS 
.5 Et51 
i ::s Q \1 .. 
Q:; 
'" 
"' 
:5:;( :s 
.E'   
.51 c- .51 . 
QQ 
E t: 
8 
'" 
;: 
'" 
.C 
 
 
CI 
.. 
CI 
.c 
U 
- t::' 
i,;:5  
:i  
c c  0 
:,;, 
Q1..CI.c.o 
.. 0 C '" tU 
o.! 
c.co.:.c..c:: 
....-;.... 
 g .5  
'" DII- ... 
-GiS i f 
;;. DII .. - :.a 
C 
 
  
eo, 
:S.2!"E 
..5 ..? 
.... ....  - 
 
\.,)Q., 
\1,1 
.  - 
..... - -.. ...... 
.... Q  ?-. 
:S r::   
Q Q  Q 
\.,) 
oS!  
   
-- 
c ::s 
 
a   
:! 0;: E 
 ... c 
.sEC 
1;!"S 
 ;..,.  :! 0- 
Q:; 
E ..; 
\1,1 :!::s 
 ::::: .... E .51 
 ;...  '" 
Q...t:-=-o 
."Q== 
\.,)-< 
1; 
.. 
_ 0 
CI'O 
G/ 'II 
i 
'" 0 
- .. 
== u 
'O -d 
c;.,g 
 
 -;: u ::: 
= 
;:Ea 
co 
C 
...: 
...,  \1,1.51 
:s.a\l,l 
r:: 0 .. ?\o&: 
.... .E'   
-QQ 
Q5.:: 
\.,) 
I 
 '" 
o 
...,....- 
 . :;(  
C-.5 
i.S! 
88 
..., 
 ::s 
E  
 
Q Q 
 
u 
00 
 
o 
 
'" 
rf 
.- C 
E E 
.s!f 
rf .- 
-; . .s  
5! 
:; 
5.2 
fE:!!.g 
c. c .:!", 
=;i:;; 
;;'Clo 
oC C 
 cg 
 
E 
oS ...,  \1,1 
:S 
. E ::: 
\I,Ir::-:S 
8( 
. '" 
.co 
::s:.= 
- 
-< 
 \1,1 
.5  
t.51 c- 
1;s 
"".:: 
..., 
.:! 
. ?-.  
.'S .5 
:Sr:: 
Q Q Q 
\.,)\.,) 
 
 
  
E c-  
-ge 
 
 
 
 
  
s;:...t: 
  
r::...t: c 
\1,1 " .... 
 ?  
a 
..., 
..:: eo, 
\I,I2..., 
 .c .g .;: 
E   s 
 .. ....  
Eb() 
 
.s 8 
DII - 
,; = .5  
 E:  
g:!!-d 
== rf 8- 
 ::I 
o :c '" 
= 5';£ 
5.c.. c 
.2  ";;;  
8 i 
c.Q1C1"Q 
CI:: 5! c.. 
UCl::l 
0:.. C 
 
E 
..., oS ...,  \1,1 
::s.a\l,l 
r::O"?-. 
.... E .E'  
.. -Q 
:::5 
\.,) 
CI 
.. 
'II 
C G/ 
'II Co 
DII.... 
c- 
0'0 
Eo 
E 
o C 
.- 
G/'O 
.. G/ 
01; 
E. 
G/'O 
.c C 
 .- 
. f 
G/ CI 
'0 
z 
..., 
.a eo, 
'\I,I . 
r::  .9 i:: 
E -  
;..,.Q. 
I::( 
. 
'" 
..., 
 eo,.-< 
 °E  .5  
E.5! 
 c Q r  
\.,)..... 
 
   
Q  ::::: 
E.51 c- 
..9   c   
QC-:.=ti.s- 
:=:i::;(Q 
\.,)  
 
  
:::: 
Q 
_0&: 
Q:; 
 
 
...,    
..::.... ._ \1,1 
\1 E:Q Q 
.r:: 0&:  ..., -=-  r:: 
i =  Q ==  
-<\.,)-< 
 
 
r:: 
a:::: 
r::  
\1,10&: 
  E 
C 
..., 
:5 ..., 
.... ?-...:!  ..., \1,1 
cO&:.... \1,1 :! 
...t: ::::::?-,. 
 
E.== 
e-< 
eo, 
0; 
:s 
.... .. 
c Q 
":>:0&: 
 
.... .. 
b() 
 
.. C 
o :s::::- 
II"'- 
-;.S.:.c  
. C '3 3 
:E   
rf 
o'Q 5 0 
-=....co 
 E 5 0 
i:G/.c 
o.c 
-'OtU 
 
U.!"" 
c.g 
C 
= 
- 
 
 
spores  
63 
RUSSULACEAE 
THIS family differs fundamentally from all other gilled mushrooms in the anatomy of 
the cap and stem tissue: nests or rosettes of large, roundish cells called sphaerocysts are 
interspersed with the usual filamentous hyphae, giving the mushroom a characteristic 
brittle, granular texture. In addition, the spores are conspicuously ornamented with 
strongly amyloid warts, spines, and/ or ridges. These unique features suggest that the 
Russulaceae evolved independently from other agarics-perhaps from underground 
ancestors. Some toadstool taxonomists consequently place them in a separate order, 
the Russulales, rather than in the Agaricales. 
There are two large genera in the Russulaceae: Lactar;us, which exudes a milk orjuice 
(latex) when broken, and Russula, which does not. Though they're often characterized as a 
"white-spored" family, their spore color ranges from white to yellow, buff, or ochraceous. 
Lactar;us and Russula are mycorrhizal and often fruit together in spectacular abun- 
dance. From an edibili ty stand point they are good for beginners beca use few, if any, of the 
mild-tasting species are dangerous. Those species with an acrid or bitter taste are best 
avoided since many are poisonous or indigestible, at least raw. To determine whether or 
not a species is acrid, chew on a small piece of the cap and gills for a minute, then spit it 
out. If it is acrid, you'll experience a burning sensation on your tongue-in fact, you may 
have to wash out your mouth to get rid of the taste! If you're not sure whether it's acrid, 
then it's probably "mild." Be careful-some species really pack a wallop! 
Key to the Russulaceae 
1. Fresh fruiting body usually exuding a latex (milk or juice) when broken (the latex is best seen 
by cutting the gills near the stalk). .................................. Lactarius, p. 64 
1. Latex absent. ..................................................... Russula, p. 83 
*In dry or very wet weather, Lactarius species with a scanty latex may exhibit none at all. The following 
characteristics will help distinguish such specimens from Russula: 
If the fruiting body has greenish stains and colored flesh, it is probably a Lactarius. 
If the cap is brightly colored and has white flesh, it is probably a Russula. 
If the cap margin is striate, it is probably a Russula. 
If the gills, stalk, or flesh are some color besides white or yellow when fresh, it may well be a 
Lactarius. (Some Russulas, however, discolor reddish, gray, brown, or black in age.) 
If the stalk is scrobiculate (pitted with darker spots), it is a Lactarius. 
If the cap margin is bearded, it is a La('tarius. 
If none of the above are applicable, try Russula first, then Lactarius. 
The latex which distinguishes Lactarius from Russula is best seen by cutting the mushroom near the 
juncture of the gills and stalk. In many species, such as L. argi//aceifo/ius var. megacarpus, shown 
here, the latex is milky white, but in some species it is brightly colored and in others practically absent. 
LACT ARIUS (Milk Caps) 
Typically terrestrial, mostly medium-sized woodland mushrooms. CAP usually depressed at 
maturity, usually with an inrolled orincurved margin when young, sometimes concentrically zoned. 
Flesh crisp, brillle, usually exuding a latex when broken; taste mild or acrid. GILLS attached 
(usually adnate to decurrent), variously colored. STALK typically rigid, brillie. snapping open 
cleanly like chalk; central, often scrobiculate. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white to 
buff or yellowish. Spores with amyloid warts and/ or ridges. Cap tissue nearly always with nests of 
sphaerocysts. 
LACTARIUS species are called milk caps because they exude a milky or juicy fluid 
(latex) when broken (see Color Plate 6 and photo on p. 63). In dry or very wet weather 
they may lack a distinct latex (especially if old), but their crisp or brittle flesh distinguishes 
them from all but the Russulas (see footnote at bottom of p. 63 for a more detailed 
comparison). A few Mycenas possess a latex, but they strike a radically different pose: 
a conical to bell-shaped cap perched on a long, thin, fragile stalk. 
The most important features to note on any Lactarius are the color of the latex, and 
the color changes the latex undergoes or produces on surrounding tissue when exposed 
to the air. The colors should always be noted on fresh material. The latex may react with 
the air rapidly (within 45 seconds) as in L. vinaceorufescens, or slowly (within 5 hours) 
as in L. deliciosus, or not at all, as in L.fragilis. The taste-whether mild oracrid(peppery) 
-is also significant, as are microscopic features such as the structure of the cap cuticle 
and pattern of ornamentation on the spores. It is also helpful to note whether or not the 
stalk is scrobiculate (pitted with darker spots). 
Lactarius contains a number of delectable collectables. The candy cap (L.fragilis) is the 
tastiest of the local species, besides being one of the most abundant. The green-staining 
milk caps (L. deliciosus, L. indigo, et al) are edible and popular, and in eastern North 
America, L. volemus, L. corrugis, and L. hygrophoroides are very good. Many species, 
on the other hand, are poisonous or indigestible. As a rule, the peppery-tasting ones 
should be avoided as well as those with yellow- or purple-staining latex. In Europe, some of 
the acrid species are eaten after pickling or parboiling, but it hardly seems worth the effort 
or risk to do so. 
Lactarius is a very large and complex genus, with over 200 species described from North 
America. It is especially diverse in eastern-and more specifically southeastern-North 
America. In fact, the milk caps are roughly to eastern hardwood forests what the 
Russulas are to the coniferous forests of the West-so exceedingly diverse and ubiquitous 
as to seem like "mushroom weeds." In California, however, there are fewer than 50 re- 
corded species of Lactarius, and in our area there are only about a dozen. As a result, 
they are much easier to identify than their bewildering brethren, the Russulas. Like the 
Russulas, they are mycorrhizal, mostly terrestrial woodland fungi, but often appear at the 
edges of woods or on tree-studded lawns. Many are specific to certain hosts-e.g., L. 
torminosus grows with birch. In California the milk caps fruit from late summer through 
the winter and sometimes rival the Russulas in abundance. 
The publication in 1979 of The North American Species of Lactarius by L. R. Hesler and 
Alexander Smith has resulted in a large number of name changes. For instance, the edible 
species widely known as L. sanguifluus is now L. rubrilacleus and our L. trivialis has 
become L. argillaceifolius. Those of you who find it hard enough to master one scientific 
name for a mushroom without being responsible for two or three can salvage some solace 
in the fact that while the names have changed, the mushrooms haven't. In other words, 
so long as you know how to recognize a particular species, it hardly matters what you call 
it-unless you are living with a taxonomist! Twenty-one species of Lactarius are de- 
scribed here and many others are keyed out and/ or mentioned. 
LACT ARIUS 
65 
Key to Lactarius 
I. Latex colored (red, orange, blue, brown, etc.), but often scanty or even absent; fruiting body 
often (but not always) staining greenish in age or where bruised (slowly, within 5 hours) . 2 
I. Latex white to buff or clear (but may stain yellow or some other color when exposed!) .... 9 
2. Latex blue; entire fruiting body blue to bluish-gray (or greenish-stained) ... L. indigo, p. 69 
2. Fruiting body not blue (may be greenish-stained), or if partly blue then latex not blue .... 3 
3. Latex carrot-orange to salmon-orange, yellow-orange, or rusty-orange (but may darken to 
red-after exposure to air) ...................................................... 4 
3. Not as above; latex red, purplish, brown, etc., or if orange in base of stalk then bluish in cap 5 
4. Cap whitish when fresh; found in southeastern U.S. .. L. salmoneus(see L. de/iciosus, p. 68) 
4. Not as above; widespread and common ..................... L. del;c;osus & others, p. 68 
5. Latex dark red to purplish; fruiting body never bluish (but often greenish-stained) ....... 6 
5. Latex purple-brown to reddish-brown to brown or yellow-brown, or bluish in cap and red 
or orange in stalk; fruiting body sometimes with blue tints (especially young cap) ....... 7 
6. Associated with western conifers (mainly Douglas-fir and pine) ........................ 8 
6. Associated with eastern conifers (mainly hemlock) L. subpurpureus (see L. rubrilacteus, p. 68) 
7. Latex when present yellowish to brown or the color of grasshopper juice; found in eastern North 
America and the Southwest ...................... L. chel;don;um (see L. indigo, p. 69) 
7. Not as above . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. paradoxus & others (see L. indigo, p. 69) 
8. Cap whitish to pinkish-brown; found in Southwest .. L. barrows;; (see L rubrilacteus, p. 68) 
8. Not as above; cap reddish-brown to orangish or tan. . .. . . . .. . . . . .. . . L. rubrilacteus, p. 68 
9. Latex quickly becoming yellow upon exposure to air (usually within 45 seconds) ....... 10 
9. Not as above (but latex may slowly stain yellow or stain wounded tissue yellow) . . . . . . . .. 15 
10. Cap pinkish to pinkish-cinnamon to reddish or vinaceous L. v;naceorufescens & others, p. 74 
10. Cap differently colored (white to yellowish, ochre, orange, etc.) ...................... II 
II. Cap white to yellowish to dark ochre; margin of cap bearded with woolly hairs (at least when 
young) or if not then associated with northern or mountain conifers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 12 
II. Not with above features ........................................................ 13 
12. Cap pale yellow to dark ochre; stalk usually scrobiculate ........... L. scrob;culatus, p. 73 
12. Cap whitish when young (but often pale yellowish or yellow-stained in age); stalk not scrobi- 
culate or somewhat so only at maturity ........... L. res;mus (see L. scrobiculatus, p. 73) 
13. Cap orangish; associated with conifers or birch in northern and western North America . 53 
13. Not as above; either differently colored or associated with hardwoods such as oak ...... 14 
14. Cap orange to bright yellow-orange ............ L. croceus (see L. vinaceorufescens, p. 74) 
14. Not as above ................... L. chrysorheus& others (see L. vinaceorufescens, p. 74) 
15. Cap (and often stalk) with a velvety texture or appearance (use hand lens if unsure); cap gray 
to smoky-brown to dark brown or black, not viscid and not very large ............... 16 
15. Not as above (if velvety, then differently colored-white, orange, red-brown, etc.) ...... 17 
16. Gills close to crowded; associated with western conifers. .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . L.fallax, p. 77 
16. Not with above features ...................... L. I;gnyotus & others (see L.fa//ax, p. 77) 
17. Latex drying purplish or stained wounded areas purplish to dull lilac (often slowly); cap not 
whitish, or if whitish then also viscid or slimy when moist .......................... 18 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 21 
18. Cap distinctly hairy or fibrillose at or near the margin; cap yellow, ochre, buff, or dull orange 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. representaneus & others, p. 75 
18. Not as above; margin of cap naked .............................................. 19 
19. Cap pale yellow; cap and stalk viscid when moist L. asp;deo;des (see L. representaneus, p. 75) 
19. Not with above features ....................................................... 20 
20. Cap and stalk white and slimy, at least when young and moist; common under conifers in the 
Pacific Northwest ........................... L. pallescens (see L. uvidus group, p. 75) 
20. Not as above; cap usually buff, gray, brown, purplish, etc. .. L. uv;dus group & others, p. 75 
21. Cap dark green to sordid greenish- or olive-brown (at least at center), sometimes honey-colored 
at margin; stalk similarly colored; latex white; taste acrid; cap staining magenta in KOH 22 
21. Not with above features ....................................................... 23 
66 RUSSULACEAE 
22. Cap and stalk dark or dull greenish; associated with hardwoods (especially oak) in eastern 
North America ........................ L. atroviridis(see L. o/ivaceoumbrinus, p. 70) 
22. Cap and stalk usually browner; found mainly with conifers L. o/ivaceoumbrinus & others, p. 70 
23. Margin of cap distinctly bearded with woolly hairs, at least when young; cap sometimes whitish, 
but usually pale pinkish to pinkish-orange (at least at center); taste very acrid; associated 
with birch or sometimes aspen .......................... L. torm;nosus & others, p. 73 
23. Not as above; if margin bearded then cap differently colored or habitat different ........ 24 
24. Gills well-spaced; cap whitish to pale grayish- or pinkish-tan or yellowish; latex and wounded 
areas staining rosy-salmon to rusty-orange (especially gills and stalk base); found under 
hardwoods in eastern North America (especially common in Southeast) L. subpl;nthogalus 
24. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
25. Cap pinkish-gray to purplish-gray to vinaceous-gray or vinaceous-buff (or brown tinged with 
these colors), not viscid; odor distinctly coconut-like; found mainly with birch (often in 
parks) or alder; northern ........................................... L. glyc;osmus 
25. Not as above ...................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 26 
26. Gills pinkish to pale pinkish; cap viscid when moist, white or with pinkish to lavender stains; 
taste acrid; associated with aspen, poplar, and willow ............. L. controversus, p. 70 
26. Not as above (cap if whitish usually not viscid) .................................... 27 
27. Margin of cap with cottony tissue (at least when young); cap usually whitish when young, but 
may discolor yellowish, tan, etc. in age ..... L. decept;vus & others (see L. piperatus, p. 71) 
27. Margin of cap naked or bearded with hairs but not as above. . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . .. 28 
28. Cap predominantly whitish (but may discolor in age), not viscid; taste distinctly acrid (some- 
times extremely so!); found mostly with hardwoods in eastern North America ......... 29 
28. Not as above (if cap whitish, then taste not acrid) _................................. 31 
29. Latx staining wounded tissue pinkish; especially common in Southeast _.... L. sub vernal is 
29. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
30. Cap and stalk minutely velvety; gills close to well-spaced L. subvellereus( see L. piperalus, p. 71) 
30. Cap and stalk not velvety; gills crowded to very crowded ....... L. piperatus & others, p. 71 
31. Cap whitish to olive-buff (often with darker and paler areas); latex white, scanty, staining 
tissue reddish to pinkish-gray or pale yellow; taste not acrid; favoring pine L. pallidio/illaceus 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Latex white and very copious, staining wounded tissue brown (often slowly); taste mild; cap 
and/ or stalk minutely velvety, never viscid; cap white to yellow, orange, red-brown, etc. (never 
grayish or olive); common under hardwoods in eastern North America. . . . .. . . . . .. . .. 33 
32. Not as above (but may have some of above features) ............................... 35 
33. Cap and stalk whitish to buff or slightly yellowish ....... L. luteolus (see L. vo/emus, p. 78) 
33. Cap and stalk tawny to orange-brown, reddish-brown, or brown ..................... 34 
34. Cap brown to reddish-brown or rusty-brown, often wrinkled; stalk typically 1-3 cm thick; odor 
usually mild ...................................... L. corrug;s(see L. vo/emus, p. 78) 
34. Cap tawny, orange-brown, rusty-brown, or sometimes yellowish. not normally wrinkled; 
stalk typically less than 1.5 cm thick; odor often fishy in age ............ L. volemus, p. 78 
35. Cap with various shades of yellow, pale buff, ochre, copper, orange, or pinkish-orange, often 
(but not always) concentrically zoned; taste very acrid (peppery or burning) ........... 36 
35. Not with above features (but may have some of them) ...................... _ . . . . . .. 40 
36. Cap with various shades of yellow, ochre, dark ochre, buff, etc. ...................... 37 
36. Cap oranger, pinker, or more coppery than above ................................. 38 
37. Cap margin with fibrils which are brown to grayish in age L.payettensis(see L. alnico/a. p. 71) 
37. Not as above ............................................ L. alnicola & others, p. 71 
38. Margin of cap bearded when young L. subvillosus & L. psammicola (see L. torminosus, p.73) 
38. Not as above; margin of cap naked even when young ............................... 39 
39. Associated with northern conifers .................. L. olympianus (see L a/nicola, p. 71) 
39. Associated with southern hardwoods (mainly oak) ..... L. yazooens;s(see L a/nicola, p. 71) 
40. Cap cinnamon to butterscotch-brown or buffy-brown; cap and stalk slimy or viscid when moist; 
taste acrid; common in eastern North America (rare or absent in West) .......... L. aff;n;s 
40. Not with above features ....................................................... 41 
LACTARIUS 
67 
41. Cap and stalk viscid or slimy when moist; cap dark brown to smoky-brown to charcoal-gray 
(without orangish, reddish, yellowish, or purplish shades), but may fade in age; associated 
with conifers ............................................................... 42 
41. Not as above; cap viscid or dry; stalk not viscid and/ or fruiting body differently colored . 43 
42. Stalk more or less tan or paler ............... L. kauffmanii(see L. pseudomucidus. p. 77) 
42. Stalk darker or grayer (colored like cap or slightly paler) " L. pseudomucidus & others, p. 77 
43. Taste distinctly to excruciatingly acrid (sometimes latently so); cap pinkish-tan to reddish-tan 
to reddish-brown or brick-red (at least in age) or sometimes orangish _............... 44 
43. Not as above; cap differently colored and/ or taste mild to only slightly acrid ........... 48 
44. Found under manzanita; cap small and viscid when moist L. manzanitae(see L. rufus. p. 79) 
44. Not with above features ....................................................... 45 
45. Associated with hardwoods in eastern North America .............................. 46 
45. Not as above; usually but not always associated with conifers ........................ 47 
46. Cap 6-20 cm or more broad, pinkish-tan to reddish-tan to brick-red (but whitish when young 
or where covered by humus), not zoned concentrically; gills white to buff ....... L. allardii 
46. Cap 5-15 cm broad, orange-brown to reddish-brown, often zoned concentrically; mature gills 
reddish-brown to dull purple-brown ....................................... L. peckii 
47. Cap dull or dark reddish to brick-red, vinaceous, or dark brown .... L. rufus & others, p. 79 
47. Cap oranger or more brightly colored than above .................................. 48 
48. Odor distinctly fragrant (sweet), at least when dried or cooked (and often when fresh) ... 49 
48. Odor not fragrant or sweet, even when dried or cooked _............................ 52 
49. Cap viscid, orange-brown to caramel-colored; odor coconut-like when dried; known only 
from California ............................ L. cocosiolens (see L. subflammeus. p. 79) 
49. Not with above features ....................................................... 50 
50. Latex clear (colorless); cap 4-15 cm broad; associated with northern conifers and especially 
common in boggy areas ................................... L. helvus(=L. aquiJluus) 
50. Latex white or watery white; cap 2-10 cm broad; widespread in many habitats .......... 51 
51. Stalk solid or stuffed (but sometimes with a central hollow in age), typically 0.5-3 cm thick; cap 
usually reddish but sometimes orangish; known only from California ..... L. rufulus, p. 82 
51. Stalk often (not always!) hollow or partly hollow, especially in age, and usually slender (0.4-1 
or occasionally 1.5 cm thick); cap usually burnt orange but sometimes redder, browner, or 
tawnier; widely distributed (including California) .............. L.fragilis& others, p. 80 
52. Cap small and olive-brown to dark grayish-brown or dark brown when young (but often tawny 
to cinnamon in age); common under alder in N. Calif. and Pacific Northwest L.occidentalis 
52. Not with above features ....................................................... 53 
53. Cap orange to reddish. pinkish. reddish-brown, or liver-colored ..................... 54 
53. Cap grayish to violet-gray, dingy brown, olive brown, or dark brown ................. 59 
54. Cap viscid or slightly viscid when moist .......................................... 55 
54. Cap not viscid, often with a dull (matte) appearance ............................... 56 
55. Cap scarlet to orange, orange-brown, or tawny ............ L. subflammeus & others, p. 79 
55. Cap pinkish to reddish to reddish-brown or liver-colored .... L. subviscidus & others, p. 80 
56. Cap and stalk minutely velvety, orange to orange-brown; gills widely spaced, pallid; latex 
very copious; common under eastern hardwoods L. hygrophoroides (see L. volemus. p. 78) 
56. Not as above ................................................................ 57 
57. Associated with oak; mainly but not exclusively southern ........................... 58 
57. Not as above; northern. L. alpinus, L. thejogalus, L. oculatus& others (see L. rufulus. p. 82) 
58. Found in California ....................................... L. rufulus & others, p. 82 
58. Found in eastern North America ............ L. subseriJluus & others (see L. rufulus. p. 82) 
59. Cap medium-sized to large (4 cm or more broad), at least slightly viscid when moist ..... 60 
59. Not as above; cap small and violet-gray to gray or ochre-gray, usually with small scales at least 
in age; found in eastern North America, often on or near rotten wood .......... L. griseus 
60. Latex often discoloring injured tissue slowly; gills often dingy yellowish or yellow-brown in old 
age; found with hardwoods (mainly oak) L. argillaceiJolius var. megacarpus & others, p. 76 
60. Not as above ........ L. circellatus & others (see L. argillaceifolius var. megacarpus, p. 76) 
68 
RUSSULACEAE 
Lactarius deliciosus (Delicious Milk Cap) Color Plate 2 
CAP 5-16 cm broad, broadly convex or with a depressed center and an inrolled margin 
when young, becoming depressed or shallowly funnel-shaped; surface viscid when moist 
but soon dry, smooth, often zoned; color variable: dull orange to carrot-orange or orange- 
brown, sometimes blotched with or entirely green; fading in age or dry weather to 
brownish, gray, dull greenish-gray, or even yellowish; margin inrolled when young. Flesh 
thick, brittle, orange to yellowish or greenish; taste mild or slightly bitter. LATEX very 
scanty, bright carrot-orange (but in some forms slowly staining dark red when exposed), 
eventually staining wounded or aged tissue greenish (within 5 hours). GILLS typically 
bright to dull orange, but varying to yellowish or orange-buff, greenish where wounded; 
adnate to decurrent, close. STALK 2-7 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, 
soon dry, sometimes scrobiculate; rigid, hollow inage, frequently maggot-riddled, colored 
like cap or paler. SPORE PRINT creamy yellowish-buff; spores 7-11 x 6-8 microns, 
broadly elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid ridges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers (pine, spruce, etc.), 
common and widely distributed. It is abundant in our coastal pine forests in the late fall 
and winter, generally after the major crop of look-alike L. rubrilacteus. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not necessarily delicious. Several varieties or forms occur and 
some are apparently better than others. Special treatment is required to overcome the 
grainy texture and latent bitterness. Its abundance and distinctiveness, however, make 
experimentation worthwhile. Some sources recommend slow cooking (e.g., baked in a 
casserole), others insist it should be cooked rapidly in a frying pan with very little butter. 
It is popular in Europe, and the Russians are fanatical about it-especially salted. 
COMMENTS: This variable, cosmopolitan fungus strikes a discordant but colorful 
note with its unlikely combination of pistachio-green and carrot-orange-even more so 
when found in the company of the bright red Russula rosacea, as is so often the case in our 
area. The carrot-colored latex separates it from L. rubrilacteus, and confusion with other 
mushrooms is unlikely. The latex is so scanty as to often be non-existent, but the brittle 
flesh and greenish stains on the cap, stalk, and! or gills will identify it. The fruiting bodies 
persist for a long time and are often completely hollowed out by maggots. Several varieties 
of L. deliciosus have been described based on slight differences in color, staining reactions, 
and microscopic characteristics; one variety tends to have an areolate (scaly-cracked) cap 
in age. The Greeks were apparently fond of L. deliciosus, for it is depicted on a fresco from 
Herculaneum (buried in 79 A.D.). Other species: L. thyinos, of northern bogs, has carrot- 
orange latex but stains red, not green; in other respects it is quite similar. L. salmoneus is 
a smallish but distinctive southeastern species with a whitish cap, bright orange gills, 
flesh, and stalk (when fresh) and orange to salmon-orange latex. L. pseudodeliciosus is 
buff or dingy colored with yellow-orange to rusty-orange latex. All ofthese are edible and 
the latter two stain greenish in age or where wounded. 
Lactarius rubrilacteus (Bleeding Milk Cap) Color Plates 3, 6 
CAP 4-14 cm broad, broadly convex with a depressed center and inrolled margin when 
young, depressed or shallowly funnel-shaped in age; surface viscid when moist, smooth, 
reddish-brown to orange, orange-brown, or tan, or often concentrically zoned with these 
colors; duller and greenish-stained in age. Flesh thick, brittle, brownish to buff, reddish, 
etc.; taste mild or slightly bitter. LATEX scanty, dark red (but occasionally orange-red 
in old specimens), slowly staining wounded areas greenish. GILLS adnate to slightly 
decurrent, close, reddish or dull purplish-red, or tan with a dark reddish sheen; greenish 
where wounded. ST ALK 2-6 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, firm, rigid, 
LACT ARIUS 
69 
hollow, colored like cap or paler, sometimes scrobiculate. SPORE PRINT pale yellowish 
or buff; spores 7.5-10 )( 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in large troops under conifers throughout the West; associated 
in our area with Douglas-fir and abundant in the fall and early winter. Where pines pre- 
dominate it is largely supplanted by L. deliciosus, and where pine and Douglas-fir grow 
together, the two milk caps often mingle. In Europe, L. sanguifluus (which may be the 
same as L. rubrilacteus) is mycorrhizal with pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not pleasing to everyone because of its granular texture; usually 
better, however, than L. deliciosus (see comments on edibility of that species). 
COMMENTS: The dark red latex is the telltale trait of this handsome fungus, which for 
many years has been known to fungophiles as L. sanguifluus. In dry or very wet weather 
the latex may be absent, but in these conditions the greenish stains are usually quite 
pronounced. In fact, as with L. deliciosus, weathered fruiting bodies may be entirely 
green, and mature specimens often have tiny, aborted green "buttons" at their bases. Be 
sure not to confuse this species with the similarly colored L. vinaceorufescens and 
L. chrysorheus-they often grow with L. rubrilacteus, but have a white latex that quickly 
turns yellow. Other species: L. barrows;; has dark red latex, but its cap is much paler 
(whitish to pinkish-brown) and it occurs mainly with ponderosa pine. Another similar 
edible species, L. subpurpureus of eastern North America, has wine-red latex and a wine- 
red to silvery cap, and favors hemlock. See also L. paradoxus(under L. indigo). 
Lactarius indigo (Indigo Milk Cap) Color Plate 4 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex or centrally depressed with an inrolled margin when young, 
usually depressed in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, then dry; indigo-blue when 
fresh but fading to grayish- or silvery-blue, sometimes with greenish stains; often zoned 
concentrically. Flesh pallid to bluish, brittle, slowly staining greenish; taste mild to slightly 
bitter-acrid. LATEX indigo-blue (bright dark blue), scanty, slowly staining wounded 
tissue greenish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, indigo-blue becoming paler in 
age. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, indigo-blue to silvery- or grayish-blue, equal or 
narrowed at base, rigid, hollow in age, soon dry. SPORE PRINT creamy-yellowish; 
spores 7 -9 )( 5.5-7.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in summer and fall, mostly in oak and pine woods; 
found throughout soutt-.ern and eastern North America, but most common along the Gulf 
Coast and in Mexico. I have found it in Arizona under ponderosa pine. If it should turn up 
in southern California it would certainly be a most welcome addition to our fungus flora. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very good-superior, at least, to the other greenish-staining 
milk caps, such as L. deliciosus. In Mexico it is sometimes sold in farmer's markets. 
COMMENTS: The overall blue to blue-gray color and bright blue latex make this one of 
the safest and most memorable of all agarics. No other milk cap has blue latex, let alone 
a bluish fruiting body. Other species: L. paradoxus, common under pine in eastern North 
America (especially the South), often has a bluish-tinged cap when young, but has reddish- 
brown to purple-brown latex and gills. Another species, L. chel;don;um, has a yellowish 
to dingy yellow-brown to bluish-gray cap and yellowish to brown latex "the color of 
grasshopper juice." It occurs commonly in the eastern United States and Southwest. L. 
hem;cyaneus is a medium-sized to large species which usually has bluish flesh in the cap 
and orange to red-orange flesh in the base of the stalk. It may possibly occur in southern 
California, according to Greg Wright and Paul Harding. All of the above species are 
edible despite their tendency to stain green in age. 
70 
RUSSULACEAE 
Lactarius olivaceoumbrinus (T oadskin Milk Cap) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane or shallowly 
depressed; surface viscid when moist, typically a mixture of dark olive, sordid olive- 
brown, and olive-buff, often spotted or zoned concentrically, but zones fading in age. Flesh 
thick, dingy olive, brittle, taste very acrid. LATEX copious, white, becoming greenish-gray 
(sometimes very slowly). GILLS adnate to decurrent, crowded, pallid becoming spotted or 
colored greenish or olive-gray. ST ALK 4-8 cm long, 1-3 cm thick; solid, becoming hollow 
in age; viscid when wet, then dry; rigid, colored more or less like cap; usually scrobiculate. 
SPORE PRINT pale buff; spores 7-10 )( 6-9 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with 
amyloid warts and ridges. Cap surface staining magenta in KOH or ammonia. 
HABITAT: Solitary or scattered or in small groups on ground under conifers in late 
summer and fall, Pacific Northwest and northern California, occasional. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. The sordid appearance and acrid taste are major deterrents. 
COMMENTS: This species and its close relatives are among our most distinctive milk 
caps-easily recognized by their overall dingy greenish to murky olive-brown color and 
copious, acrid white latex. I know very few people who would call them beautiful, but 
that's precisely what they are-beautiful-in a grotesque sort of way that only a thoroughly 
jaded fancier of the fleshy fungi can appreciate. (For some reason, they remind me oftoads 
-see Color Plate I.) Other species: L. sordidus is a similar species with a somewhat 
browner ca p and smaller spores; it also occurs in the Pacific Northwest as well as in eastern 
North America. L. alroviridis (COLOR PLATE 1) has a mottled dark greenish cap and 
stalk and grows under hardwoods (especially oak) in eastern North America. Neither is 
edible. The nameL. necalor(a European species) was previously applied to this group. 
Lactarius controversus (Poplar Milk Cap) 
CAP (5) 7-20 cm broad, broadly convex becoming depressed; surface viscid when moist, 
then dry, white, or whitish with lavender to pinkish stains; margin at first inrolled. Flesh 
thick, firm, brittle, white; taste slowly acrid(burning). LATEX white, unchanging. GILLS 
adnate to slightly decurrent, crowded, narrow, pinkish to creamy-pink. STALK 2.5-7 cm 
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, white, sometimes spotted; hollow in age; 
rigid. SPORE PRINT creamy to pale pinkish; spores 6-7.5 )( 4.5-5 microns, elliptical, with 
amyloid warts and ridges. 
Laclarius controversus has pinkish gills. white latex, acrid taste, and inrolled cap margin when young. 
t . 
" " 
I' 
,' 
,=. . 
" 
1<' 
 
,-. .. 
LACT ARIUS 
71 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious under aspen, poplar, and willow; widely distributed. 
It can be found in the aspen forests of the Sierra Nevada in the late summer and fall. I 
have seen large fruitings in New Mexico in the late summer. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided due to the acrid taste. 
COMMENTS: This handsome milk cap is one of several large, whitish species with white, 
unchanging latex and a very peppery taste. The viscid cap when moist and pinkish-tinted 
gills plus the association with aspen, poplar, and willow distinguish it from the other 
large white Lactarii (see L. piperatus), while the presence of a latex places it in Lactarius. 
Lactarius piperatus (Peppery White Milk Cap) 
CAP (4) 6-16 cm broad, broadly convex and usually depressed centrally, becoming broadly 
vase-shaped in age; surface more or less smooth, dry, unzoned, white to creamy-white, 
but often developing dingy buff or tan stains in age; unpolished; margin naked. Flesh thick, 
crisp, brittle; odor mild, taste extremely acrid. LATEX white, copious, unchanging or 
drying yellowish ( or in one variety staining wounded tissue dingy greenish). GILLS adnate 
to decurrent, narrow and very crowded, white to creamy, often forked. STALK 2-8 cm 
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapered toward base, dry, white, smooth or with a whitish 
bloom, not scrobiculate. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-7)( 5-5.5 microns, elliptical 
to nearly round with inconspicuous amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABITAT: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods, 
common in the summer in eastern North America. I t has also been reported from the west 
coast, but I have not seen it west of Minnesota. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. In Russia and Scandinavia it is eaten, along with other 
acrid milk caps, after parboiling or pickling. However, it is rather difficult to digest and 
may even be poisonous if not properly prepared. 
COMMENTS: The dull dry white ca p, very crowded narrow gills, extremely peppery taste, 
and copious white "milk" form a distinctive set of characters. It has much the aspect of 
Russula brevi pes, but of course that species lacks a latex. There are several similar, 
medium-sized to large whitish, acrid milk caps with white latex, including: L. neuhoffii, 
with larger spores and only moderately crowded gills that are sometimes pale pinkish-buff 
at maturity; L. subvellereus, with minutely velvety cap and stalk, and close to well-spaced 
gills; andL. tomentoso-marg;natusandL. deceptivus, witha whitish cap that becomes dull 
tan or brownish in age and has conspicuous cottony tissue on the margin when young. All 
of these are common in eastern North America under hardwoods; the latter also grows 
with conifers. None have the slightly viscid cap and pinkish gills of L. controversus. Other 
species: L. pseudodecept;vus mimics L. deceptivus, but grows with northwestern conifers. 
Lactarius alnicola 
(Golden Milk Cap) 
Color Plate 5 
CAP 5-14 (20) cm broad, convex with a central depression and conspicuously inrolled 
margin when young, depressed or broadly funnel-shaped in age; surface viscid when 
moist, usually zoned concentrically with various shades of ochre and pale yellow, but 
sometimes nearly evenly colored; margin naked or slightly hairy but not bearded. Flesh 
thick, brittle, crisp, whitish; taste very acrid. LATEX white, unchanging or very slowly 
yellowing or staining wounded tissue yellowish. GILLS crowded, adnate to decurrent, 
whitish when young becoming buff or ochraceous-toned in age; wounded areas stained 
yellowish to yellow-brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or with narrowed 
base, hard, usually hollow in age; pallid or tinged cap color, often (but not always) 
scrobiculate (with darker yellow to ochraceous spots). SPORE PRINT whitish to 
yellowish; spores 7.5-10)( 6-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
.. 
, 
...' .., ' 
. ... , 
) 
.. : 
fa 
t " 
\ 
" 
, 
I 
. 
'- 
. 
.. . ,,: 
.. 
... . 
"' 
" . 
Lactarius alnicola has a golden zoned cap and p'eppery white latex. This is our oak-loving variety, 
which has a latemly acrid taste and bald cap margin. See color plate for conifer-loving form. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under spruce and other conifers (despite the species 
epithet, which implies alder) in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific Northwest in the late 
summer and fall, and also abundant (a slightly different form-see comments) in our live 
oak woodlands in the fall and winter. Still another variant occurs in coastal sand dunes 
with willow and bush lupine. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible. The excruciatingly peppery taste is a formidable deterrent. 
COMMENTS: The overall yellowish-ochre color and zoned, non-bearded cap plus 
the frequently scrobiculate stalk, acrid taste, and white latex typify a very confusing group 
of milk caps which have traditionally passed under the European names of L. ;nsulsus and 
L. zonar;us. There is still doubt, however, as to just what those species are. The common 
member of this group in central and southern California differs from typical L. alnicola in 
its mycorrhizal mate (oak), somewhat smaller size and paler cap (yellowish-buff), 
frequently short, off-center stem, and latently acrid taste. Its latex usually stains 
surrounding tissue dingy yellow but does not turn yellow itself. Forms are encountered, 
however, in which the latex does yellow slowly, and forms in which it discolors tissue buff or 
grayish-buff, thus muddling the picture so thoroughly that I begin to yearn for the baseball 
season. (Ah, the simplicity, security, and symmetry of baseball, where each participant has 
a fixed name, number, and position, and a unique and indisputable set of statistics and 
characteristics.) Other species with a more or less zoned, non-bearded cap and acrid white 
latex include: L. olymp;anus, a common western conifer-lover, typically with an oranger 
cap and non-scrobiculate stalk; and two oak-loving easterners, L. psamm;colaf. glaber, 
with a yellowish cap and latex that stains wounded tissue buff to pinkish-cinnamon, and 
L. yazooensis, a southern species with an orangish cap. Similar species that are bearded 
are listed under L. torminosus and L. scrobiculatus. They include L. subvillosus, a com- 
mon local species whose cap is often naked in age, but pinker or oranger than that of L. 
alnicola. Also worth mentioning is L. payettens;s, a western conifer-lover with white 
scanty latex that yellows slowly and brownish to grayish fibrils on the cap margin. None of 
the above species should be eaten, at least until they are better known. 
72 
LACT ARIUS 
73 
Lactarius torminosus 
(Bearded Milk Cap) 
Color Plate 7 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex with a central depression and strongly inrolled margin when 
young, shallowly depressed in age; surface viscid when moist, yellowish-buff to pinkish- 
buff to whitish, the center usually pinkish to pinkish-orange when fresh, or sometimes pale 
pinkish to pinkish-orange throughout; margin bearded with a dense white mat of soft, 
woolly hairs (while inrolled) that may mimic a veil; hairs sparse orevenabsentin age. Flesh 
thick, firm, brittle, white or tinged pinkish; taste very acrid. LATEX often scanty, white 
and typically unchanging (but staining gills yellowish in var. nordmanensis). GILLS white 
to yellowish-tan or developing a pinkish tinge, crowded, narrow, adnate to slightly 
decurrent. STALK 2-7 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, rigid, equal or with a narrowed base, 
firm, dry, often hollow in age; colored like cap or paler, sometimes with dingy ochre spots. 
SPORE PRINT creamy-white; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious under or near birch or occasionally aspen; common 
and very widely distributed. In our area this species and L. pubescens (see comments) are 
common after the first fall rains on lawns with planted birch trees (often in the company of 
Paxil/us involuluS). The mycelium is probably imported on the roots of birch saplings. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended, as it is indigestible or even poisonous unless thoroughly 
cooked. However, in Russia and Scandinavia it is collected in large quantities and pickled, 
and in Norway it is roasted and added to coffee. 
COMMENTS: The bearded, pinkish-tinged cap, white latex, acrid taste, and growth with 
birch are the trademarks of this attractive Laclarius. Buttons with an inrolled margin are 
reminiscent of Paxil/us involulus (another birch-lover), but paler in color. L. pubescens is 
practically identical to L. lorminosus but has smaller spores( 6-8 microns long)and is more 
apt to have a whitish cap (see photo on p. 41). It is common with birch in parks and gardens 
as well as in forests, and is often mistaken for L. lorminosus. One collection I made had 
greenish bands on the gills and stalkjust like in Russula brevipes var. acrior. Other similar 
species: L. subvillosus is common in our tanoak-madrone woodlands. Its pinkish-orange 
to orange cap is bearded when young but often naked in age, leading to confusion with L. 
alnicola. which has a yellower cap. L. psammicola has an orangish, zoned, bearded cap 
but grows under eastern hardwoods. For bearded yellow-stainers, see L. scrobiculalus. 
Lactarius scrobiculatus (Scrobiculate Milk Cap) 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane with the center usually depressed, in age often 
vase-shaped; surface viscid when moist, smooth or scaly in age, unzoned or faintly zoned, 
pale yellow to yellowish to bright ochre, the center sometimes darker; margin inrolled 
when young and typically bearded with hairs (but hairs absent or inconspicuous in var. 
montanus and var. pubescens). Flesh thick, firm, brittle, whitish but staining yellow when 
exposed; taste variable: strongly acrid to mild. LATEX copious or scanty, white, quickly 
staining yellow when exposed. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish to pale or dull 
yellow, close. STALK 3-11 cm long, (I) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, firm, 
dry, hollow in age; white to yellowish, usually scrobiculate (i.e., pitted with large, glazed, 
darker or brighter yellow to honey-colored spots). SPORE PRINT whitish to creamy or 
yellowish; spores 6-10 x 5-7.5 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under northern and mountain conifers; 
widely distributed. Its various varieties are common in the summer and fall in the Sierra 
Nevada, northern California, and other parts ofthe West, but absent in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended; yellow-staining milk caps should be avoided. 
COMMENTS: This robust but variable milk cap can have a mild to strongly peppery 
(acrid) taste and prominently bearded to virtually bald cap margin. However, it can 
'- 
I" 
h 
, 
Lactar;us v;naceorufescens (see description below) has white latex that quickly stains yellow when 
exposed. It is variable in other respects and intergrades with L. chrysorheus, another yellow-stainer. 
be recognized by its overall pale yellow to dark ochre color, scrobiculate stalk, and white 
latex that quickly turns yellow or stains exposed tissue yellow. The latter feature distin- 
guishes it from L. alnicola. which stains yellow slowly or not at all. Other species: L. 
res;mus is a bearded, yellow-staining species whose stalk is scrobiculate only in age if at 
all. Its cap is white when young but often pale yellowish in age. It favors birch, aspen, 
alder, manzanita, and conifers. Also see L. payeltensis (under L. alnicola). 
Lactarius vinaceorufescens (Yellow-Staining Milk Cap) 
CAP 3-7 (9) cm broad, broadly convex with incurved margin, then plane or depressed; 
surface dry to slightly viscid, smooth, cinnamon-buff to pinkish, reddish-cinnamon, or 
dark reddish, often darkening to vinaceous-brown in old age; often faintly zoned or with 
darker watery spots; margin not bearded. Flesh brittle, staining yellow when cut; taste mild 
to somewhat bitter or acrid. LATEX white, quickly turning sulfur-yellow when exposed 
(within 45 seconds). GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, pallid when young, then 
tinged cap color and eventually aging or staining dark reddish. ST ALK 3-7 cm long, 1-2.5 
cm thick, equal, pallid or colored like cap but usually paler, often stained dark reddish in 
age; smooth, not scrobiculate; base often with hairs. SPORE PRINT white to yellowish; 
spores 6.5-9 x 6-7 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups or troops under both hardwoods and conifers; widely 
distributed. It is often abundant in our area from fall through early spring, particularly 
with manzanita, oak, Douglas-fir, and pine( often minglingwithL.fragilis. L. rubrilacteus. 
Russula emetica. and R. cremoricolor). L. chrysorheus (see comments) is also common. 
EDIBILITY: Reportedly poisonous-all yellow-staining milk caps should be avoided. 
COMMENTS: This ubiquitous milk cap superficially resembles L. rubri/acteus. L. rufus. 
L. subviscidus. L. fragi/is. and L. rufulus. but is easily distinguished by the prompt 
yellowing of the latex when exposed to the air. The rate at which it yellows depends on the 
moisture content and age of the mushroom, but it normally occurs in 5-30 seconds. L. 
vinaceorufescens has been confused in the past with L. chrysorheus, widespread and also 
common in our area, which has a somewhat paler (pallid to yellowish-cinnamon to pale 
pinkish), often zoned cap and gills and stalk that do not discolor as much in age. Other 
74 
tACT ARIUS 
75 
species with yellow-staining latex include: L. maculatipes and L. croceus, found under 
hardwoods in eastern North America, the first with a whitish to creamy-yellow, often 
spotted cap and slimy stalk when fresh, the latter with a bright saffron to yellow-orange or 
orange, viscid cap; and L. xanthogalactus of California, probably the same as L. chry- 
sorheus or L. v;naceorufescens. For other yellow-staining species, see L. scrob;culatus. 
Lactar;us uv;dus group (Purple-Staining Milk Cap) 
CAP 3-10 (12) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth, 
viscid to slimy when moist, pallid becoming grayish, lilac-gray, or pale lavender-brown, 
sometimes obscurely zoned; margin naked. Flesh thick, white, staining lilac slowly when 
wounded; taste mild to slowly bitter or acrid. LATEX white or creamy, staining wounded 
areas lilac or dull purple. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, white to yellowish; 
wounded areas staining purplish, then eventually dingy tan. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2 cm 
thick, more or less equal, smooth, viscid when moist but soon dry, rigid, pallid or sometimes 
tinged cap color, often ochraceous-stained toward base. SPORE PRINT yellowish-white; 
spores 8-12 x 7-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. Cap surface staining 
green in KOH (potassium hydroxide). 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods; widely distributed. In our 
area this species and its close relatives (see comments) are fairly common in mixed woods 
in the late fall and winter, but seldom fruit in quantity. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be poisonous. All purple-staining milk caps should be avoided. 
COMMENTS: The tendency of the latex to stain wounded tissue purple typifies this 
species (see photo on p. 897) and its close relatives. A stouter, conifer-loving version, L. 
uv;dus var. montanus, has a darker, somewhat browner, nearly dry cap and resinous taste. 
Other purple-stainers include: L. pallescens, with a slimy or viscid whitish cap and stalk, 
common under conifers in northern California and the Pacific Northwest; L. califor- 
n;ens;s, an acrid-tasting species whose purplish to brownish-gray cap often has yellowish 
tinges or stains; L. cascadens;s, a large northwestern species with dull brownish gills in age, 
favoring swampy areas (under alder, etc.); L. maculatus of eastern North America, 
with a distinctly zoned cap and acrid taste; and L. subpalustr;s, larger, with a grayish to 
dingy brown, often spotted cap that does not stain green in KOH, plus a mild taste. For 
purple-staining species with a yellowish to buff cap, see L. representaneus. 
Lactar;us representaneus (Purple-Staining Bearded Milk Cap) 
CAP (4) 6-20 cm broad, broadly convex with a central depression and inrolled margin, 
becoming broadly depressed or vase-shaped in age; surface viscid when moist, sometimes 
zoned concentrically, pale yellow to golden-yellow to orange-buff, often developing rusty 
and sometimes purple stains; smooth at center but coarsely hairy (fibrillose) toward the 
margin, which is bearded with woolly yellowish hairs when young. Flesh thick, brittle, 
white, staining dull lilac or purplish slowly where cut or bruised; taste slowly bitter oracrid. 
LATEX copious, white 'Or creamy, drying or slowly staining wounded tissue dull purple or 
lilac. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, buff to dull ochre or orange-spotted, with lilac 
or purplish stains where bruised. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3 (4.5) cm thick, equal or thicker 
below, hard, whitish or more often colored like cap, usually prominently scrobiculate, 
sometimes lilac-stained; hollow or stuffed. SPORE PRINT whitish to yellowish; spores 
8-12 x 6.5-9 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or often gregarious on ground under northern conifers- 
especially spruce and fir; widely distributed but not found in our area. I have seen it under 
Engelmann spruce in Colorado and New Mexico in August, and under Sitka spruce in 
northern California in November. It is said to be abundant in Alaska. 
76 
RUSSULACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. The taste is not appealing and it may be poisonous. 
COMMENTS: This often large, impressive milk cap is easily identified by its yellowish 
cap with the hairy margin, and purple-staining latex. It resembles L. scrobiculatus and 
L. alnicola in appearance, but those species have unchanging or yellow-staining latex. 
Other purple-staining species (see L. uvidus) are differently colored and do not have a 
bearded cap. Similar species include: L. speciosus, with a dull buff to tan cap and hairy 
margin, common under hardwoods in eastern North America (especially the South); and 
L. aspideoides, with a viscid, pale yellow cap that is not bearded. Neither should be eaten. 
Lactarius argillaceijolius var. megacarpus (Vulgar Milk Cap) 
CAP 7 -18 (27) cm broad, broadly convex-depressed with an inrolled margin when young, 
plane to depressed in age; surface viscid, drab grayish, violet-gray, or sometimes brownish 
tinted with violet, often fading in age to dingy tan or grayish-buff; sometimes obscurely 
zoned or with rusty-ochraceous spots. Flesh thick, pallid; taste mild or somewhat acrid. 
LATEX creamy-white, unchanging, but slowly staining wounded areas dingy brownish. 
GILLS pallid becoming dingy yellowish or buff, often darker( dingy yellow-brown) in old 
age, slowly staining brownish or grayish where bruised; adnate to slightly decurrent, close. 
ST ALK 6-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick, firm, rigid, slightly viscid or dry; whiteto buff or tinted 
cap color, at times with ochre or yellow-brown stains. SPORE PRINT whitish to buff; 
spores 7-11 )( 6-9 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in humus under hardwoods (live oak, 
tanoak, madrone), fairly common in our area in the late fall and winter. It is known only 
from the Pacific Coast, but variety argillaceifolius(see comments) is widespread. 
EDIBILITY: Possibly poisonous; to be avoided. 
COMMENTS: The robust dimensions, dingy tan to grayish color, and white latex are the 
distinguishing features of this undistinguished mushroom. It is our largest and least 
attractive Lactarius. The taste is rather variable, but generally the latex isat least somewhat 
acrid while the flesh may be mild. The violet tints that sometimes pervade the cap are 
reminiscent of L. uvidus (with which it sometimes grows), but that species stains purple 
instead of dingy brown. L. argillaceiJolius var. argillaceiJolius is smaller and browner than 
var. megacarpus. and has a tendency to become dingy brown or yellow-brown overall in 
age. It is a characteristic summer mushroom in the hardwood forests of eastern North 
America. Other species: L. caespitosus is similar, but has a gray to olive-brown cap and 
grows under western conifers; L. vietus is also similar but favors birch and northern coni- 
Lactarius argi//aceifo/ius var. megacarpus can be told by its relatively large size, dingy color, and 
white latex that slowly stains the gills brownish. For a close-up of the latex, see photo on p. 63. 
,,\I'1\ 
. 
// 
, 
 
---- - 
---- .- 
-=- 
oil 
",..::;: 
" 
'" 
... 
.. 
..... 
'\t 1, 
\ \ \ f I 
.. 
.. 
- 
->,.: 
"'- 
, 
, .."  
..... 
'\ 
-ow. 
..... -.... 
, 
" 
-:.... 
 
" 
jtt, 
" 
.--- 
. 
A_ 
",,1 -" 
Lactarius pseudomucidus, a conifer loving milk cap with a dark cap and stem thatare slimy when wet. 
fers and often has a lilac- or vinaceous-tinged cap;L. cinereus has a gray to olive-gray cap, 
non-staining gills and stalk apex often tinged pale pinkish, and grows with beech; L. cir- 
cellatus favors birch and northern conifers, but has non-staining gills and a brownish-gray 
to bluish-gray or lavender-tinged cap, and zebra-like amyloid stripes on the spores. For 
years L. argillaceifolius has been called L. trivialis, a similar slimy-stalked species whose 
gills discolor scarcely if at all; it occurs in the Pacific Northwest, usually under conifers. 
Lactarius pseudomucidus (Slimy Milk Cap) 
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, 
viscid (with a thick layer of slime when moist), evenly colored blackish-brown to dark gray; 
not zoned; margin naked. Flesh grayish, thin, fragile, taste slowly acrid. LATEX white, 
unchanging, but may stain gills tan to brownish, gray, or olive-gray. GILLS adnate to 
decurrent, white or tinged gray, sometimes discolored (brownish, etc.) in age. STALK 
4-10 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, fragile, smooth, without spots, evenly colored like ca p or paler 
(gray); very slimy when wet, usually thicker below. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7 -9)( 6-7 
microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid ridges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under conifers in late summer and fall; known only 
from northern California and the Pacific Northwest, common. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Only the most ardent slippery jack lover would fail to be 
deterred by the copious layer of slime coating the cap and stem. 
COMMENTS: The dark grayish-brown cap and stalk under a thick layer of slime (when 
fresh) and the white latex are usually enough to distinguish this glutinous woodland 
mushroom. It is slimmer and slimier than either L. argillaceifolius or L. trivia lis, and 
darker besides. It has been called L. mucidus, but that species. which is commoner in 
eastern North America, has a pale cap margin and only slightly viscid stalk. Another 
look-alike, L. glutigriseus, has a slightly viscid stalk that is paler at the apex and base. 
L. kauffmanii. also frequent in the Pacific Northwest and sometimes found with L. 
pseudomucidus, is similar but usually larger and stouter, with a distinctly tan or paler 
(not gray) stalk. Also see the species listed under L. argillaceifolius var. mega carpus. 
Lactariusfallax (Velvety Milk Cap) Color Plate 9 
CAP 2.5-7 (9) cm broad, convex to plane (often with an umbo) when young. often shallow- 
ly depressed in age; surface dry and more or less velvety, often wrinkled toward the center; 
evenly dark brown to nearly black, not zoned; margin often scalloped. Flesh rather thin, 
brittle, whitish, taste mild or slightly acrid. LATEX white, usually copious, slowly stain- 
ing wounded tissue dull reddish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, narrow, crowded, 
white tocreamy-buff(butedgesdark brown in one form). ST ALK2.5-7 cmlong.0.5-1.5 cm 
78 
RUSSULACEAE 
thick, rather slender, more or less equal, colored like cap or somewhat paler; dry and 
unpolished or velvety. SPORE PRINT yellowish; spores 9-12 )( 8-11 microns, more or 
less round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in small groups under conifers (especially fir) or occasionally on 
rotting wood; fairly common in the late summer and fall in the Pacific Northwest and 
northern California. [have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species is one of several milk caps with a brown to nearly black, 
velvety cap. Though not good edibles, they are notable fortheir beauty, and therefore likely 
to attract the attention of even the casual collector. L.fallax is the most common member 
of the group in the West, and is easily distinguished from the similarly colored L. pseudo- 
mucidus. by its dry, velvety rather than smooth, slimy cap and stem. There are several 
closely related species found mainly in eastern North America, including: L. lignyotus, 
with broader, more widely-spaced gills; L. gerardii, with very well-spaced (distant) gills; 
L. fuliginellus, a hardwood-lover with close gills; and L. fumosus, with close gills and 
a paler (smoky-brown) cap. None of these are worth eating. 
Lactarius volemus (Weeping Milk Cap; Bradley) 
CAP 5-10 (13) cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed, or sometimes umbonate; 
surface dry, minutely velvety to nearly smooth, golden-tawny to orange-brown or rusty- 
orange ( or pale yellowish in var. flavus). Flesh thick, firm but brittle, whitish; odor often 
becoming fishy in age; taste mild. LATEX white or creamy, very abundant, slowly staining 
brown or staining wounded tissue brown. GILLS close, white to creamy or sometimes pale 
tan, adnate to slightly decurrent. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.8-1.2 (2) cm thick, equal or 
tapered downward, orange-brown to tawny (colored like cap or slightly paler), dry, 
unpolished, minutely velvety to nearly smooth; not scrobiculate. SPORE PRINT whitish; 
spores 7.5-10 )( 7.5-9 microns, round or nearly round, with amyloid ridges (reticulate). 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground under hardwoods (especially oak) 
or in mixed woods; common in the summer and early fall in eastern North America. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious when properly cooked! Like most milk caps it has a 
slightly granular texture that displeases some people, but the flavor is excellent; slow 
cooking is best. L. corrugis and L. hygrophoroides (see comments below) are equally 
good if not better. All three species are usually free of maggots. 
COMMENTS: This species is one of a trio of tasty milk caps (see below) that rank among 
the best edible mushrooms of eastern North America. To my knowledge they are not found 
in the West, but are to be looked for in southern Arizona, where several so-called "eastern" 
mushrooms occur (e.g., Strobilomycesfloccopus). L. volemus is easily recognized by its 
dry, tawny to orange-brown cap and stalk which are often minutely velvety, its mild taste, 
and extremely copious white milk that slowly stains brown. The latex is so copious that 
the slightest nick of the gills will cause them to "weep," i.e., exude a stream of milky 
droplets. The fishy odor that often develops after it is picked or as it is cooked is also 
distinctive, but in no way reflects or affects its flavor. Also common under hardwoods in 
eastern North America are three similar species with copious white latex, mild taste, and 
minutely velvety cap and/ or stalk: L. hygrophoroides is a beautiful, similarly colored or 
oranger species with well-spaced gills, a mild odor, and latex that does not stain brown; 
L. corrugis (COLOR PLATE 8) is larger and more robust, with a frequently wrinkled, 
dark brown to reddish-brown to rusty-brown cap, whitish to slightly yellowish or 
cinnamon-tinged gills, brown-staining latex, and a (typically) mild odor; L. luteolus has 
a white to buff or yellowish cap, brown-staining latex, and a frequently fishy odor. All 
of the above species are edible. See p. 79 for a photograph of L. volemus. 
 
t. 
\ 
I . I, 
'" 
., 
\ 
v- 
\" 
Left: Lactar;us yo/emus. a delectable species with a dry cap and copious white latex. Note how stature 
is more slender than that of the closely related L. corrug;s (Color Plate 8). Right: Lactar;us sub- 
flammeus has a viscid orange cap and white latex. Note the rather long, slender stem. 
Lactar;us subflammeus (Orange Milk Cap) 
CAP 2-6 (7) cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth, 
viscid, scarlet when young soon fading to bright orange and eventually dull orange; not 
zoned concentrically; margin naked. Flesh thin, fragile; odor mild, taste slowly acrid. 
LA TEX white, unchanging. GILLS adnate to decurrent, fairly close, whitish or colored 
like cap but paler. ST ALK 4-9 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, usually rather long and thicker 
toward the base; hollow, rigid but fragile, colored like cap; not viscid. SPORE PRINT 
whitish; spores 7.5-9 )( 6.5-7.5 microns, elliptical, with amyloid ridges and warts. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious under pine, spruce, and other conifers; found in 
western North America in the late summer and fall and especially common in northern 
California and the Pacific Northwest. I have not seen it south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown; best avoided until better known. 
COMMENTS: The bright orange viscid cap, stalk usually longer than the width of the 
cap, and white unchanging latex typify several similar species that have traditionally 
passed under the name L. aurantiacus. They can be told from the candy cap (L.fragilis) 
by their viscid cap and brighter color, plus their mild odor. L. luculentus is a very similar 
species with a mild to bitterish taste, an orange to tawny cap that is only slightly viscid, 
and gills that may stain brownish; it is also common in northern California and the Pacific 
Northwest. L. cocosiolens, discovered in California by Andrew Methven, has a viscid 
orange-brown to caramel-colored cap, mild taste, and copious white latex, and smells like 
coconut when itdries.L. substriatusis one of several look-a likes with yellow-staining latex. 
Lactar;us rufus (Red Hot Milk Cap) 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface usually not 
viscid; smooth, dark brick-red to bay-red or reddish-brown, not zoned; margin naked. 
Flesh dingy reddish, rather fragile; odor mild, taste strongly-but often latently-acrid. 
LA TEX white, unchanging. GILLS crowded, adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish when 
young, flushed reddish in old age. STALK 4-11 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick, equal, rigid but 
rather fragile, stuffed or hollow, dry, more or less colored like cap. SPORE PRINT pale 
yellowish; spores 7.5-11 )( 5-7.5 microns, elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers; widely distributed. It is 
common in northern California and the Pacific N orthwestfromlate summer through early 
winter, but I have not seen it south of San Francisco. It is also abundant in northern 
sphagnum bogs. Like L. deliciosus, its favorite mycorrhizal mates are pine and spruce. 
80 
RUSSULACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Like several other peppery milk caps, it is harvested 
and canned commercially in Scandinavia. However, North American variants have not 
been thoroughly tested and it may be poisonous raw. 
COMMENTS: This species occurs in droves under northern conifers. It can be told from 
other reddish milk caps by its red-hot taste, unchanging white latex, and fondness for 
conifers. Fresh young specimens are among the most acrid of all mushrooms. When you 
taste one, take only a small bite, and remember: the burning sensation can be delayed! 
Other species: L. manzanitae has a small (2-5 cm), viscid, orangish to coppery-red or 
brick-red cap, strongly acrid taste, and unchanging latex; it occurs under manzanita in 
California. L. hysginus var. americanus has a brown to dark vinaceous-brown, viscid 
cap and viscid stalk; it grows under conifers. For similar species with a milder taste, see 
L. subviscidus. L. subflammeus. and L. rufu/us. 
Lactarius subviscidus 
CAP 14 (5) cm broad, shallowly depressed becoming broadly or more deeply depressed in 
age; surface smooth, viscid to thinly slimy when wet, dark reddish or reddish-brown 
to brick-red or paler(pinkish) inage, not normally zoned; margin sometimes faintly striate. 
Flesh thin, tinged cap color, fragile; odor mild, taste mild to slightly acrid. LATEX white, 
rather scanty, unchanging. GILLS close, adnate to decurrent, pinkish-buff to pinkish- 
cinnamon, or darker in age. STALK 2-5 cm long, 4-8 mm thick, more or less equal, usually 
hollow; smooth, not viscid, colored like cap or gills. SPORE PRINT white to yellowish; 
spores 8-10 )( 7-8 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid ridges. 
HABITAT: Scattered to gregarious on ground or rotten wood under conifers (spruce, 
pine, etc.) in the Pacific Northwest and California. It is fairly common in our area in the 
fall and early winter under pine, Douglas-fir. and manzanita. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This small species looks like a candy ca p (L. fragilis or L. rufu/us), butthe 
thinly viscid cap (often with debris stuck to it), mild odor, and white (rather than watery 
white) latex distinguish it. The latex does not stain yellow as in L. vinaceorufescens. but 
may slowly stain white paper yellow (overnight). The cap is not orange as in L. subflam- 
meus and not as acrid (peppery) as L. manzanitae (see L. rufus). Similar species include: 
L. riparius, common under conifers, alder, and willow in seepage areas in the Sierra 
Nevada, with a brownish-red to brick-red cap that is slightly viscid when moist, mild 
taste, and copious unchanging white or watery-white latex; L. atrobadius, with a viscid 
liver-colored to blackish-red cap and non-yellowing latex; andL. hepaticus, with a viscid 
or dry cap and yellowing latex. For similar species with dry caps, see L. rufu/us. 
Lactarius jragilis 
(Candy Cap) 
Color Plate 10 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly convex or plane or sometimes with an umbo, becoming 
slightly to broadly depressed in age; surface dry (never viscid!), often uneven or somewhat 
wrinkled; usually colored burnt orange to cinnamon but sometimes reddish-brown; 
sometimes darker toward center but not zoned concentrically; margin often wavy or 
frilled. Flesh thin, fragile, tinged cap color; taste mild or slightly bitter; odor faintly fragrant 
or pungent becoming strongly aromatic (like maple syrup) upon drying. LATEX white or 
watery-white, unchanging, often scanty or absent. GILLS adnate becoming decurrent, 
close, pale pinkish-cinnamon or tinged cap color (or sometimes more yellowish), 
darkening to more or less cap color in age, or dusted whitish with spores. ST ALK(2)4-9 cm 
long, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, usually rather slender; fragile, more or less equal, colored like 
b fi_ 
 
--- 
Lactarius jragiJis. These mature specimens are rather regular in shape, but it is not uncommon for 
the caps to have frilled edges. Color ranges from burnt o range ( see color plate) to cinnamon to reddish- 
brown and the stalk is usually hollow in age. Fragrant odor is also distinctive. 
cap; often hollow in age, with hairs at base. SPORE PRINT white to pale yellowish; 
spores 6-9 microns, more or less round, with amyloid warts and ridges (reticulate). Cap 
and stalk tissue containing numerous nests of sphaerocysts. 
HABITAT: Widely scattered to densely gregarious or in small clumps on ground in 
woods (often along trails and in other damp places, sometimes on wood). It is apparently 
confined to the Pacific Coast and Southeast, but the very similar L. camphoratus (see 
comments) occurs elsewhere. In our area it is normally abundant from the late fall through 
early spring, especially under oak but also with other trees (pine, Douglas-fir, etc.). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and one of the very best of our late season mushrooms. Fresh speci- 
mens can be sauteed and used like any other mushroom; when chopped up and slowly 
dried, however, their flavor becomes sweet and they are great in pancakes, cookies, on 
cinnamon toast with sesame seeds, or even in ice cream! Fortunately, they are plentiful 
enough to merit collecting in spite of their small size, but be sure of your identification! 
A few poor souls, alas, are allergic to them. 
COMMENTS: The most remarkable feature of candy caps is the sweet, persistent fra- 
grance they develop when cooked or dried. If just a few candy caps are sauteed, their odor 
will permeate the entire house and linger for days. Stranger still, when eaten in quantity 
they imbue one's perspiration and bodily exudates with the unmistakable aroma of maple 
syrup-thereby provoking some puzzled stares! Their odor has also been likened to that 
of butterscotch, fenugreek, burnt sugar, and sweet clover. Fresh specimens may have 
only a slight odor, in which case the mild taste, watery-white unchanging latex, and overall 
burnt orange or "ferruginous" color separate them from most other mushrooms (but see 
below). In dry weather the latex is often absent, leading to confusion with Laccaria laccata, 
Clitocybe in versa, Rhodocybe nuciolens, Collybia and Cortinarius species, and various 
other similarly colored mushrooms. Fortunately, the odor is usually quite pronounced 
under those conditions. Be sure the latex does not stain yellow- L. vinaceorufescens often 
mingles with it and can be practically the same color. 
The typical variety of L. fragilis occurs in the Southeast and is slightly tawnier. The 
western version, L. fragilis var. rubidus, may actually be a distinct species. F Qr years it has 
passed as L. camphoratus. That species, however, is found in northern coniferous and 
hardwood forests and has a slightly redder, frequently nippled (umbonate) cap and non- 
reticulate spores. Still another candy cap, L. rufulus, occurs in California under oak, 
but tends to be larger, is often redder, usually has a thicker and firmer stem, and contains 
few if any sphaerocysts in its tissue (see description of L. rufulus). For similar species with 
a mild odor, see L. subviscidus and comments under L. rufulus. 
.1' 
. 
-' 
'-. 
'"', ' 
Lactarius rufulus. This west coast native resembles L.fragilis. but differs microscopically and usually 
has a solid, thicker stem (as shown here) and larger cap. Color is variable but usually reddish. 
Lactarius rufulus (Rufous Candy Cap) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly umbonate, becoming wavy or 
depressed; surface often uneven or somew hat wrinkled, not viscid, color variable: usually 
dark red to reddish-brown or brick-colored, but sometimes oranger; evenly colored or 
with darker areas; margin incurved at first. Flesh firm, whitish to buff or tinged cap color, 
brittle; taste mild to faintly acrid, odorfragrant to mild orfaintly pungent. LATEX white 
or watery white, unchanging, often scanty or even absent. GILLS adnate to decurrent, 
fairly close, pallid to cinnamon-buff, pinkish-buff, or tinged cap color( or yellower), often 
darker red or reddish-brown in age, at least On the margins. STALK 4-12 cm long, (0.5) 
0.8-3 cm thick, equal or slightly tapered, colored more or less like cap, firm, usually solid 
or stuffed but sometimes partially hollow in age. SPORE PRINT creamy to yellowish; 
spores 7-9 microns, round or nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges(atleast partially 
reticulate). Nests of sphaerocysts scanty to completely absent in cap and stalk tissue. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or tufted under oak, late fall through spring; 
known only from California. In my experience it is not as common as L.fragilis in regions 
of high rainfall (e.g., coastal central and northern California), but more common than 
L. fragilis in drier areas (e.g., inland and southern California). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and good, but not quite as fragrant or tasty as L.fragilis. 
COMMENTS: This oak-loving candy cap tends to be redder and more robust than L. 
fragilis. and often has a solid stem. The critical difference is microscope, however: the 
absence or near absence of swollen cells (sphaerocysts) in the cap and stem tissue is highly 
unusual for a Lactarius! L. rufu/us can also be confused with L. rufus. but that species has 
an acrid taste and favors conifers, while L. vinaceorufescens has yellowing latex. 
There is a whole slew of very similar, reddish-brown to dull rusty-orange milk caps with 
a mild to somewhat bitter taste and little or no odor. These are difficult to differentiate 
without a microscope, and far too numerous to ennumerate. As a group they have passed 
under the name L. subdulcis, but of course are not the "true" L. subdu/cis of Europe ( if they 
were, we would probably be calling them something else!). These species include: L. sub- 
serijluus, with clear latex and orange-brown cap, the oak-loving eastern counterpart of 
L. rufu/us (it also lacks sphaerocysts in the cap tissue); L. thiersii, also lacking sphaero- 
cysts but much smaller (cap 1-3 cm), known only from California;L. oculatus, with a red- 
brown to pinkish, often nippled, dry to slightly viscid cap, found in eastern Sphagnum bogs 
and under conifers; L. a/pinus var. mitis, One of several species common under alder and 
northern conifers or in seepage areas; L. hepaticus (see comments under L. subviscidus); 
and L. thejogalus, with somewhat yellowing latex, occurring in swarms under birch. 
L. herpeticus should also be mentioned. For similar viscid-capped species, see L. subvisci- 
dus. N one of these species should be eaten until better known. 
83 
RUSSULA (The Russulas) 
Medium-sized to large, mostly terrestrial woodland mushrooms. CAP plane or depressed at 
malurity. viscid or dry, skin often peeling easily, margin often striate. Flesh brittle. usually white; 
taste mild or acrid. Lalex absent. GILLS attached or free, brittle, usually white to yellow. at least 
when young (but may discolor in age). STALK central, rigid. brittle. breaking open cleanly like 
chalk. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT while to yellow. yellow-orange. orochraceous. 
Spores with amyloid warts andj or ridges. Cap tissue (and usually other tissue) containing nests or 
rosettes of sphaerocysts. 
RUSSULA is distinct by virtue of its brittle (dry or granular) flesh, rigid fruiting body, 
white to yellow-orange spore print, and warty amyloid spores. "Brittle," of course, is a 
subjective term, but the crisper Russula species will snap audibly when broken, and in 
both the crisp and fragile types the stalk is fleshy and snaps open cleanly like a piece of 
chalk-i.e., there is no fibrous tissue present as in most fleshy-stemmed mushrooms. 
Lactarius species also snap open like chalk, but usually exude a latex when broken, while 
Leucopaxi/lus is somewhat brittle but has a tough, fibrous stem that does not break like 
chalk and often has white mycelium at the base. In addition to their brittle texture, the 
Russulas have a characteristic appearance that, though difficult to describe, makes them 
one of the easiest groups to recognize. The cap is plane to depressed at maturity and often 
broader than the length of the stem-with exceptions, of course. 
Though Russula as such is a very clearcut group, mastering their identification is almost 
to be despaired of, for Russulas come in a bewildering panoply of reds, purples, pinks, 
yellows, oranges, browns, greens, and whites that is at once their most attractive and 
deceptive feature. The color pigments are unusually sensitive to environmental and genetic 
caprice, so that no two mushrooms look quite alike. Identification is made even more 
difficult by the fact that many species produce only a few fruiting bodies per mycelium- 
making it hard to gauge accurately the degree of color variation. The result is that many 
species are still poorly known or unclassified, while synonyms and homonyms abound. 
Russula-researchers have resorted to examining the spore ornamentation of different 
species with an electron microscope in an effort to establish fixed criteria for each species 
and dispel some of the confusion. 
Russula xerampe/ina is one of the few Russulas worth gathering for the table. Note the shape, which is 
fairly typical of the genus Russula. and note how the stalk fractures like a piece of chalk. 
t' . · 
WI 
- , 
"'" 
, 
 
joo. 
"'- 
\ 
\. :. 
'- 
!' " 
... 
84 
RUSSULACEAE 
The task of getting to know the Russulas is expedited by assigning them to groups. For 
instance, the section Compactae includes several large, hard-stemmed species with 
gills that usually alternate long and short (R. albon;gra and R. densifolia are good 
examples). Another group, centered around R. fragrant;ss;ma and R. soror;a, has a 
yellow-brown to brown, conspicuously striate cap and a strongly fragrant to unpleasant 
odor. A third group, mainly northern in distribution, has flesh which turns grayish when 
exposed (e.g, R. c1aroflava). The remaining Russulas can then be divided into four large, 
artificial groups based on spore color and taste: to wit, spores white and taste mild (e.g., R. 
cyanoxantha), spores white and taste acrid (e.g., R. emet;ca), spores yellow and taste acrid 
(e.g., R. rosacea), and spores yellow and taste mild (e.g., R. xerampelina). 
Russulasare mycorrhizal with a broad range of hardwoods and conifers, and are almost 
always terrestrial. They grow not only in woods, but at the edges of pastures, in brushy 
areas, and on lawns near trees. They are among the most omnipresent mushrooms of our 
western coniferous forests, but are often concealed by leaves and needles and evident only 
as low mounds ("mushrumps") in the humus. 
In eastern North America the Russulas, like the milk caps (Lactar;us), are often 
prominent during muggy weather when other mushrooms are relatively scarce, while in 
the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains their season more closely coincides with that 
of other fungi. In our area Russulas run rampant throughout the mushroom season, 
subject, of course, to the whim of the weather. A metagrobolizing melange of species (R. 
albon;gra. R. xerampelina. R. cyanoxantha. et al) usually erupts after the first fall rains, 
followed by another burst (spearheaded by R. emet;ca) in the winter. 
Russulas are among the most maligned of all mushrooms. Even veteran mushroom 
hunters treat them mercilessly-throwing them over their shoulder or crushing them 
underfoot with disparaging remarks like "Oh, it's aJAR" ("J ust Another Russula"). Their 
omnipresence, anonymity, and poor culinary reputation are partly responsible, I am sure. 
Also, their brittle flesh is irresistible to those who like to smash things. Furthermore, they 
ha ve a habit of forming "mushrumps" in the humus which resemble those made by Boletus 
edulis. Frustrated boletivores can be uncompromisingly brutal (see p. 546), and their 
habitual hunting grounds are inevitably strewn with the broken bodies of Russulas. 
However, mushrooms were not created for the excl usive enj oyment of Homo sapiens, and 
it is wrong to judge them accordingly. Try to resist the sharp temptation to mash, maim, and 
mutilate them. Those who follow in your footsteps will appreciate your sensitivity and 
self-restraint. 
Most of the mild-tasting R ussulas are edible, but this should not be taken as a signal to 
sample them indiscriminately. Always identify what you intend to eat! Those which red- 
den or blacken and/ or have a peppery (acrid) taste should be avoided-at least some cause 
vomiting and diarrhea or worse. Thorough cooking may render them edible, but it hardly 
seems worth the effort or risk. Russulas are not widely revered as esculents, and it is 
true that their dry, granular flesh does not blend well with some dishes. However, R. 
xerampelina and R. cyanoxantha (to name just two of the local species) are marvelous 
delicacies in their own right, and R. v;rescens and R. crustosa of eastern North America are 
also excellent. 
About 200 species of Russula are reported from North America, but the vast majority of 
them are "JAR's"-i.e., depressingly difficult to demystify. Only some of the more 
distinctive types are described here. You will doubtlessly encounter many, many more- 
some of them unclassified. If your "JAR" does not key out convincingly, you can send 
it to a specialist, or better yet, the nearest compost pile. 
RUSSULA 
85 
Key to Russula 
I. Fruiting body medium-sized to very large, hard (especially the stalk); cap white to brown, black, 
or grayish (never brightly colored); gills typically adnate to decurrent and usually alternating 
long and short; cap cuticle (skin) not peeling easily, margin not striate ................ 2 
I. Not with above combination of characteristics .................................... 10 
2. Fruiting body basically white (but often with brown to yellowish stains); flesh and stalk surface 
not staining when bruised or cut ................................................ 3 
2. Flesh and stalk surface changing color when bruised (within 10 minutes) and/ or fruiting body 
not white ................................................................... 4 
3. Cap 5-10 cm broad; taste very acrid; gills and stalk never blue-green ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R. cascadensis(see R. brevipes. p. 87) 
3. Cap 7-20 cm or more broad; taste mild to slightly acrid, or if distinctly acrid then gills and/ or 
stalk apex usually tinged blue-green or green ................. R. brevipes & others, p. 87 
4. Fruiting body turning dark gray to black directly when bruised(within5-1O minutes), without an 
intermediate reddish phase; fruiting body blackening in age ... R. albonigra & others, p. 89 
4. Not as above; if staining black, then with a preliminary reddish phase .................. 5 
5. Flesh and stalk surface distinctly staining reddish to orange when scratched or bruised (within 
5 minutes), then eventually darkening to dark gray, dark brownish-gray, or black ....... 6 
5. Not as above (but may stain reddish withoUl blackening afterward or may stain smoky-brown 
directly) .................................................................... 8 
6. Gills thick and widely spaced ...................... R. nigricans(see R. densifolia. p. 90) 
6. Not as above .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
7. Cap viscid when moist; taste usually acrid .......................... R. densifolia, p. 90 
7. Cap not viscid; taste typically mild .............. _ R. d;ss;mulans(see R. densifolia. p. 90) 
8. Gills usually with sordid reddish stains, often entirely reddish in old age; fruiting body not 
blackening; associated with oak in California and southern U.S. R. subn;gr;cansgroup. p.90 
8. Not as above ........................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9 
9. Flesh typically staining faintly reddish when cut (within 20 minutes), and then eventually pale 
smoky-brown (or at times without reddish phase) R. adusta (see R. subnigricans group, p. 90) 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Fruiting body very firm and stalk hard; cap whitish becoming ochre, rusty-brown, or reddish- 
brown, margin not striate; all parts bruising or discoloring ochraceous to cinnamon-brown; 
odor often unpleasant in age, never sweet; spore print white; common in eastern North 
America ............................. .R. compacta (see R. subnigricans group, p. 90) 
10. Not as above ................................................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. II 
II. Odor heavy and sweet (like maraschino cherries or benzaldehyde), but in age often becoming 
fetid; cap medium-sized to large (5-15 cm broad), yellow-brown to straw-color, dull ochre, or 
yellow-orange ....................................... R.fragrant;ss;ma group. p. 92 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Cap 5-12 cm broad, typically dark red with a nearly blackish center; taste usually acrid but some- 
times mild; spore print whitish; common under hardwoods in eastern North America ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R atropurpurea (= R. krombholz;;) 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Flesh and stalk surface staining gray to ashy or black (sometimes slowly and sometimes with 
an intermediate reddish phase) ................................................ 14 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
14. Cap yellow to ochre .......................................................... 15 
14. Cap orange to red, coppery, purple-red, etc. (sometimes mixed with yellow) ........... 16 
15. Taste mild .................................................... R. ciaroflava, p. 92 
15. Taste acrid ................................... R. ochroleuca(see R. c/aroflava. p.92) 
16. Cap red to orange or coppery-brown; flesh bruising gray directly . R. decolorans group. p.91 
16. Cap purplish, greenish, brownish, etc. (often a mixture of colors); flesh usually turning reddish 
before graying ................ R. occ;dentalis& others (see R. decolorans group, p. 91) 
86 RUSSULACEAE 
17. Cap bright yellow to golden-yellow; mature gills yellowish R. lutea (see R. claroflava. p. 92) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap white or whitish to yellowish-white or pale yellow ............................. 19 
18. Cap some other color (including yellow-brown) when fresh, but may fade to whitish in age 23 
19. Cap cuticle (skin) thick and rubbery ......... R. crassotunicata(see R. cremoricolor. p.97) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Spore print and gills white or whitish ............................................ 21 
20. Spore print and mature gills yellowish ........................................... 22 
21. Cap pale yellow to yellowish-white, viscid when moist, the margin usually striate in age; taste 
acrid; usually scattered to gregarious ................... R. cremoricolor & others, p. 97 
21. Cap dull white or tinged buff or pink at center, often dirty, viscid or dry; taste mild or acrid; 
usually occurring in small numbers ........................... R. albidula group. p.96 
22. Stalk typically staining yellow and then brown when scratched; odor fishy in age .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. sp. (unidentified)(see R. xerampelina. p. 102) 
22. Not as above ............................................ R. maculata group. p. 100 
23. Taste of flesh and/ or gills distinctly acrid (taste them both!) ......................... 24 
23. Taste mild or nearly so ........................................................ 32 
24. Stalk white (but sometimes with stains or discolorations, especially at base) ............ 25 
24. Stalk red or flushed pink to rose ................................................. 31 
25. Cap yellow-brown to dull straw-color, hazel-brown, grayish-brown, or even darker at center; 
margin striate and with small bumps, at least in age; odor usually rather unpleasant; very 
common .................................................. R. sororiagroup. p.93 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Spore print and gills white or whitish ............................................ 27 
26. Spore print yellow to ochre; gills yellowish at least in age .............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . " Various JARs (see R. alutacea group, p. 102 & R. maculata group, p. 100) 
27. Stalk and flesh often slowly staining orange or pink when bruised (sometimes with an inter- 
mediate yellowish phase); cap typically multicolored (usually yellowish at center and splotched 
with yellow, orange, or red toward margin) ................................ R. hicolor 
'27. Not as above ................................................................ 28 
28. Cap red suffused with gray or brown; associated with western conifers and especially common 
in the Rocky Mountains. ... . .., .. ... . ... ......... . ........... ........ R. montana 
28. Not as above (but cap may be bright red) ......................................... 29 
29. Cap bright red when fresh, but often fading to pink, orange, or sometimes even white ...... 
...... . . . ..... . .. . . . ......... ... .......... . ... ...... .... .. R. emeticagroup. p. 97 
29. Not as above; cap variously colored but not bright red .............................. 30 
30. Many gills forked at quite a distance from the stalk; stalk firm, 1-3 cm thick,cap5-15 cm broad 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " .. R. variata(see R. cyanoxantha. p. 94) 
30. Gills not forked, or forked only near stalk; stalk usually less than 1.5 cm thick. often quite fragile; 
cap up to 7 cm broad. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R.fragilis& others, p. 98 
31. Stalk red to pink; cap dark red to bright red (but often fading in age) ..... R. rosacea, p. 99 
31. Cap pink, olive-gray, etc., or a mixture of these colors; stalk usually tinged rose or grayish-rose 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R. gracilis group & others, p. 99 
32. Cap surface dry and soon areolate( cracked into scales or plaques), greenish to blue-gray orwith 
buff, yellowish, or even brownish tones; common under hardwoods in eastern U.S. .... 33 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 34 
33. Cap usually greenish or greenish-gray .............................. R. virescens, p. 95 
33. Cap buff to yellowish or brownish, with green tones sometimes present also ............... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . R. crustosa & others (see R. virescens. p. 95) 
34. Cap predominantly greenish or grayish-green (sometimes mixed with other colors); stalk 
white or whitish (or sometimes brownish-stained. but never pink); odor not fishy in age; spore 
print white to creamy (pale yellow), not ochre or dark yellow ....................... 35 
34. Not with above combination of characteristics; cap may have greenish tones, but typically the 
greenish tones not predominating .............................................. 38 
RUSSULA 
87 
35. 
Spore print white; fruiting body often robust (stalk 1.5-3 cm thick or more); stalk not staining 
salmon in ferrous sulfate .................................... R. cyanoxantha, p. 94 
S pore print pale cream; stalk typically 0.7 -2 (2.5) cm thick, staining salmon in ferrous sulfate 36 
Cap bluish-green to greenish, with a matt (dull) appearance ............................ 
.............................................. R. parazurea (see R. aerug;nea, p. 95) 
Cap greenish to grayish, often with yellowish, rusty, or brownish areas, and viscid when 
moist ...................................................................... 37 
Cap usually greenish; found with aspen, birch, oak, and conifers ....... R. aeruginea, p. 95 
Cap often with other colors; found with oak and beech ... R. grisea (see R. aerug;nea. p. 95) 
Cap small to medium-sized (2-7 cm broad); surface dry, reddish to purple, but overlaid with 
a fine whitish powder or velvety bloom .............................. R. mariae, p. 96 
Not as above; cap lacking whitish bloom ......................................... 39 
Spore print and gills white or whitish ............................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 40 
Spore print yellow to ochre; gills yellowish in age .................................. 42 
Cap typically with purplish, pinkish-lilac, bluish, and/ or yellow tones; fruiting body some- 
times large; gills often slightly greasy to the touch; stalk not staining salmon in ferrous sulfate 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R. cyanoxantha, p. 94 
Cap usually browner, grayer, redder, or more flesh-colored than above; fruiting body usually 
medium-sized; stalk staining salmon in ferrous sulfate ............................. 41 
Predominant color of cap typically flesh-color or reddish; cuticle (skin) often wrinkled; found 
mainly in eastern North America .................. R. vesca(see R. cyanoxamha. p. 94) 
Predominant color of cap typically some shade of brown, olive-brown, gray, or gray-brown; 
widespread ................................ R. brunneola(see R. cyanoxantha. p. 94) 
Stalk typically staining yellow when scratched, then slowly becoming brownish; stalk usually 
rose-colored or at least with a blush of pink, but white in some forms; fruiting body medium- 
sized to very large; odor shrimpy or fishy in old age .............. R. xerampelina, p. 102 
Not as above ........................... _. . .. .. . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 43 
Cap red to pink, orange, or whitish, or a mixture of these colors; associated with hardwoods, 
especially oak; stalk white ................................ R. maculatagroup, p. 100 
Not as above ................................................................ 44 
Cap 2-6 cm broad, markedly fragile, variously colored but usually with at least some purple 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., R. placita group & others, p. 100 
Not as above; larger and/ or not markedly fragile .................................. 45 
Cap large, firm, sometimes massive (up to 35 cm broad!); stalk often tinged pinkish ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. olivacea (see R. alU/acea group, p. 102) 
Not as above; medium-sized to fairly large, but not massive; stalk usually white ........ 46 
Spores and mature gills creamy; found with hardwoods .. R. grisea (see R. aerug;nea. p. 95) 
Spores and mature gills yellow to ochre; found with hardwoods or conifers ............ 47 
Cap medium-sized (3-12 cm broad), burgundy to livid red, purple, or rusty-red, or with a 
brownish center, or with reddish-buff tones; fruiting body quite firm R. integra group, p. 10 I 
Not as above; medium-sized to fairly large (cap 5-20 cm broad) and often fragile in old age 
.......... ...... ...... . . .................. R. alutaceagroup & assorted JARs, p. 102 
35. 
36. 
36. 
37. 
37. 
38. 
38. 
39. 
39. 
40. 
40. 
41. 
41. 
42. 
42. 
43. 
43. 
44. 
44. 
45. 
45. 
46. 
46. 
47. 
47. 
Russula brevipes (Short-Stemmed Russula) 
CAP 7-30 cm broad, broadly convex with a depressed center and inrolled margin, be- 
coming broadly vase-shaped in age; surface dry, unpolished, minutely woolly or felty, 
white or whitish but often dirty and/ or with yellowish to brown stains and discolorations; 
margin not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white, not staining; taste mild or slowly acrid. 
GILLS thin, close or crowded, adnate to decurrent, usually alternating long and short, 
white or creamy (but tinged blue-green in one variety), often brownish-stained in age. 
STALK 2-7 (10) cm long, 2-5 em thick, hard and rigid, often quite short and stout, equal or 
tapering downward, smooth, dry, dull white or brownish-stained, sometimes with blue- 
green tinge at apex. SPORE PRINT white to pale buff; spores 8-11 x 6.5-9 microns, 
elliptical, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
'J 
, . 
u 
...... .- 
 ". 
. "' it -' _ 
.j.'...,. 4 
- · i .#.. ." .r - 
- :;.".-:.... -.  >-'  
... .,.., 
.  . 
""1  : 
. « .... 
". .."...,..,  "1 . , 
.: . ,\. .).! . 
':.". - . .. 
,. ...,. .. ....... 
At 
'.. 
.. 
. . 
"Better kicked than picked," Russula brev;pes is one of the most common and mundane of all the 
Russulas. Note the centrally depressed or vaselike white cap. The stem can be slightly longer-or 
considerably shorter-than shown here and the cap is often incrusted with dirt. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or more often scattered or in groups or troops on ground in woods 
of all kinds; widely distributed and often abundant. It hugs the ground closely and may be 
visible only as a low mound or "mushrump" in the humus. In our area the major crop is 
typically in November or December, but it can be found most any time. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but better kicked than picked. In my experience it is insipid and 
granular, but some people are apparently fond of it. One authority recommends stewing 
it slowly in soups; another says to "throw it in with the sauerkraut." The flavor and texture 
are substantially improved when it is parasitized by Hypomyces lactif/uorum(see p. 884). 
COMMENTS: "So large, so mediocre" and "Better kicked than picked" typify the 
comments this tedious, vulgar, mundane mushroom received when overwhelmingly voted 
the "Most Boring Mushroom" of the 8th Annual Santa Cruz Fungus Fair. (Second place 
went to "the one behind the desk answering questions.") Actually, it is a rather attractive 
mushroom when first encountered, the pristine cleanness (clean pristineness?) ofthegills 
contrasting prettily with the dirty hunks of humus hoisted aloft by the concave cap. How- 
ever, as the above comments attest, one quickly tires of finding it-not only because of its 
ubiquitousness (it is by far the most common of the larger Russulas), but also due to its 
annoying habit of forming deceptively promising "mushrumps" in the humus (thwarted 
boletivores are not known for their ability to perceive beauty). 
R. brevi pes is easily recognized by its dull white color, centrally depressed cap with an 
inrolled margin when young, hard stem, and crisp flesh that does not blacken or redden 
when bruised. It has the general aspect of a large Lactarius (e.g., L. piperatus), but lacks a 
latex, though the gills when young may be beaded with water droplets. Var. acr;or is the 
form with an acrid taste and blue-green tints in the gills and stalk apex. Other species:R. 
romagnes;ana is a rare but very similar eastern species with smaller spores;R. cascadens;s 
also has smaller spores, but has an intensely acrid taste and smaller cap (4-12 cm broad) 
and occurs under conifers in the Pacific Northwest. R. de/;ca is also close to R. brevi pes, 
but is said to have thick, well-spaced gills. It was originally described from Europe and is 
apparently rare in North America. 
J' 
, 
.. 
\ 
"""-- 
-.. 
." 
"1 
" 
Russula albonigra is a hard, robust species that is decidedly schizophrenic: white inyouth, black in age 
(note the young whitish cap at the bottom). It also blackens when bruised. 
Russula albonigra (Blackening Russula; Integrated Russula) 
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, broadly convex or centrally depressed becoming broadly 
depressed in age; surface dry to slightly viscid, sometimes polished; smooth, at first white, 
soon becoming grayish or blackish-brown and finally entirely black; margin not striate. 
Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white, bruising gray and then black; taste mild or slightly acrid. 
GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close to rather well-spaced, thick, brittle, usually 
alternating long and short; creamy-white staining gray or black, often entirely black in old 
age. STALK 3-13 cm long, 2-5 cm thick, very hard, stout, solid, rigid, smooth, equal or 
tapered downward, white becoming grayish or brownish-gray in age or where wounded, 
then black. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 5.5-7.5 microns, broadly elliptical to 
nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups or troops under both hardwoods and conifers; wide- 
ly distributed. It is sporadically common in our oak-madrone woodlands but appears to 
be more abundant than it actually is because the fruiting bodies do not decay readily. 
In the Pacific Northwest it favors conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Better punted than hunted. Although said to be edible if thoroughly cooked, 
it is hardly tempting and a closely related Oriental species is poisonous. 
COMMENTS: This sometimes massive Russula is easily identified by its hard cap and 
stem and the blackening of all parts in age or when handled. It is decidedly schizophrenic 
in appearance-young specimens are reminiscent of R. brevipes and Hygrophorus 
sordidus in their whiteness, while elderly individuals are completely jet-black (hence the 
epithet albonigra, meaning "white-black"). Most dramatic, however, are those specimens 
in transition, i.e., with a black cap, black stem, and white gills (the gills generally take longer 
to blacken than the cap and stem). R. so,dida is a passe synonym. R. at,ataisa very similar 
west coast species that also blackens, but has a much thicker cap cuticle. Several allied 
species stain reddish before turning black (see R. densifolia), and R. adusta(seecomments 
under the R. subnigricans group) darkens less dramatically. 
90 
RUSSULACEAE 
Russula densifolia (Reddening Russula) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed; surface viscid when moist, soon 
dry and often polished; smooth, whitish to pale buff becoming grayish or brownish or 
eventually blackish in old age; margin not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, white, slowly bruising 
reddish or orange-red, then eventually grayish-brown to black; taste usually acrid. GILLS 
adnate to slightly decurrent, close, brittle, whitish, developing sordid reddish to smoky 
stains in age, usually alternating long and short. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, hard, 
rigid, smooth, equal; whitish when fresh but staining like the flesh (reddish or orangish, 
then smoky-brown to black). SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 )( 6-8 microns, broadly 
elliptical with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods; widely distributed. It is fairly 
common locally, along with R. dissimulans (see comments), but is not nearly as numerous 
as R. albonigra, R. brevi pes, or R. subnigricans. The majorcrop is in the fall or early winter. 
EDIBILITY: Better dribbled than nibbled. The sharp taste is said to disappear in cooking, 
but the end product is insipid at best and indigestible or even poisonous at worst. 
COMMENTS: The slow staining of wounded tissue to reddish and then grayish-brown, 
sooty-gray, or black is the calling card of this coarse Russula and its close relatives (see 
below). The staining is a tactful compromise between R. albonigra, which blackens 
directly, and the R. subnigricans group, which stains reddish but not black. The full 
staining sequence may take half an hour and is best seen by scratching the stalk. Other 
coarse, closely related Russulas with the same staining reactions include:R. dissimulans, 
common and widely distributed, with a dry (not viscid) cap, mild taste, and slightly larger 
spores; and R. nigricans, fairly common (at least on the west coast), with very thick, well- 
spaced gills and smaller spores. Both of these species are "better beaten than eaten." 
Russula subnigricans group (Rank Russula) 
CAP (5) 9-20 (30) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed; surface slightly viscid 
when moist, smooth, whitish when young, soon becoming pale smoky-brown or dingy 
reddish-brown or dull ochraceous-stained, or often a sordid mixture of these shades; 
margin at first inrolled, not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, white, typically bruising slowly 
reddish (in 5-20 minutes), then usually browner or grayer within an hour, but sometimes 
staining grayish-brown directly (especially in stalk), or not at all; odor strong and 
unpleasant, at least in age or upon drying; taste mild to slightly bitter. GILLS thick, brittle, 
adnate to slightly decurrent, usually alternating long and short; pallid, soon stained dark or 
sordid reddish; close to fairly well-spaced. ST ALK(3) 7-13 cm long, (1.5) 3-7 cm thick, very 
hard, rigid, solid; equal orwith tapered base, smooth, white, staining sordid reddish andf or 
smoky-brown in age or when handled. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-10 microns, nearly 
round with low amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under live oak; common in our area from late 
summer through early winter and also reported from Mississippi. In our area it is a good 
chanterelle-indicator (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Better trampled than sampled. The rank odor is hardly enticing and the 
Japanese version is extremely poisonous according to mycologist Tsuguo Hongo.* 
COMMENTS: This vulgar giant of the genus is very close both macro- and micro- 
scopically to R. subnigricans, a species originally described from Japan. (Our version, 
upon which the above description is based, seems to differ only in its slightly larger size, 
closer gills, and rank odor at maturity.) The principal field marks are its hard stem, brittle 
· Hongo. coincidentally, is the Spanish word for "mushroom." 
'\ 
 "'\\\llll f ' 
. ,  \\, d . 
\\\I  
"" , 
,..... ..... .. 
" 
I 
'.. 
,. 
. '< 
"" 
'\ 
\-. 
::: 
,-.III  
 
... 
 
/' 
'- 
/ 
...... 
J" .of 
. 
... 
--..:;:. 
w" 
,... 
, . 
.... . 
:,'* . 
-f. .) . 
". 
,. 
t 
.. 
.. 
"'. 
... 
.' -ti. 
 
... ',; 
.. 
,,( 
.. 
'* 
c. 
Russula subn;gr;cans group. This large rank Russula develops dingy reddish stains on the gills, 
but never blackens. It seems to grow only with oak-usually in the company of chanterelles. 
texture, large size, coarse appearance, and reddening of the gills in age or where wounded. 
The staining reactions elsewhere on the fruiting body are rather variable, but at no point 
does it blacken as in R. albon;gra. R. densifolia, R. d;ss;mulans, or R. n;gr;cans. The cap 
color is rather amorphous-generally an un becoming blend of murky gray, smoky-brown, 
and sordid reddish or ochraceous-but in one-collection I made the fruiting body had 
bluish-green tinges as in R. brev;pes var. acr;or. Another interesting feature is its affinity for 
chanterelles, one or more of which will often grow right out ofthe base of its stem-or if not, 
then in the immediate vicinty! Other species: R. adusta is a somewhat similar, widespread 
species which has rather erratic staining reactions (the flesh normally bruises smoky- 
brown or grayish-black, but may show a slight reddish intermediate phase); its gills, 
however, do not redden in age. R. compacta of northern and eastern North America is 
also somewhat similar, but stains ochre or brown and has a pallid to rusty- or reddish- 
brown to ochre-brown cap. Both of these are "better stomped than chomped." 
Russula decolorans group (Graying Russula) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, nearly round becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed; sur- 
face smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: dull red to orange, red mixed with yellow, 
coppery-brown, or at times with cinnamon or tawny tones; margin striate in old age. Flesh 
thick, firm, white, becoming gray, ashy, or black when bruised or exposed (sometimes 
slowly); odor and taste mild. GILLS typically adnate to adnexed, fairly close, creamy 
becoming pale ochre or yellowish, sometimes grayish-stained in old age. ST ALK4-12 cm 
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or often thicker below. very firm when young(but often softer in 
age), white, staining and aging grayish. SPORE PRINT yellowish to pale ochre; spores 
9-14)( 7-10 (12) microns, elliptical, with isolated amyloid warts. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in mixed woods and 
under conifers, associated principally with pine; widely distributed. 
EDIBILITY: Better smashed than stashed-it is said to be edible, but there are several 
look-alikes of unknown edibility. 
91 
92 
RUSSULACEAE 
COMMENTS: The graying flesh, reddish to orange cap, and mild taste are the fallible 
field marks of this firm, rather robust Russula, which is actually a close-knit" complex" of 
species. One striking form found in our coastal pine forests is very firm and hasa somewhat 
shiny cap in dry weather. Other species: R. paludosa has a reddish cap and flesh that grays 
somewhat, but the taste is usually slightly bitter or acrid. R. obscura has a darker (purple- 
red to brownish) cap, mild taste, and flesh that stains pinkish orreddish before blackening. 
Both of the above species are quite firm and robust, have ochre spores, and grow with 
conifers. Another distinctive species, R. occidental is, has a grayish to olive-brown to buff, 
brownish, or vinaceous cap (usually a mixture of these colors) and mild taste. Its stalk 
and flesh are white but usually stain reddish and then gray (or gray directly) when bruised. 
It is fairly common under mountain conifers in the Pacific Northwest. 
Russula claroflava (Yellow Russula) 
CAP (3) 4-12 cm broad, nearly round becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed; 
surface slightly viscid, soon dry, yellow to golden-yellow, smooth; margin slightly striate in 
age. Flesh white, slowly staining grayish when rubbed; odor and taste mild. GILLS adnate 
to adnexed or free, close, creamy becoming pale ochre; sometimes grayish-stained in age. 
ST ALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, more or less equal, white to pale yellow, dry, smooth, 
aging or slowly bruising grayish. SPORE PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 8.5-10 )( 7.5-8 
microns, broadly elliptical with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in small groups in woods; mainly northern or montane in distri- 
bution and partial to birch, aspen, and various conifers. I have found it in New Mexico 
under aspen, but not in California. I t fruits mainly in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. 
COMMENTS: The pretty yellow cap and tendency to stain or age ashy-gray rescue this 
species from "JAR" status. R. flava is a synonym. R. ochroleuca is a similar species with 
a yellow-ochre cap, acrid taste, and flesh that grays quickly. Another yellow-capped spe- 
cies, R. lutea, is rather fragile, has a mild taste, ochre gills, and does not stain gray. All of 
these are fairly common in northern North America under conifers, birch, and aspen. 
Russula fragrantissima group Color Plate 11 
(Fragrant Russula; Fetid Russula) 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, nearly round becoming convex, then plane or somewhat 
depressed; surface viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, yellowish to yellow-brown to bright 
ochre, stra w-colored, orange-brown, or brown, often darker (or reddish-spotted) at the 
center; margin usually radially furrowed with small bumps (tuberculate-striate), at least in 
old age. Flesh thick, white or tinted cap color; odor heavy and penetrating-at first sweet 
(like maraschino cherries, almond extract, or benzaldehyde), but in age with a nauseating 
(fetid) component; taste nauseating; taste of gills acrid. GILLS creamy-white becoming 
yellowish or pale ochre, brownish-spotted in age, often beaded with water droplets when 
fresh; adnate to adnexed or free, fairly close. STALK 3-20 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, equal or 
somewhat tapered below, whitish to buff becoming yellowish or brownish-stained in age, 
especially near base; smooth or longitudinally lined, dry. SPORE PRINT pale ora-nge- 
yellow; spores 6-9 )( 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round with amyloid warts and 
at least partially reticulate. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and 
conifers, widely distributed. In our area it fruits mainly in the fall under oak, tanoak, and 
madrone; it can be found every year but is not nearly as numerous as the R. sororia group. 
RUSSULA 
93 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible and possibly poisonous-in other words, it is better 
punched than munched. The disgusting taste and strong odor should discourage most 
people from sampling it. 
COMMENTS: Anyone under the mistaken impression that all mushrooms smell alike 
should get a whiff of this robust, odoriferous Russula. The penetrating odor is reminiscent 
of maraschino cherries, but with a fetid component that becomes more and more pro- 
nounced as the mushroom matures. The cap is often merely flat at maturity, rather than 
depressed as in most of the larger R ussulas, and the stalk is often long in relation to the ca p. 
The yellow-brown to ochre cap, fairly large size, and water droplets on the gills (when 
moist) are also distinctive. Other species in the "complex" include:: R. lauroceras; 
(possibly the one in the color plate), a slightly yellower, cleaner, slimmer, larger-spored 
version of R.Jragrantissimawhose odoris strongly fragrant through maturity, albeit witha 
subtle fetid component; it is also widely distributed and the two appearto intergrade. Both 
have passed under the name R.joetens, a European species with a nauseating odor even in 
youth and non-reticulate spores. Its North American counterpart, R. subjoetens (=R. 
joetentula?) is smaller, has a bright rusty-orange to rusty-yellow to brownish cap, and 
does not smell as strong. Finally, there is R. ventricosipes, which grows in sand under 
northern conifers and has a large, conspicuously swollen (ventricose) stalk. 
Russula soror;a group (Comb Russula) 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface viscid when 
moist, smooth, dark grayish-brown to hazel-brown when young (rarely whitish), usually 
paler (yellow-brown to straw-colored or pale grayish-brown) toward margin or in age; 
margin usually furrowed with low bumps (tuberculate-striate) in age. Flesh brittle, firm, 
white, not bruising; odor unpleasant (rancid or "spermatic"); taste mild or slightly acrid; 
taste of gills slowly but distinctly acrid. GILLS white or creamy, but often brownish- or 
rusty-stained in age; close, adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, 
equal or tapered downward, whitish, but often rusty-stained near base; often with large 
cavities (usually 3) within. SPORE PRINT creamy to pale yellow; spores 6-9 )( 5-7 
microns, broadly elliptical with amyloid warts. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in woods or at their edges, on lawns under 
trees, etc; common and widely distributed. In. our area it is often abundant in the fall and 
winter, especially under pine, oak, and Douglas-fir. 
Russula soror;a is abundant under both hardwoods and conifers. The yellow-brown to grayish- 
brown cap has a striate margin in age. 
  
.,. 
 
94 
RUSSULACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Better stomped than chomped-it might be poisonous and doesn't taste 
good anyway. 
COMMENTS: The brown to grayish-brown to dingy straw-colored cap, tuberculate- 
striate margin in age, peppery-tasting gills, unpleasant odor, and moderate size typify a 
group of R ussulas that are at times exceedingly abundant. They differ from the R.Jragran- 
tissima group in their smaller size, gra yer color, and different odor. They ha ve passed under 
the names R. pectinata, a European species with a yellower cap, and R. pectinatoides, 
a North American species that is also yellower than R. sororia. and has a less acrid taste 
and darker (yellower) spores. Other species: R. amoenolens is the same as R. sororia 
(as defined here); R. cerolens is practically the same but has partially reticulate spores; 
R. granulata and R. pulverulenta have scurfy-granulose caps. 
Russula cyanoxantha 
(Variegated Russula) 
Color Plate 12 
CAP 5-18 cm or more broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface viscid when 
moist but soon dry, smooth, color variable, sometimes entirely but more often a mixture of: 
pinkish-lilac, dull purple, green, olive, yellow, blue-green, white, and/ or brown; margin 
sometimes obscurely striate. Flesh thick, firm, white, crisp; odor mild or pleasant, taste 
mild. GILLS adnexed to adnate or slightly decurrent, many of them forked at least once; 
white or with a few brownish stains, slightly greasy to the touch. ST ALK 5-13 cm long, 1.5-5 
cm thick, solid or stuffed, rather hard; more or less equal, smooth, white, but the flesh in 
base sometimes grayish. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 )( 6-8 microns, broadly 
elliptical to nearly round with isolated amyloid warts. Stalk not staining salmon in ferrous 
sulfate. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops under hardwoods or sometimes 
conifers; widely distributed. It is often abundant shortly after the first fall rains in our 
live oak-tanoak-madrone forests, but fruits on into the winter. Like many Russulas, it 
is often concealed by fallen leaves. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice; it is delectably sweet when young and rated highly in 
Europe. The hard, crisp buttons are hard to beat in omelets or with scalloped potatoes, but 
alas, they are also considered "edible and choice" by maggots! 
COMMENTS: This variable species is more difficult to characterize than it is to recognize 
(see photo on p. 897). The telltale traits are its fairly large size, white gills and spores, firm 
white stalk, mild taste, and variegated cap (typically a mixture of pinkish-lilac, dull purple, 
green, yellow or even blue). In our form young specimens-especially those still covered 
by leaves-are often uniformly colored a beautiful pinkish-lilac-mauve. When exposed 
to light they gradually become spotted with yellow, green, etc., and in old age are often a 
washed-out whitish color at the center, with slight greenish or lilac tones showing on the 
margin. Another distinctive feature is its soft, somewhat greasy gills: they are not as brittle 
as those of most Russulas. R. parazurea (see comments under R. aeruginea) is easily 
mistaken harmlessly for greenish forms of R. cyanoxantha. but is usually slightly smaller, 
not so variegated, and has reticulate or partially reticulate spores. R. variata (=R. cyano- 
xantha var. vadata), common in northern and eastern North America, differs in its more 
promiscuously forked gills, often acrid taste, and somewhat different cap color-tending 
more toward brownish-olive, greenish, dull purplish, or vinaceous-brown. Two other 
species, R. vesca and R. brunneola, also have a mild taste and whitish spores, but their 
stalks stain salmon or deep salmon in ferrous sulfate. The cap cuticle in R. vesca tends 
to be slightly redder or more flesh-colored (and is often wrinkled and/ or recedes from 
the margin in age), while that of R. brunneola tends to have a brownish to yellowish- 
brown to olive-brown or grayish-olive cast. Both are widely distributed and easily 
RUSSULA 
95 
confused with each other (as well as with R. cyanoxanrha) when not "typically" colored. 
Both are edible, however, so it hardly matters. For similar species with creamy or yellow- 
tinged spores, see R. parazurea and R. grisea (under R. aeruginea). 
Russula aerug;nea (Green Russula) 
CAP 3-9 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface viscid when 
moist, dull greeen to dark green, sometimes with brown, gray, or yellowish tints or blotches; 
margin often striate. Flesh white, brittle; taste mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, 
close, brittle, white becoming pale yellowish, often with brownish stains. STALK 4-8 cm 
long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or with tapered base, white or faintly yellow, base often with pale 
brown stains. SPORE PRINT creamy to pale yellow or pale orange-yellow; spores 6-9 )( 
5-7 microns, nearly round with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods; widely distributed. In California 
I have found it only a few times, but it is sometimes abundant under aspen in the Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest, and under oak in the South. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. I have fried it. 
COMMENTS: This moderate-sized Russu/a can be told by its smooth green cap, pallid 
or brownish-spotted gills, and pale yellow spore print. There is no red or purple in the cap 
as in some of the larger, yellow-spored Russulas (e.g., R. o/ivacea and R. xerampe/ina). 
There are several similar species, including: R. parazurea, a bea utiful green-ca pped species 
with a matt appearance, firm white stem, and white spores, found under oak and tanoak 
in our area; and R. grisea, fairly common in our area under oak, with a slightly duller 
or grayer cap (green mixed with brown, gray, etc., or sometimes purplish or lilac) and 
yellowish spores. Also see R. cyanoxanrha and the species listed under it. 
Russula v;rescens (Quilted Green Russula) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, nearly round at first becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed; 
surface dry and sometimes slightly velvety, markedly areolate at maturity (i.e., cracked 
into small flattened scales or patches); dull green to greenish-gray or sometimes dull 
bluish-green, at times with ochre, buff, or creamy discolorations; margin not striate or 
only very slightly so, often lobed. Flesh thick, white, brittle; odor and taste mild. GILLS 
white or creamy, fairly close, adnate to adnexed orevenfree. ST ALK 3-9 cm long, 1-3 (4) 
cm thick, more or less equal, dry, firm, brittle, white, more or less smooth. SPORE 
PRINT white or with a faint yellow tinge; spores 6-9 (10»( 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly 
round, with amyloid warts and/ or ridges. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in groups under hardwoods, especially oak 
and beech; common (along with R. cruslOsa-see comments) during the summer months 
in eastern North America. It has also been recorded from Montana under birch and is to 
be expected in southern Arizona and New Mexico, where several "eastern" species occur. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-along with R. cyanoxanlha and R. xerampe/ina, among 
the best of the Russulas for the table. 
COMMENTS: One of the most distinctive of all the Russulas, this species is easily told by 
its greenish to greenish-gray, areolate (cracked or quilted) cap, white spores, and asso- 
ciation with hardwoods. It is one of the characteristic summertime mushrooms of eastern 
hardwood forests, where it sometimes fruits with the equally edible Laclarius vo/emus 
and/ or L. corrugis. Other species: R. crustosa is a closely related edible species 
with an areolate cap that is slightly viscid when wet and more variable in color (usually 
browner or more ochre-buff, but sometimes with a greenish tinge); R. macu/osa of the 
Southeast resembles R. cruslosa, but has a paler cap and disagreeable odor in age. 
96 
RUSSULACEAE 
Russula mariae (Powdered Russula) 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, purple to 
reddish-purple, amethyst. dark crimson. or maroon (sometimes toned with gray or olive). 
finely powdered or velvety from a whitish bloom; margin sometimes striate when old. 
Flesh thin, brittle, white; taste mild or slightly acrid. GILLS close, white becoming creamy 
or pale yellowish, typically adnate to adnexed. STALK 2.5-7.5 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, 
equal or tapering downward, firm, rigid, white ortinged reddish to purple. SPORE PRINT 
creamy-yellow; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid warts 
and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on ground in woods; rather rare in California, where I 
have found it in the fall under oak and Douglas-fir, but acommon mid-summer mushroom 
in the hardwood forests of eastern North America. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but hardly incredible. 
COMMENTS: This exq uisite, rather dainty Russula is one of the more easily recognized 
species in the genus. The dry, velvety or finely powdered reddish to purple cap, creamy 
spore print, and mild taste distinguish it. The "splitters" recognize two species, the purple- 
capped forms being called R. alachuana. The name R. mariae should not be confused 
with R. mairei, a member of the R. emetica group. 
Russula albidulagroup (Boring White Russula) 
CAP 3-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth, 
slightly viscid when moist, then dry; white or tinged buff at center; margin not striate or 
very obscurely so. Flesh fragile, white; taste acrid. GILLS adnate to'adnexed or free. brit- 
tle, close, white or creamy. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, 
dry, smooth, rigid, white; often spongy or hollow in age. SPORE PRINT white or creamy- 
white; spores 7-10 microns, nearly round with amyloid ridges. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in woods or at their edges, widely distributed. It is 
fairly common in our area from late summer through the spring, usually with oak but never 
in large numbers (like lips and scissors. it tends to occur in pairs). It is partial to poor 
soil along trails or roadcuts. 
EDIBILITY: Better whacked than sacked-the acrid taste is a deterrent. 
COMMENTS: This plain, unprepossessing, profoundly forgettable Russula can be 
recognized by its white color, modest size, and acrid taste. It is smaller and more fragile 
than R. brevi pes and does not have a strongly inrolled cap margin when young. There are 
several very similar, confusing, widespread, wishy-washy Russulas. They include R. al- 
bella and R. albida, with a mild to slightly bitter taste, and R. anomalaandR. subalbidula, 
with an acrid taste, but distinguishing between them is a matter for the specialist. For a 
comparison of the R. albidula group to R. cremoricolor, see comments under the latter. 
Russula albidula group. A dingy and often dirty whitish "J AR" of moderate size. R. cremoricolor 
(illustrated on next page) is usually much cleaner. 
r 
.;-, 
,.. .-. ...... 
I 
'\ 
; 
...'" ..;. 
", 
...... ", 
... '" 
 
\ 
" 
If 
. 
. 
. . 
.. 
."" . . 
.: 
Russula cremoTlcolor resembles R. emet;ca except for its cap color, which is yellowish-white. 
Russula cremoricolor (Creamy Russula) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane to centrally or broadly depressed; surface viscid 
when moist, smooth, white to pallid to very pale yellowish-white, the center often slightly 
darker (yellowish or buff); margin usually striate in age (but sometimes obscurely). Flesh 
brittle, white; odor mild or slightly fragrant; taste distinctly acrid. GILLS white, adnate 
to adnexed or ocasionally free, fairly close. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.7-2.5 (3) cm thick, 
equal or slightly thicker below, dry, white or whitish, usually longitudinally lined or striate. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 7.5-10 )( 7.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical, with 
amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or troops in woods; widely distributed. 
In our area it is often abundant in the late fall and winter in the same habitatsasR. emet;ca. 
In the Pacific Northwest it favors conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Better obliterated than refrigerated-the acrid taste is a deterrent. 
COMMENTS: This species looks like an albno R. emet;ca. and save for the whitish cap, 
there is little difference. The cap, although whitish, is slightly yellower than that of R. 
alb;dula, and is usually cleaner and more markedly striate. Also, R. cremor;color tends to 
fruit in larger numbers. Other species: R. crenulata and R. raoult;; are two very similar 
species that are yellower (cap more or less pale yellow); the latter also has smaller spores. 
Another pale capped, bitter- or acrid-tasting species, R. crassotun;cata, can be distin- 
guished by its thick, rubbery or leathery cap cuticle that is often slightly scurfy and its 
white stalk that frequently develops brownish spots in age. It occurs under northern 
conifers. "Eating raoultii'" (or any of the other species discussed here) is not recommended. 
Russula emetica group (Emetic Russula; The Sickener) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, rounded-convex becoming plane or broadly depressed; surface viscid 
when moist, smooth, bright red to scarlet, the center often darker; fading in age or wet 
weather to pink, orange, or blotched with white; margin eventually striate (but some- 
times obscurely). Flesh white (but pink under the cuticle), brittle, odor mild, taste very 
acrid. GILLS white orcreamy-white, brittle, close, adnate toadnexed or free. ST ALK3-1 0 
cm long, 0.7-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, dry, white or whitish, usually with 
longitudinal lines. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 6.5-9 microns, elliptical with 
amyloid warts and ridges. 
, 
... 
.. 
. 
. 
Russula emetica group. The bright red cap (that often fades), white gills, white stem, and peppery 
taste make this an easy mushroom to identify. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops in woods, widely distributed and 
common. Our member of the R. emetica group fruits late in the season( winter) in chaparral 
and mixed woods (oak, madrone, manzanita, and pine), often intermingled with R. 
cremoricolor and Lactarius vinaceorufescens. It also grows on very rotten wood- 
unorthodox behavior for a Russula. 
ED IBILITY: Pleasing to the eyes of all, to the tongues of some, but to the stomachs of none. 
As its name implies, it is poisonous, at least raw, and can be used to induce vomiting. 
Parboiling may destroy the toxins, but it hardly seems worth the trouble or risk. It is 
collected by Himalayan villagers, presumably for use in curries (consult your local travel 
agent for details). 
COMMENTS: This attractive mushroom is easily recognized by its red cap, white stem 
and gills, and red-hot taste. As in many Russulas, the skin peels rather easily from the cap. 
For years the name R. emetica has been applied toaconfusinggroup of Russulas with the 
above features. I see no compelling reason to discontinue this trend, though the present 
consensus seems to be that the "real" R. emeticaoccurs principally with conifers and favors 
sphagnum bogs. Other species in the group include: R. s;/v;co/a, an eastern species with a 
red to pinkish-yellow cap and slightly smaller spores, common with both hardwoods and 
conifers; and R. ma;re;, colored like R. emetica but associated with hardwoods and with a 
firmer texture and smaller spores, 6-8.5 )( 5-7 microns (it may well be our local species). 
Russula fragilis 
(Fragile Russula) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, viscid when 
moist, color variable: purplish to pinkish, olive-brown, greenish, or even yellow, or a 
mixture of these colors, but most often blackish at the center and pinkish or pinkish-yellow 
at the margin, with a grayish-olive zone in between; margin striate in age. Flesh thin, very 
fragile, white; odor variable; taste acrid. GILLS adnate to adnexed Or even free, fairly close, 
white or creamy-w hite. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at 
either end, dry, whitish; fragile. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 6-9 )( 5-8 microns, broadly 
elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods of all kinds, but especially under 
conifers; widespread. I have not seen it in our area, but several similar species occur. 
RUSSULA 
99 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended-the acrid taste is a deterrent. 
COMMENTS: This species is apt to befuddle the color-conscious beginner with its 
numerous color guises, but is rather distinctive when "typical," i.e., dark at the center, 
pinkish toward the margin and grayish-olive between. The other critical features are the 
fragile texture, peppery taste, white gills, and white spores. Other species: R. aquosa is a 
closely related but slightly larger species; its cap is viscid with a greasy feel and shiny 
appearance when wet, and is usually reddish to orange-red or pink with grayish, brownish, 
or yellow tints. 
Russula gracilis group 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed, sometimes retaining a 
slight umbo; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: usually some shade of 
pink, but often with a dull greenish or grayish-olive to brownish-black center and pale 
pinkish margin, and sometimes a rather deep pink or violet-tinged; margin usually striate 
in old age. Flesh fragile, white; taste acrid. GILLS typically adnate to slightly decurrent, 
whitish becoming creamy and finally tinged yellow, close. STALK 3.5-8 cm long,0.5-1.5 
cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, usually quite soft and fragile, whitish, but usually 
tinged or flushed pink to grayish-rose. SPORE PRINT creamy to pale ochre; spores 7 -9 x 
5-7 microns. elliptical. with isolated amyloid warts. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; it is said to grow only 
with birch, but a very similar if not identical species is abundant in our area with Douglas- 
fir in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible due to the acrid taste. 
COMMENTS: Also known asR. graci/lima, this species can be told by its fragile pinkish- 
tinged stalk, yellowish spores, acrid (peppery) taste, and pinkish or pink-and-greenish cap. 
R. fragilis is quite similar in cap color but has whitish spores and a white stalk, while the 
R. placita group, which also occurs commonly with Douglas-fir in our area, has a mild 
taste, white stem, and darker cap. Other species: R. pe/argonia also has a pinkish-tinged 
stalk and acrid taste and grows with conifers (especially Douglas-fir), but it has creamy 
spores, a more erratically colored cap (grayish, pinkish, brownish, reddish, etc.), and a 
distinct geranium-like odor (at least when the flesh is crushed). 
Russula rosacea 
(Rosy Russula) 
Color Plate 13 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when moist, 
smooth, dark red to bright red. fading in old age to pink or pink blotched with white. Flesh 
white, firm, brittle, odor mild, taste very acrid. GILLS creamy-white to pale yellow, adnate 
Russula gracilis group. Our member of this species "complex" (shown here) is abundant under 
Douglas-fir. Note the slightly colored (pinkish-tinged) stalk. 
""" 
, 
.., 
. -, 
'\-' 
100 
RUSSULACEAE 
to decurrent, close, brittle. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or with a narrowed 
base, smooth, dry, pink or red, or at times only with a blush of red; hollow in age. SPORE 
PRINT pale yellow; spores 7-9)( 6-8 microns, nearly round with amyloid warts. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in large troops under conifers, especially pine. Abundant on the 
Pacific Coast from fall through early spring, fruiting in our area mainly in coastal stands 
of Monterey pine, often in the company of Lactarius deliciosus. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided because ofthe acrid taste. 
COMMENTS: This common, conspicuous, colorful inhabitant of our coastal forests is 
readily recognized by its red cap, red to rosy stem, creamy gills, and acrid (peppery) taste. 
It is one of our prettiest mushrooms-the clean, pale gills contrasting beautifully with the 
red cap and stem. At a distance it is sometimes mistaken for Amanita muscaria, which also 
grows commonly with pines but has a white stem with a ring (annulus) and volva. The pale 
yellow spores and red or pink stem distinguish R. rosacea from R. emetica, while "the acrid 
taste separates it from R. xerampelina and the R. alutacea group. Other species: R. san- 
guinea is probably a synonym. A form with reddish-purple cap and stem-possibly 
distinct-is sometimes found in our area growing with R. rosacea. 
Russula maculata group 
CAP 4-10 (12) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface 
viscid when moist, smooth, color variable: red to pink, reddish-orange, peachy-pink, 
yellowish-buff, or whitish, or often a mixture of these colors, Qr buffy-white with pinkish 
tints on the margin; margin obscurely striate in age. Flesh white, firm becoming fragile in 
age; taste mild or slightly peppery. GILLS creamy becoming pale ochre, close, adnexed, 
or free. STALK 4-10 (13) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below, white, the base 
sometimes brownish-stained. SPORE PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 7-10 )( 6-9 microns, 
nearly round, with amyloid warts and ridges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under hardwoods; common in our area in the 
fall and winter (sometimes spring) with live oak, but more widely distributed. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The cap color in this species "complex" is quite variable, but within a well- 
defined range: red, pink, orange, yellowish-buff, and whitish. The association with oak, 
yellow spores, and rather fragile texture in age are also distinctive. The "true" R. maculata 
of Europe is said to have a mild to peppery taste and slightly fragrant odor. Our version has 
a consistently mild taste and little or no odor. Whether it is the "true" R. maculata or a 
closely related species is for the Russula-researchers to decide. There are a number of 
similar reddish-capped, mild-tasting species, such as R. velenovskyi, which do not fade 
as drastically and/ or differ microscopically. 
Russula plac;ta group (Pleasing Russula) 
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when 
moist, smooth, dark purple to wine-colored, reddish-violet, or brownish-purple, often 
darker at the center and paler toward margin, but sometimes brown to yellowish atcenter, 
and sometimes washed out in age; margin usually striate in age, at least obscurely. Flesh 
rather thin, fragile, white, odor and taste mild. GILLS close, white or creamy soon 
becoming yellow and finally dull ochre-yellow; adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 2-8 cm 
long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end, white, dry, soft and spongy 
inside; fragile in age. SPORE PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 7-10 )( 6-9 microns, broadly 
elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid warts and sometimes ridges. 
- 
, 
 
, 
 
Russula placito group. As defined here, this group includes many small, fragile Russulas with a 
mild taste, purplish cap, and yellow gills. They usually grow under conifers such as Douglas-fir. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in woods, associated mainly with conifers; 
widely distributed. In our area this group is quite common in the fall and winter, especially 
with Douglas-fir (often accompanied by R. xerampelina. R. integra. and Lactarius 
rubrilacteus); elsewhere it often grows with spruce, fir, hemlock, and pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but forgettable-thin-fleshed and virtually tasteless. Similar species 
are probably-but not definitely-harmless. 
COMMENTS: A large number of small, fragile, mild-tasting, yellow-spored Russulas will 
fit the above description. Their caps vary considerably in color but usually have some 
purple or reddish-purple in them. Their fragility is such that it's difficult to transport them 
home without crushing them( the stalk, though fragile, breaks cleanly like chalk). They lack 
the shrimpy odor of R. xerampelina and do not stain brown, and are not as firm as R. 
integra. Their identification is best left to the specialist armed with monographs and a 
microscope. Some related species that bear mentioning are: R. lilacea, whose spores 
have isolated warts; R. abietina, cap often greenish or brownish; R. puellaTis, with pale 
creamy-yellow spores;R. caeTulea, with frequently umbonate cap; andR. chamaeleontina, 
with a small, thin, fragile, purplish to lilac to reddish to orange or yellow cap. The latter has 
proved invaluable to compulsive categorizers exasperated by the endless nuances of color 
in these Russulas. Aberrant forms with yellow spores, fragile texture, and a mild taste can 
simply be referred to R. chamaeleontina and conveniently forgotten about. R. fragilis 
has served the same purpose in the fragile, white-spored, acrid-tasting group. 
Russula integra group 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth, viscid 
when moist, color variable: usually burgundy to vinaceous-brown to livid red or rusty- 
red with the margin paler (reddish-buff), but in older specimens often buff or brownish in 
the central area and sometimes entirely reddish-buff; margin obscurely striate in old age. 
Flesh crisp, firm, white, not staining, odor and taste mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or 
free, white becoming yellowish or pale ochre; close. STALK 3-9 cm long, 1-3 cm thick; 
usually equal or tapering upward, dry, white, sometimes with brownish or yellow-brown 
spots and stains. SPORE PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 8-IJ )( 6-9 microns, broadly 
elliptical with amyloid warts. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious under conifers, widely distributed. Common at times 
in our area in the fall and early winter. I have seen large fruitings under Douglas-fir. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and good when young and crisp; however, there are many similar 
species of unknown edibility, so exercise caution. 
COMMENTS: Also known as R. polychToma, this medium-sized species and its close 
relatives can be recognized by their mild odor and taste, yellow spores, white or brownish- 
stained stem, and reddish to wine-colored to brownish cap. They are larger than and not 
nearly so fragile as the R. placita group, and smaller than R. xerampelina and R. alutacea. 
As is commonly the case in Russula. this "complex" is in need of critical study. 
101 
102 
RUSSULACEAE 
Russula alutacea group 
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when moist 
but soon dry, smooth, color variable: dark red to red, purplish, purple-brown, or purple- 
red, or buff to straw-colored at the center or throughout, or with olive shades, or often 
a mixture of these colors; margin striate in age. Flesh brittle, white, firm at first, fragile in 
age; odor and taste mild. GILLS pale to dull ochre or straw-color; close, adnateto adnexed 
or free; brittle. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick, more or less equal, smooth, dry, white 
or sometimes tinged pinkish. SPORE PRINT ochre-yellow; spores 8-11 )( 6.5-9 microns, 
broadly elliptical with amyloid warts. Phenol solution staining stalk and flesh purple-red. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in mixed woods and under conifers, widely 
distributed. In our area this group is especially abundant in old coastal pine forests in 
the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. A large number of species will key out here-and we are 
not yet sure whether they're all edible. 
COMMENTS: The above description embr.:lces a number of medium-to-large, mild- 
tasting, yellow-spored Russulas. Distinguishing between them is ajob for rabid Russula 
buffs. The most common variety in our area sometimes grows with R. xerampelina, but is 
easily distinguished by its mild odor and marked fragility in age; older caps often disin- 
tegrate in transit unless carefully collected and packed. Another local species is much 
firmer, with a reddish, often burnished cap (see comments under R. decolorans). R. 
olivacea, which occurs in Europe under hardwoods and in America under conifers, is a 
very firm, sometimes massive (cap to 35 cm broad!) species with a more frequently rose- 
tinted stem. It is closely related to the true R. alutacea by virtue of its purple-red phenol 
reaction. There are also a number of medium-sized to fairly large yellow-spored Russulas 
with an acrid taste. These include R. veternosa and R. tenuiceps of eastern North America 
(and of questionable occurrence in California); and an unidentified western conifer- 
lover that has a buffy-brown to pinkish-brown or flesh-colored cap, mild-tasting flesh, 
and acrid-tasting gills. 
Russula xerampelina 
(Shrimp Russula) 
Color Plate 14 
CAP 5-30 cm broad, convex becoming plane orcentrallydepressed; surface smooth, viscid 
when moist, color variable: typically red to dark red, purple, or brownish-olive, but often 
laced with( or sometimes entirely) green, brown, yellow-brown, purple-brown, etc.; margin 
usually striate in age (at least obscurely). Flesh thick, creamy-white, bruising yellowish and 
then brown or discolored brownish in old age, brittle; odor mild becoming shrimpy or 
crablike in old age; taste mild. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed, creamy-white becoming 
dull yellowish, staining like the flesh, drying brownish or grayish. STALK 3-1 2 cmlong, 1- 
4 cm thick, equal or with slightly enlarged base, often longitudinally lined; dry, sometimes 
entirely rose-pink, but more often white with just a tinge of pink, or occasionally pure 
white; staining yellowish where scratched, then slowly brown; interior spongy and often 
discolored in age. SPORE PRINT yellowish; spores 8-11 )( 6-8.5 microns, elliptical to 
nearly round, with amyloid warts. Flesh and stalk turning deep green in ferrous sulfate. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious under conifers; widely distributed and common, 
ranging as far north as the Arctic Circle. In our area it is associated almost exclusively with 
Douglas-fir and is often abundant in the fall, less so in the winter and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and unforgettable-but one of the least appreciated of our edible 
fungi, perhaps due to the mediocrity of its brethren. The young, nutty caps are superb 
stuffed with grated cheese, chives, walnuts, and parsley and then broiled. In contrast to 
R. cyanoxantha, they are rarely riddled with maggots! 
RUSSULA 
103 
COMMENTS: This beautiful but extremely variable species can be recognized by the 
following combination of characteristics: (1) cap viscid when wet, usually with adhering 
debris when dry (2) stem usually-but not always-tinted pinkish and always staining 
yellowish and finally brown when handled or bruised (3) yellow spore print (4) mild (not 
peppery) taste (5) fishy odor at maturity, which is accentuated by cooking or drying 
(6) tendency of the gills to age or dry brownish to grayish. In addition, the young buttons 
are remarkably rotund and symmetrical-but this character can be appreciated only by 
religiously observing a large number of Russulas. Given the extreme variation in color and 
size, R. xerampelina may well be a composite species. At least two distinctive-but 
intergrading-varieties occur: one with a red to purple cap and lovely rosy stem, the other 
with a brownish-olive cap and white or nearly white stem (in addition to the color plate, 
there is a black-and-white photo on p. 83). Another distinctive variety occurs in our area 
with oak and manzanita; it differs in having a pale greenish-yellow to buff or whitish cap. 
HYGROPHORACEAE (Waxy Caps) 
 
 
. 
 C@) 
° 0 0- 
spores . .:.' 
Small to medium-sized, mostly terrestrial mushrooms. CAP typically smooth, often viscid and 
brightly colored. GILLS soft. waxy. usually thick and well-spaced, usually attached. ST /> LK 
central; fleshy or hollow. VEIL absent or evanescent, rarely forming a slight ring (annulus). 
VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores round to elliptical, but often shaped like corn 
kernels when immature; typically smooth and not amyloid. Basidia long and narrow. Gill tissue 
interwoven, parallel, or divergent. 
THESE are attractive, often colorful. white-spored mushrooms with soft, clean, waxy- 
looking gills. The flesh is not dry and brittle or chalky as in the Russulaceae, and the gills, 
though often thick, do not have the blunt edges typical of the chanterelles (Cantharella- 
ceae). However, there is little aside from the "waxy" gills to separate them from the 
numerous white-spored genera in the Tricholomataceae (particularly Clitocybe, Mycena, 
Omphalina, Laccaria, and Marasmius). The "waxiness" is admittedly an ambiguous 
character, but with a little experience is readily apparent-the gills are characteristically 
soft, clean, fleshy, and. . . they look (and often feel) waxy. (The cap sometimes also has a 
waxy appearance, hence thecommonname"waxycaps. ") Laccariaspecies have somewhat 
waxy gills, but they have tough, fibrous stems and spiny spores. Chroogomphus and 
Gomphidius also have waxy gills, but their spores are smoky-black. 
The waxy caps have traditionally been grouped together in a single large and diverse 
genus, Hygrophorus, but most mycologists now split them into two or more genera based 
primarily on the arrangement of the hyphae in the gill tissue (see illustrations, p. 19). As 
this character can only be determined with a microscope, the family is treated as one entity 
here, but three genera are recognized: 
Camarophyllus (hyphae in gill tissue intricately interwoven): Fruiting body small to 
medium-sized, usually white ordullcolored;cap usually not viscid oronlyslightly so; 
gills t}pically decurrent, thick, well-spaced, somewhat waxy; stalk dry; veil absent. 
Hygrocybe(hyphae in gill tissue more or less parallel): Fruiting body small to medium- 
sized, usually brightly colored and quite waxy; cap dry to moist, viscid, or slimy; gills 
free to adnexed, ad nate, or sometimes decurrent, obviously waxy; stalk dry or viscid 
or slimy, often slender and hollow; veil absent. 
Hygrophorus in restricted sense (hyphae in gill tissue divergent from a central strand): 
Fruiting body medium-sized to fairly large, usually white ordullcolored;cap viscid or 
slimy; gills typically adnate to decurrent, well-spaced or close, often only slightly 
waxy, usually white or pale colored; stalk slimy, viscid or dry, often fleshy (rarely 
hollow), apex often punctate (adorned with pointlike scales or granules); slimy or 
fibrillose veil sometimes present. 
104 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
Hygrocybe species are the mushrooms most easily identified as "waxy caps," while 
Hygrophorus and Camarophyllus species are more likely to be confused with other genera, 
particularly Clitocybe. because their gills are not so obviously waxy. Some investigators 
still recognize only one genus, Hygrophorus. while others recognize only two by throwing 
Camarophyllus in with Hygrocybe. Several small, rare "satellite" genera also occur, but are 
not treated here. 
The long, narrow protruding basidia that give the gills their "waxiness" are reminiscent 
of those in Cantharellus. leading some mycologists to infer that Camarophyllus (the most 
primitive genus of waxy caps) evolved from Cantharellus-like ancestors. (Camarophyllus 
pratensis, in fact, slightly resembles the chanterelle, Cantharellus cibarius.) A relation- 
ship with Omphalina and Clitocybe of the Tricholomataceae has also been suggested. 
The waxy caps occur throughout the mushroom season but are partial to cold weather. 
In colder climates they may continue to fruit after the first frosts, while in our area they 
normally peak in the cold winter months (December-February). Camarophyllus and 
Hygrocybe species are mostly saprophytic. Like Leptonia species, they are particularly 
abundant in environments where other fleshy fungi are few. In coastal California 
this means under redwood and to a lesser extent cypress, but in other regions they a-re 
common in ungrazed fields, heaths, and boggy areas. Hygrophorus species, on the other 
hand, are largely mycorrhizal-hence in .our area they occur with other mycorrhiza- 
formers under oak, madrone, pine, and Douglas-fir, rather than with redwood or cypress. 
Hygrophorus and Hygrocybe each contain about 100 species in North America, while 
Camarophyllus has about 40. Most waxy caps have wide distributions, and at least half of 
the North American species occur in California. 
Waxy caps are without a doubt among our most colorful mushrooms, with virtually 
every hue in the rainbow represented: blue or green in Hygrocybe psillacina. pink in 
Hygrocybe calyptraeformis. bright yellow, orange, or red in a great many species, black in 
Hygrocybe conica. white in Hygrophorus eburneus. None are thought to be dangerously 
poisonous, and some species are rated highly as edibles. However, I have yet to find one 
to my liking. By and large they are too bland or too watery or too bland and too watery 
to be worth eating. (See comments on the edibility of Hygrophorus sordidus and H. 
russula!) Also, a few species (e.g., Hygrocybe conica and H. punicea) may cause illness. 
However, their beauty is reason enough for getting to know them, and they have the 
added attraction of being relatively easy to identify in the field! Consequently, a fairly 
extensive selection of species is offered here. 
Key to the Hygrophoraceae 
I. Fruiting bod y whitish except for yellow to golden-orange powder, flakes, or granules on the cap 
and/ or stalk apex (but powder may smear in wet weather) Hygrophorus chrysodon, p. 119 
I. Not as above (if fruiting body white, then lacking yellow to golden-orange granules) ..... 2 
2. Fruiting body white to creamy, buff, or pale yellow when fresh ....................... 3 
2. Fruiting body at least partially darker or differently colored (including bright lemon-yellow) 17 
3. Stalk viscid or slimy when moist, at least over lower portion .......................... 4 
3. Stalk not viscid ............................................................... 7 
4. Cap tinged buff to yellowish or pale yellow, at least at center; especially common under pine 
(but not restricted to it) ....................... Hygrophorus gliocyclus & others, p. 120 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Stalk usually at least 1.5 cm thick; cap fairly large (5-15 cm broad) ...................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrophorus ponderatus (see H. sordidus. p. 122) 
5. Stalk usually (but not always) less than 1.5 cm thick; cap medium-sized to fairly small .... 6 
6. Cap conical when young, usually with a prominent umbo in age; gills not decurrent; found in 
eastern North America, rarely in California (mostly under cypress) ...... Hygrocybe pura 
6. Not as above; gills adnate to decurrent; widespread ........ Hygrophorus eburneus, p. 119 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
105 
7. Cap not conical; stalk 1-7 cm thick, or ifthinner then cap viscid when moist and developing dis- 
tinct yellow-brown to reddish-brown, peachy, salmon, or ochre tones in age ........... 8 
7. Not as above; stalk typically less than I cm thick and/ or cap distinctly conical. . . . . . . . .. 10 
8. Stalk often with an annulus (ring) or "volva" that is easily obliterated; typically found under 
mountain conifers .................................. Hygrophorus subalpinus, p. 121 
8. Not as above; annulus or "volva" absent .......................................... 9 
9. Fruiting body white or discoloring slightly yellowish or buff; associated mainly with oak, 
occasionally with conifers ..................... Hygrophorus sordidus & others, p. 122 
9. Either fruiting body discoloring more dramatically in age or else associated with conifers and 
possessing a densely scurfy stalk apex ........................................... 74 
10. Growing in grass; stalk tough and pliant; cap often umbonate (see Marasmius oreades, p. 208) 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
II. Odor sharp and cedarlike or fragrant ...... Camarophyllus russocoriaceus & others, p. 109 
II. Odor mild or not distinctive (or merely fungal) .................................... 12 
12. Cap conical when youngand/ orgills typically notched or adnexed or at timesadnate; gill hyphae 
parallel ..... Hygrocybe subaustraliga & H. albinella (see Camarophyllus borealis. p. 109) 
12. Cap not normally conical; gills typically adnate to decurrent; gill hyphae not parallel .... 13 
13. Cap viscid when moist ........................................................ 14 
13. Cap not viscid ............................................................... 15 
14. Cap thin and often translucent-striate when moist, usually less than 3 cm broad; found in 
many habitats; gill tissue interwoven ...... Camarophyllus niveus (see C. borealis. p. 109) 
14. Not as above; found mainly under conifers; gill tissue divergent ......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrophorus piceae (see H. eburneus. p. 119) 
15. Growing in groups or troops on pine needles; gills very widely spaced and usually with veins in 
between; cap broadly convex soon becoming plane or umbilicate (see photo at top of p. 207) 
. . . .. . .... . .. . . . .. . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. (see Marasmius sp. (unidentified), p. 206) 
15. Not as above (see top right photo on p. 109) ...................................... 16 
16. Fruiting body often developing a slightly yellowish tinge in age; cap dry .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Camarophyllus virgineus (see C. borealis. p. 109) 
16. Not as above; cap sometimes slightly lubricous .... Camarophyllus borealis & others, p. 109 
17. Cap small (up to 6 cm broad but usually less), dry, honey<olored or yellowish to orange or 
scarlet beneath a layer of small, gray to dark brown or blackish fibrillose scales ........ 18 
17. Not as above; either cap viscid or larger or lacking dark scales or differently colored ..... 19 
18. Background of cap scarlet to orange when fresh Hygrocybe turunda (see H. miniata. p. 113) 
18. Background of cap buff to dull yellowish or honey<olored; found in eastern North America 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrocybe caespitosa 
19. Fruiting body staining gray to black when handled (often slowly); cap conical, at least when 
young; common .................................. Hygrocybe conica & others, p. 116 
19. Not as above; fruiting body not blackening when handled ........................... 20 
20. Cap bright red, yellow, or orange, at least when fresh (but may fade to whitish) ......... 21 
20. Cap some other color (including pink, salmon, vinaceous, purple-red, pale dull orange, etc.) 42 
21. Cap and lower portion of stalk viscid to slimy when moist; stalk typically 4 mm thick or more 
and not hollow; gills adnate to decurrent; gill tissue divergent ....................... 22 
21. Not as above; if both cap and stalk'viscid, then stalk typically slender, hollow, and fragile 23 
22. Cap red to orange when young, at least at center ........... Hygrophorus speciosus, p. 126 
22. Cap at first dark brown to olive-brown at center, the brighter colors developing in age and the 
center often remaining brownish ...................... Hygrophorus hypothejus, p. 126 
23. Cap dark to bright red when fresh (but may fade in age or as it dries to orange or yellow) . 24 
23. Cap orange to yellow (sometimes fading to whitish), never bright red ................. 31 
24. Cap conical, up to 5 cm broad, bright red and not usually fading, viscid when moist; stalk also 
red and usually viscid; found in eastern North America ................ Hygrocybe ruber 
24. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
25. Cap and stalk distinctly viscid to slimy when moist; cap usually small or minute ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Hygrocybe reai & others (see H. miniata. p. 113) 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
106 HYGROPHORACEAE 
26. Cap distinctly conical when young and usually retaining a pointed umbo in age; stalk yellow 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Hygroeybe euspidata (see H. acutoconica, p. 115) 
26. Not as above ................................................................ 27 
27. Gills usually distinctly decurrent; cap typically small or minute (less than 4 cm broad) ... 40 
27. Not as above ................................................................ 28 
28. Cap small (1-4 cm), not viscid, red to scarlet when moist but fading drastically as it dries to 
orange or even yellow ............................ Hygroeybe miniata & others, p. 113 
28. Not as above (if cap not viscid, then cap not fading drastically or cap larger) ........... 29 
29. Stalk white (base may be colored) ........... Hygroeybe laetissima (see H. punicea. p. 114) 
29. Stalk yellow to orange or red ................................................... 30 
30. Cap viscid when moist; stalk typically(O.5) 1-2 cm or more thick, usually yellow or reddish fading 
to orange-yellow; base of stalk often whitish ......... Hygrocybe punieea & others, p. 114 
30. Cap not viscid or only slightly viscid; stalk typically 3-8 mm thick, usually red to reddish-orange 
with a yellow to orange base ..................... Hygrocybe eoceinea & others, p. 114 
31. Cap and stalk slimy or very viscid when moist; cap generally 4 cm broad or less ......... 32 
31. Not as above (cap may be slimy, but stalk dry to only slightly viscid) .................. 35 
32. Fruiting body showing pink, fIesh-colored, or greenish (rarely bluish) tones somewhere on 
fruiting body; gills not normally decurrent ................. Hygroeybe psittacina, p. 118 
32. Not as above; fruiting body yellow to orange (but may show some white or have a lilac tinge) 33 
33. Growing on rotting conifers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Myeena lilaei/olia, p. 236) 
33. Not as above; usually found on the ground ....................................... 34 
34. Gills typically decurrent and cap usually depressed centrally ............................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Hygroeybe nitida (see H.j7avescens. p. 115) 
34. Not as above ................ Hygroeybe ehlorophana & others (see H.j7avescens, p. 115) 
35. Cap distinctly viscid or slimy when moist, 2-7 cm broad or more when expanded; gills not 
decurrent .................................................................. 36 
35. Cap not viscid, or if slightly viscid then less than 3 cm broad or gills decurrent .......... 37 
36. Cap distinctly conical, at least when young ............... Hygroeybeaeutoconiea, p. 116 
36. Cap broadly convex to plane, not conical .......... Hygroeybe Jlaveseens & others, p. 115 
37. Gills brilliant orange to yellow-orange, retaining their color even after the cap fades; common 
in eastern North America, occasional in the Pacific Northwest Hygrocybe marginata, p. 112 
37. Not as above; common and widespread .......................................... 38 
38. Gills usually not decurrent; cap red to orange-red when fresh and moist (but fading) ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygroeybe miniata & others, p. 113 
38. Not as above; gills usually decurrent ............................................. 39 
39. Found in humus; cap yellow to orange-yellow (never scarlet, red, or orange) .............. 
................................ Hygroeybeparvula& others (see H.j7avescens, p. 115) 
39. Not as above ................................................................ 40 
40. Stalk usually quite long (4-10 cm); found mainly in eastern North America on ground, in moss, 
or on rotten wood ..................... Hygrocybe eantharellus (see H. miniata, p. 113) 
40. Not as above; found on ground, or if in lichen, moss, or wood, then stalk not so long .... 41 
41. Typically found in humus or soil; cap red or scarlet when fresh. . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . .. .. . . .. .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrocybe subminiata (see H. miniata, p. 113) 
41. Not as above; often found on wood, lichens, moss (see Omphalina& Xeromphalina, p. 221) 
42. Cap sharply conical when young, usually retaining a pointed umbo in age, coral-pink to pink, 
pinkish-orange, or salmon; gills pink ................ Hygrocybe ealyptraeJormis, p. 117 
42. Not as above ................................................................ 43 
43. Entire stalk or at least the lower part distinctly viscid to slimy when moist; cap also viscid 44 
43. Stalk dry to slightly lubricous but not viscid; cap dry or viscid ....................... 54 
44. Cap small; stalk slender (usually less than 6 mm thick), hollow, not white; veil absent .... 45 
44. Cap usually medium-sized to fairly large; stalk typically at least 5 mm thick, sometimes white; 
veil present or absent ........................................................ 47 
45. Cap blackish to dark brown or grayish ..... Hygroeybe unguinosa (see H. psittacina. p. 118) 
45. Not as above; cap brighter or lighter in color ...................................... 46 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
107 
46. Cap sometimes green or greenish-tinged; gills typically adnate . Hygrocybe ps;ttacina, p. 118 
46. Green shades absent; gills often decurrent ...... Hygrocybe laeta (see H. psittacina, p. 1I8) 
47. Cap dull yellowish becoming browner or grayer in age; stalk at least I cm thick; gills white or 
developing greenish stains, but not yellow; found mainly under hardwoods in eastern North 
America ................................................. Hygrophoius paludosus 
47. Not as above ................................................................ 48 
48. Cap (or center of cap) chestnut-brown to cinnamon-brown, reddish-brown, pinkish-tan, 
salmon, or yellow-brown ..................................................... 49 
48. Cap olive-brown to grayish-brown, gray, blackish, etc. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 51 
49. Cap and gills rufous to rusty-orange, apricot, or salmon-buff; growing under oaks in eastern 
NorthAmerica ....................................... . Hygrophorussubsalmon;us 
49. Not as above ................................................................ 50 
50. Odor fragrant, like almond extract ..... Hygrophorus var;;color(see H. bakerensis. p. 126) 
50. Odor more or less mild ....... Hygrophorus laurae & others (see H. roseibrunneus, p. 125) 
51. Lower portion of stalk sheathed with gray to brown, olive-brown, or blackish fibrils, scales, 
or granules; cap, gills, or stalk not yellow ..... Hygrophorus ol;vaceoalbus & others, p. 127 
51. Not as above ................................................................ 52 
52. Gills creamy to yellow or orange; cap and stalk often exhibitng some yellow or orange tones 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrophorus hypothejus, p. 126 
52. Yellow and orange tones absent ................................................ 53 
53. Cap evenly blackish to deep olive-brown when young; found mainly in eastern North America 
.......... ... . ..... ..... .... ....... HygrophorusJul;gineus(see H. hypothejus. p. 126) 
53. Cap paler when young or with a paler margin; widespread ............................. 
.......................... HygrophorusJuscoalbus& others (see H. hypothejus,p. 126) 
54. Gills persistently bright orange to yellow-orange, even after cap fades; cap 1-5 cm broad, stalk 
less than 6 mm thick .................................. Hygrocybe marginata, p. 112 
54. Not as above ................................................................ 55 
55. Cap green (citrine-green), at least when mature .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrocybe virescens, p. 118 
55. Not as above ................................................................ 56 
56. Cap gray to grayish-brown, dark grayish-brown, olive, deep olive-brown, blackish, or umber; 
gills and cap lacking violet or blue tones ......................................... 57 
56. Cap differently colored (tan, reddish-brown, vinaceous, etc.), or if colored as above then cap 
or gills with a violet, lilac, or bluish tinge when fresh .............................. 63 
57. Cap conical or with a pointed umbo, dull or dark gray ................................. 
.............................. Hygrocybeacuta(see Camarophyllusrecurvatus. p. 1I2) 
57. Not as above ................................................................ 58 
58. Odor fragrant (like almond extract), but sometimes faint .............................. 
........................... ............. .. Hygrophorusagathosmus & others, p. 128 
58. Odor mild or not as above ..................................................... 59 
59. Base of stalk usually pale pinkish to pinkish-orange (especially interior) .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see T r;choloma saponaceum, p. 184) 
59. Not as above ................................................................ 60 
60. Stalk sheathed by grayish to dark grayish-brown fibrils, scales, or granules ............... 
..................... Hygrophorus;nocybiform;s& others (see H. olivaceoalbus. p. 127) 
60. Not as above ................................................................ 61 
61. Fruiting body rather small (cap typically less than 5 cm broad, stalk typically less than I cm 
thick and sometimes hollow) ................ Camarophyllus recurvatus & others, p. 112 
61. Not as above; fruiting body medium-sized; stalk usually I cm thick or more ............ 62 
62. Cap viscid to slimy when moist; gills white or pink ....... Hygrophoruscalophyllus, p. 129 
62. Cap viscid or dry, often appearing streaked; gills white or gray .......................... 
...................... Hygrophoruscamarophyllus& others (see H. calophyllus, p. 129) 
63. Stalk rooting deeply or with a "tap root" encased by grayish-brown volva-like material; cap 
white becoming pinkish to vinaceous-red; gills white; known only from southern California 
under oak; solitary or clustered .............................. Hygrophorus mar;anae 
63. Not as above; widespread and common .......................................... 64 
l HYGROPHORACEAE 
64. Gills (or entire fruiting body) soon streaked or stained coral-red to vinaceous, pinkish-red, or 
purple-red (especially in age), sometimes also with yellow stains ..................... 65 
64. Not as above (but gills may be naturally pinkish) .................................. 68 
65. Associated with hardwoods (mainly oak and tanoak) ........ Hygrophorus russula, p. 123 
65. Associated with conifers (mainly pine and spruce) ................................. 66 
66. Cap reddish at first but staining yellow and becoming pale to bright yellow in age; taste bitter; 
especially common in the Rockies ..... Hygrophorus amarus (see H. purpurascens, p. 124) 
66. Not as above (but fruiting body may yellow somewhat); widespread (including Rockies) . 67 
67. Fibrillose veil present, at least when young ............ Hygrophoruspurpurascens, p. 124 
67. Veil absent ...... Hygrophorus erubescens& H. capreolarius(see H. purpurascens, p. 124) 
68. Gills lilac or violet or pinkish to dingy flesh-colored, attached and sometimes slightly decurrent 
but not deeply decurrent; stalk tough and fibrous, pliant, often fibrillose; cap often minutely 
scaly or scurfy, not viscid; spores usually spiny ................... (see Laccaria, p. 171) 
68. Not as above; spores smooth ................................................... 69 
69. Gills and/ or cap with a violet, purple, or bluish tinge when fresh ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Camarophyllus subviolaceus & others, p. III 
69. Not as above ................................................................ 70 
70. Gills brown to vinaceous-brown, adnate to decurrent; cap some shade of brown when moist, 
fading as it dries; found with hardwoods in eastern North America Hygrophorus kauffmanii 
70. Not as above; gills paler ............. .'. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 71 
71. Growing in grass; cap buffto tan, often umbonate; gills whitish; stalk thin, tough, pliant .... 
. . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Marasmius oreades, p. 208) 
71. Not as above ................................................................ 72 
72. Cap 4.5 cm broad or less, translucent-striate when moist ............................ 73 
72. Not as above; cap typically opaque .............................................. 74 
73. Stalk 4-7 mm thick; cap vinaceous-brown to pinkish-gray or buff, slightly viscid when moist; 
gills pinkish-gray or paler, distinctly decurrent; terrestrial ............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Camarophyllus colemannianus (see C. subviolaceus, p. III) 
73. Not as above; growing on ground or wood ............... (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
74. Stalk 1-3 cm thick, the apex distinctly scurfy (punctate); cap 5-20 cm broad, pale tan to pinkish, 
flesh-colored, pinkish-orange, or occasionally whitish; gills usually tinged pink( but sometimes 
whitish); cap viscid when moist, the margin inrolled until maturity; odor not like almond 
extract; associated with conifers (especially spruce) ...... Hygrophorus pudorinus, p. 124 
74. Not with above combination of characteristics .................................... 75 
75. Gills distinctly paler than center of cap (white to creamy or pale yellow) ............... 76 
75. Gills colored like the cap or slightly paler or darker (pinkish to salmon, etc.) ........... 79 
76. Odor faintly fragrant (like almond extract) to strongly aromatic ..................... 77 
76. Not as above; odor usually mild or somewhat potato-like ........................... 78 
77. Odor like almond extract ..................... Hygrophorus bakerensis & others, p. 126 
77. Odor strongly aromatic (but not as above) Hygrophorus pacificus (see H. bakerensis, p. 126) 
78. Cap pink or rose (but may fadd), stalk lacking sordid yellowish patches below; found under 
mountain conifers, often near melting snow Hygrophorus goetzii(see H. pudorinus, p. 124) 
78. Not with above features .............. Hygrophorus roseibrunneus& many others, p. 125 
79. Odor sickeningly sweet; fruiting body pinkish-buffto pinkish-cinnamon; cap not viscid ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Camarophyllus graveolens 
79. Not as above ................................................................ 80 
80. Cap whitish to buff, sometimes with darker spots or zones; odor often faintly fruity (if kept in 
a closed space); gills pinkish-cinnamon to salmon or ochre-salmon; associated with conifers 
(but not redwood); gill hyphae divergent . Hygrophorus saxatilis (see H. pudorinus. p. 124) 
80. Not with above features ....................................................... 81 
81. Cap whitish when young Hygrophorus albicastaneus & others (see H. roseibrunneus, p. 125) 
81. Cap not white when young (but may be quite pale in age or after fading) ............... 82 
82. Gills adnexed toadnate or slightly decurrent; stalk 1-4 cm thick, cap 5-13 cm broad; odor mild or 
radish- to cucumberlike; gill hyphae divergent; usually associated with oak .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hygrophorus nemoreus(see Camarophyllus pratensis, p. 110) 
82. Not as above; gills usually decurrent .................... Camarophyllus pratensis, p. 110 
",,, 
. , f 
":. ... 
.-" 
. . 
I \ \ 
-. 
Left: Hygrophorus subalpinus is a robust whitish conifer-loving waxy cap (see description on p. 
121). Note the slight annulus (ring) on specimen at left. Right: Camarophyllus borealis and its close 
relatives are white to yellowish with a slender build, decurrent gills, and little or no odor. 
Camarophyllus borealis (Snowy Waxy Cap) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad, convex or obtusely umbonate, often expanding in age to plane or 
depressed; surface smooth, moist or lubricous but not viscid, watery white to dull white. 
Flesh thin, soft, white, odor mild. GILLS usually decurrent, well-spaced, thick, soft, 
somewhat waxy; white. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm thick, equal or tapering down- 
ward, smooth, firm, dry, often curved or sinuous, white. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 7-9 (12»( 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups on ground and humus in woods or at their edges, widely 
distributed. In our area this species and its relatives C. virgineus and C. niveus (see com- 
ments) are fairly common throughout the mushroom season, but seldom occur in the 
large numbers typical of Hygrophorus eburneus. The best fruitings usually occur in the 
winter, often in relatively dry weather. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but fleshless, flavorless, and savorless. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hygrophorus borealis, this is one of several rather small, 
whitish waxy caps with a dry to slightly viscid (not slimy) cap. slender non-viscid stalk, 
and interwoven gill tissue. Others include: C. niveus, common. cap slightly viscid and 
slightly striate when moist; C. virgineus, especially common in California. cap dry and 
usually tinged yellow in age or dry weather. and spores 8-12 microns long; C. angustiJolius, 
dull white with spores 5-8 microns long; C. cremicolor, with pale yellow gills when young; 
and three species with parallel gill hyphae and non-decurrent gills: Hygrocybe subaustrali- 
ga, small, cap scarcely viscid, gills notched or adnexed, fairly common; H. albinella. cap 
white and conical at first, stalk dry. rare; and H.fornicata. with a grayish-tinged viscid cap. 
All ofthese have been placed in Hygrophorus. None have the slimycapand stalk of Hygro- 
phorus eburneus. Alboleptonia sericella and Inocybe geophylla can be similar but have 
pinkish and brown spores respectively. See also the undescribed Marasmius on p. 206. 
Camarophyllus russocor;aceus (Cedar Waxy Cap) 
CAP 1-3 (5) cm broad. convex to plane or slightly umbonate to slightly depressed; surface 
smooth, not viscid. white or often tinged pale tan to yellowish. especially at the center. Flesh 
whitish, thin; odor fragrant when fresh (like arborvitae or cedar). GILLS well-spaced, 
usually decurrent. thick, slightly waxy, white or whitish. STALK 3-10 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm 
thick, equal or tapered downward. often long in relation to cap; dry, smooth, colored more 
or less like cap, often curved or sinuous. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6.5-9)( 
4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven. 
 
' 
Camarophyllus russocoriaceus is a slim waxy cap that smells like cedar or Russian leather. Note 
off-white to buff-colored cap and long, slender stem. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered or in small groups in woods or at their edges, known only 
from the west coast (in addition to Europe). Common in our area in the fall and winter, 
especially at higher elevations in the coastal mountains, but rarely in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended-it has a slightly medicinal flavor, at least raw. 
COMMENTS: The piquant cedarlike odor distinguishes this plain-looking waxy cap 
from C. borealis and other look-alikes. Other species: Hygrophoruspusillusisasomewhat 
similar species with a viscid cap that is usually tinged cream or pale brownish-flesh-color. 
I t has a slight fragrant odor, divergent to nearly parallel gill tissue, and occurs in groups or 
troops under conifers in northern California and the Pacific Northwest. 
Camarophy//us pratensis (Meadow Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-9 (10) cm broad, obtuse to broadly convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane to 
depressed in age; surface smooth or sometimes cracking in age (especially at center), not 
viscid; rufous to dull orange or pale dull orange, fading to salmon-buff, pinkish-tan, buff, 
tawny, or even whitish; margin often wavy. Flesh white or tinged cap color; odor mild. 
GILLS typically decurrent, same color as cap or paler (usually pale dull orange or salmon- 
buff to nearly white); well-spaced, thick, broad, somewhat waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long, 
0.5-2 cm thick, whitish or tinged cap color, equal or tapering downward, dry, smooth or 
fibrillose. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5.5-8)( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to 
nearly round. Gill tissue interwoven. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in damp places-common and very widely 
distributed-from Europe to Iceland to South America. In our area it fruits mainly in 
the winter under redwood, but as its name implies (pratensis=fields), it can also occur in 
open or grassy situations. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and rated highly in Europe (one author even puts in on a par with 
morels!). However, my own experience with it gave me no great cause for enthusiasm. 
Unlike the similarly-colored chanterelle, it is readily attacked by maggots. 
COMMENTS: Better known as Hygrophorus pratensis, this common waxy cap is ex- 
tremely variable in size and shape, but can generally be recognized by its pale, dull orange 
110 
,'1' 
'., 
'" 
( 
'! 
... 
. .... 
J.! 
); 
.. 
. 
Camarophyllus pratensis is variable in both shape and color, but the gills are nearly always decurrent 
and widely spaced, and the cap is never slimy. 
color and decurrent gills. The cap and stem are not viscid, but the gills are thick and rather 
waxy. Robust individuals are slightly reminiscent of chanterelles (Cantharellus cibarius). 
but differ in their duller color and broad, well-developed gills with acute rather than blunt 
edges. A similarly colored species, Hygrophorus nemoreus, is fairly common in our area 
with oak in the fall and winter. It is larger and fleshier than C. pratensis(cap 5-1 3 cm broad, 
stalk 1.5-4 cm thick) and has a slightly viscid to dry, orangish or cinnamon-orange cap, 
adnexed to adnate or slightly decurrent gills, a mild to radish- or cucumberlike odor, and 
divergent gill tissue. It is large enough and common enough to be worth sampling, but 
I can find no information on its edibility. 
Camarophyllus subviolaceus (Violet-Gray Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-6 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly depressed with an uplifted margin; 
surface slightly viscid when moist, hygrophanous: violet-gray to violet-brown at least at the 
margin when moist (center often paler), fading as it dries to gray or pallid; margin trans- 
lucent striate when fresh. Flesh rather thin, colored like cap or paler; taste mild to bitter or 
slightly acrid. GILLS decurrent, whitish soon becoming smoky-violet or gray with a violet 
tinge; well-spaced, thick, soft, rather waxy. ST ALK 3-7 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or 
tapered downward, dry, smooth, white or tinged cap color, often curved. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-8 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven. 
Camarophyllus subvio/aceus has widely spaced decurrent gills that are violet-gray when fresh. 
.. 
,. 
:- 
..... 
I. .1 
.. 
 
.... 
': 
.  
, 
"t. 
II2 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in small groups in woods and swamps throughout northern North 
America, late summer through early winter. I have found it several times in the 
Pacific Northwest but it is not particularly common. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Better known as Hygrophorus subviolaceus, this beautiful species has 
been included because its violet-tinged gills are unusual for a waxy cap. There are several 
similarly-colored species, including: C. pallidus, with smaller, round or nearly round 
spores and a viscid, violet-gray cap; C. angelesianus, with amyloid spores and a viscid 
cap that does not fade appreciably, usually found at high elevations in the spring and 
summer; C. rainierensis, with a strong green corn odor and slightly viscid cap; and C. 
cinereus, with a non-viscid cap, mild taste, and larger spores. Other species include: 
C. colemannianus, closely related, but with a viscid, brown to pinkish-gray to buff cap 
and pinkish-gray to pale buff colors; Hygrocybe caerulescens, a bluish-tinged species 
with parallel gill tissue; and Hygrocybe purpureojolia, with lavender to dull purplish 
gills and a brown cap that fades to yellow-orange, found in eastern North America. 
Camarophyllus recurvatus (Little Brown Waxy Cap) 
CAP 1-3 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed, sometimes with a small 
pointed umbo; surface smooth or cracking into small scales, dry to slightly viscid, dark to 
pale olive-brown or at times pallid; margin often wavy or pleated. Flesh thin, olive-brown, 
odor mild. GILLS decurrent, well-spaced, broad, thick, soft and rather waxy, white or 
grayish-white. STALK 2-5 cm long, 3-6 mm thick, equal or tapering downward, smooth, 
not viscid, whitish or colored like cap. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 4- 
6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under conifers and in open, grassy areas; widely 
distributed. I've seen large fruitings in northern California but have yet tofind it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hygrophorus recurvatus, this is one of a number of 
undistinguished, brown to grayish waxy caps that qualify as "LBM's." As they are unlikely 
to interest the a verage collector, only a few others are worth mentioning: Hygrocybeovina, 
with deeply notched to adnate gills and a convex to plane, grayish-brown cap that often has 
a paler or yellower margin; Hygrocybe nitrata, with a nitrous odor; Camarophyllus 
paupertinus, with a small (1-2 cm) cap and exceedingly strong, disagreeable odor (known 
only from northern California under red woods); Hygrocybe acuta, with a sharply conical, 
dull gray to gray-brown cap, growing under conifers on the west coast; and Hygrocybe 
atro-olivacea, with a minutely scaly cap that is dark at the center or throughout. 
Hygrocybe marginata (Orange-Gilled Waxy Cap) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad, conical or convex becoming umbonate, plane, orwith uplifted margin; 
surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid: deep yellow to yellow-orange or orange 
when moist, sometimes with an olive tinge, fading to pale yellow or whitish as it dries. Flesh 
thin, fragile, waxy. GILLS slightly decurrent to adnate, adnexed, or even free; well-spaced, 
broad, thick, soft, waxy; brilliant orange or at times orange-yellow, not fading. STALK 
4-10 cm long, 3-6 mm thick, more or less equal, smooth, fragile, not viscid; pale orange to 
buff or pale yellow-orange, often curved; hollow. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 7-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel to somewhat interwoven. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in humus and on very rotten wood, 
under both hardwoods and conifers; common in eastern North America in summer and 
fall, known also from the Pacific Northwest and to be expected in northern California. 
I have not seen it in our area. 
HYGROCYBE 
II3 
EDIBILITY: Edible but of negligible substance and flavor. 
COMMENTS: The gills' ability to retain their bright orange color long after the cap has 
faded is the outstanding attribute of this modest waxy cap. also known as HygTOphoTUS 
maTg;natus. The cap is at times slightly greasy or tacky to the touch, but never truly viscid. 
Several color forms occur. including one with an olive cap (fairly common in Washington) 
and another with yellow gills (in eastern North America). 
Hygrocybe m;n;ata (Miniature Waxy Cap) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth or minutely scaly, 
hygrophanous but not viscid: bright red to scarlet when moist, quickly fading as it dries to 
orange and finally yellow. Flesh very thin, waxy, colored more or less like cap. GILLS 
adnexed to adnate or very slightly decurrent, soft, waxy, thick, broad, red to orange, 
yellow, or peachy (fading like cap). STALK 2-5 (8) cm long. 2-4 mm thick, equal, smooth, 
dry, red to orange or yellow (fading like the cap but more slowly). VEIL absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-10 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small tufts on ground, rotting logs, or in 
moss; widely distributed and common. In our area it fruits in the late fall and winter in a 
variety of habitats, but usually in deep shade. The largest fruitings I've seen were in a 
dense stand of pole-size redwood saplings and in a-plot of cypresses mixed with oaks. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but of negligible substance and according to most sources, bland. 
However, Captain Charles McIlvaine says: "The gunner for partridges will not shoot 
rabbits; the knowing toadstool-seeker will pass all others where H. miniatus abounds." 
COMMENTS: The small size, waxy gills, and convex to plane, non-viscid cap that fades 
markedly from red to yellow or orange are the far-from-infallible fieldmarks of this dainty 
fungus. I t is better known as HygTOphoTUS m;n;atus. The cap is neither viscid nor conical, 
and is often minutely scaly (squamulose). Its frequent occurrence on rotten wood 
is unorthodox behavior for a waxy cap. Other species: H. squamulosa has thicker. firmer 
flesh but is otherwise similar. H. canthaTellus is very similar but has a longer stem and de- 
current gills; H. moseT; has a less scaly cap and decurrent gills. H. subm;n;ata has a 
minute( up to 1.5 cm broad), scarlet to orange, slightly viscid cap plus decurrent, whitish to 
pale yellowish gills and a very thin (about 2 mm) stalk; it is fairly common in our area, 
especially under redwood. H. tUTunda is a widespread miniature northern species with 
Hygrocybe m;n;ata has a bright red cap that fades to orange or yellow as it loses moisture. Note 
small size (the largest is 2 cm broad) and convex (not conical) cap. 
 
 
"" 
.. 
" 
. " 
.".... 
't , 
... 
... " 
.,. 
114 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
minute brown to grayish sq uamules (scales) on a red to yellow background. There are also 
several minute species with a slimy-viscid cap and stalk when fresh, including: H. reai, with 
a bitter-tasting cap; H. minutula, with a stalk that fades to yellowish in age; and H. sub. 
minutula, whose stalk scarcely fades from red. All of the above species have a red to scarlet 
cap when moist, and all were originally placed in Hygrophorus. N one are worth eating. 
Hygrocybe coccinea (Righteous Red Waxy Cap) Color Plate 20 
CAP 1.5-4 (6) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; 
surface smooth, dry or tacky, deep red, blood-red, or bright red when fresh, fading some- 
what in age or developing paler streaks or splotches. Flesh thin, reddish to orange, waxy. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, reddish to orange or peachy, or red with yellow edges; 
thick, broad, soft, waxy. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 3-8 mm thick, equal, smooth, not viscid, 
hollow; usually red to reddish-orange with a yellow base (but base sometimes appearing 
whitish from mycelium); typically not fibrillose-striate. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 7-10.5)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods and other wet places; widely 
distributed, but not as common in North America as H. punicea. Like H. punicea, it is 
frequent in our area in the winter under redwoods or in mixed woods. Curiously, in some 
regions (such as England) it grows mainly in open fields! 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but easily confused with H. punicea. I haven't tried it. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as Hygrophorus coccineus, this exquisite bright red waxy cap 
ranks among our most beautiful mushrooms and is definitely worth seeking out. It is 
redder than H. miniata and does not fade nearly as drastically. It is often confused with 
H. punicea. but that species is usually more robust, has a distinctly viscid cap (when moist), 
and most often has a yellow to orange, fibrillose-striate stem with a whitish base rather 
than a red stem with a yellow base (see color plates 20 and 21). Other species: H. marchii 
is a similar species with a viscid red cap that soon dries out and fades to orange or yellow- 
orange. Like H. coccinea. it is a rather small, slender species (stalk 3-6 mm thick) that calls 
to mind H.flavescens but for its color. It is widely distributed but I have not seen it locally. 
Hygrocybe punicea 
(Scarlet Waxy Cap) 
Color Plate 21 
CAP 2.5-12 (14) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex when young, then plane to broadly 
umbonate or with uplifted margin in age; surface smooth, viscid or lubricous when moist, 
deep red to bright red, fading (often in streaks or splotches) to reddish-orange and finally 
orange. Flesh rather thin, waxy, watery reddish-orange to yellow-orange. GILLS adnateto 
adnexed or free, reddish-orange to yellow or peachy, well-spaced, thick, broad, soft, waxy. 
ST ALK 3-12 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, smooth, not viscid, often 
fibrillose-striate; yellow or sometimes red soon fading to orange or yellow; base usually 
whitish but sometimes yellow. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-12 )( 4-6 
microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in cool, damp places (usually in woods); widely 
distributed and fairly common in our area in the winter and early spring, especially under 
redwood. It is usually the last waxy cap to appear (mid-January or later). 
EDIBILITY: Listed as edible in most books, but poisonous at least to some people! I know 
two toadstool-testers who had very unpleasant experiences with it. It is an efficient con- 
centrator of the malleable metallic element cadmium, which is decidedly deleterious 
when consumed on a regular basis. 
COMMENTS: Better known as Hygrophorus puniceus, this beautiful mushroom is as 
easy to recognize as it is difficult to overlook. The bright red sticky cap and indisputably 
HYGROCYBE 
115 
waxy gills make it stand out vividly in the dim, damp milieu where it thrives. It is just as 
common in our wintertime woods as H. coccinea, but much more conspicuous because of 
its larger size. For a com parison of the two, see comments under H. coccinea. Other species 
in the H. punicea "complex" include: H. laetissima, with an even brighter red cap plus a 
white stalk when young; H. splendidissima, stalk white becoming reddish-striate in age; 
and H. aurantiosplendens, whose cap fades more markedly. All of these favor redwoods 
in California and could just as well be treated as variations of H. punicea. 
lIygrocybeflavescens 
(Golden Waxy Cap) 
Color Plate 22 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or with margin slightly uplifted; 
surface smooth, viscid when moist, bright lemon-yellow to golden-yellow (or sometimes 
orange toward the center). Flesh thin, yellow, waxy. GILLS typically adnexed or free, 
soft, thick, waxy, yellow or pale yellow . STALK 4-9 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal, 
smooth, sometimes tacky or slightly viscid but not slimy; easily splitting, often grooved, 
yellow to yellow-orange with a whitish base. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7- 
9 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
HABITAT: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground, usually in woods, 
widely distributed. Common in our area in the winter, especially under redwood but also 
with oak, madrone, etc. It usually peaks well after H. acutoconica has finished fruiting, 
sometimes when the bright red waxy caps (H. punicea and H. coccinea) appear. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but far from incredible: it is watery and has little substance or taste. 
One author says it "would make a colorful and novel addition to a salad." So would a 
banana slug. 
COMMENTS: The bright yellow to lemon-yellow color, convex to plane cap, and waxy 
gills identify this beautiful mushroom, better known as Hygrophorusjlavescens. The cap is 
never red as in H. punicea, nor is it conical as in H. acutoconica. In rainy weather the 
surface ofthe cap can be quite viscid or even slippery-giving it the appearance of ajust- 
licked lollipop-but in dry weather it is often somewhat silky or shiny. Other widely dis- 
tributed yellow to orange species with non-conical caps include: H. chlorophana, often 
confused with H.j7avescens, but slightly smaller with a distinctly slimy stalk when moist; 
H. ceracea, with a slightly viscid cap and sta)k and adnate to decurrent gills; H. citrino- 
pallida, with a slimy-viscid cap and stalk that fade from yellow to whitish and gills that 
retain their yellow color; H.jlavijolia, with a slimy-viscid cap and white, slimy-viscid stalk; 
H. parvula, with a non-viscid stalk and decurrent gills; and H. nitida, always yellow when 
fresh, with a centrally depressed cap (even when young), gills that are soon deeply de- 
current, and a frequently viscid stalk. The latter species is widely distributed but espe- 
cially common in mossy or boggy areas in eastern North America. In both H. nitida and 
H.j7avifolia the cap often fades to creamy or whitish as it loses moisture or ages. 
lIygrocybe acutoconica (A Cute Conic Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, bluntly or acutely (sharply) conical when young, sometimes 
expanding in age but usually retaining pointed umbo; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when 
moist, bright yellow to yellow-orange or orange (the orange usually toward center). Flesh 
soft, thin, waxy, yellow. GILLS adnexed to free, thick, soft, broad, waxy, yellow, never 
blackening. STALK 5-8 (12) cm long, 3-6 (I 0) mm thick, equal or thicker below. usually 
longitudinally striate and/ or twisted, easily splitting; smooth, moist or slightly viscid, 
yellow to yellow-orange, but usually white at base; not blackening when handled, but 
base may bruise or age grayish to nearly black. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
9-15 x 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
\ 
'f 
" 
j 
 
'''1' 
. , 
.. 
J ,t' 
\ 
7 
. " 
 
, '". 
f1-. 
")' 
. 
16.-, 
" 
. 
. 
Hygrocybe aCUloconica. This common yellow to orange waxy cap does not blacken when handled. 
The cap is sharply conical when young, but eventually expands as shown at left. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods or under trees, widely distributed. 
In our area it fruits in the fall and early winter, mostly under redwood and oak. It is nearly 
as common as its blackening counterpart, H. conica, but has a shorter season. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless, fleshless, flavorless (see comments on edibility of H.j1avescens). 
COMMENTS: Better known as Hygrophorus acutoconicus, this cute, conic waxy 
cap differs from H. conica in its yellowish gills and "failure" to blacken when handled. 
Scientists may scoff at our tendency to anthropomorphize (attribute human qualities to 
inhuman beings or inanimate objects), yet our language leaves us little choice. For instance, 
the word "failure" (with its attendant implications of inadequacy, its connotation of 
"attempting to, but not succeeding") is often utilized by taxonomists to denote "absence." 
Before I'm accused of lending credence to this trend, let me earnestly put this question to 
you philosophical few among the myopic many (or you fungophilic few among the 
mycophobic many): Is the "failure" in this case an innate inability to succeed? An admirable 
example of genetic (or aesthetic) restraint? A coincidental and pointless byproduct of 
circumstance? Or none ofthe above? . . . Other species: H. langei and H. aurantiolutescens 
are very similar if not the same; H. cuspidata ( called H. persistens by some) is also similar 
but has a conical red cap when fresh that fades with age, plus an orange to yellow stem. It 
is widely distributed, but I have yet to find it south of San Francisco. 
Hygrocybe conica (Witch's Hat; Conical Waxy Cap) Color Plate 19 
CAP 1-5(12»cm broad, bluntly to sharply conical, sometimes expanding in age but usually 
retaining a pointed umbo; surface smooth, dry to moist or slightly viscid, sometimes red 
but more often orange, yellow, or olive-yellow; blackening in age or upon handling; margin 
sometimes uplifted in old age. Flesh thin, waxy, blackening in age. GILLS adnexed or 
free, thick, broad, soft, waxy, usually whitish but sometimes tinged yellow, soon becoming 
grayish and finally black. STALK (2) 4-20 cm long, 0.3-] (1.5) cm thick, equal, not viscid 
or only slightly so, usually striate and/ or twisted, hollow in age and easily splitting; pallid to 
yellow, olive-yellow, orange, or red, with a whitish to gray base, but turning gray or black 
when handled or in age. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-14 x 5-7 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue paralleL 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in damp places (usually in 
woods); widely distributed and very common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It is 
known from a wide variety of habitats in North America, but in our area shows a pro- 
nounced preference for redwood and cypress. It fruits in the fall and winterand,alongwith 
116 
- 
,Ii . 
f'. 
,. 
"I' 
... 
Hygrocybe conica (better known as Hygrophorus conicus) is one of our most common waxy caps. 
Note conical cap (which may expand somewhat in age) and tendency to blacken. 
H. aCUloconica, is usually the first of the brightly colored waxy caps to appear. Bob 
Winter says it often grows on lawns in Fresno, California. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It was once considered poisonous, perhaps due to its 
blackening qualities, but also because four deaths in China were (mistakenly?) attributed 
to it. Now it's generally regarded as harmless, but Larry Stickney, chef eXlra ordina ire, 
meandering mainstay of the Mycological Society of San Francisco, and an inimitable 
mushroom-loving marvel of a man, says it "elicited an odd sensation of lightheadedness 
and numbness" when he tried it. At any rate, it hardly seems worth experimenting with 
such a thin-fleshed, watery, tasteless morsel. 
COMMENTS: The conical cap and tendency of all parts to blacken when handled im- 
mediately identify this cosmopolitan mushroom. It is likely to be among the first waxy caps 
encountered by beginners and is quite beautiful and waxy-looking when growing in the 
woods. By time it is brought home, however, it is often barely recognizable because of the 
gray and black stains that develop. Old, withered, completely black speimens are 
sometimes found growing alongside vividly colored fresh ones. When growing in deep 
humus (e.g., redwood duff) the stalk is often quite long, but when growing in bare soil or 
grass or shallow humus it is apt to be shorterand/ or stouter;Hygrophorusconicusisa syn- 
onym. The "splitters" recognize several closely related blackening species, including: Hy- 
grocybe nigrescens, with a bluntly conical, red to scarlet cap, often found under oak; H. 
singeri, cap and stalk distinctly viscid; and H. olivaceoniger, small, thin, and olive-green. 
Hygrocybe calyptraeform;s (Salmon Waxy Cap) Color Plate 23 
CAP 2.5-7 cm broad, acutely (sharply) conical at first, then expanding somewhat but 
retaining a pointed umbo; surface dry or slightly viscid, smooth, coral-pink to pink to 
salmon when young (rarely tinged lavender), paler (or pinker or oranger, sometimes 
with whitish areas) in age; margin often splitting at maturity and sometimes uplifted. Flesh 
thin, watery pinkish, waxy. GILLS adnate to adnexed or even free, thick, soft, waxy, pink 
to pale pink. STALK 3-16 cm long, 3-8 (10) mm thick, usually rather long and slender, 
equal, smooth, often longitudinally striate and/ or twisted; fragile, hollow, and easily 
splitting, white or tinged pinkish (or rarely lavender), not truly viscid. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-9 )( 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
II? 
ll8 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in woods or at their 
edges (often rooted deeply in the humus); widely distributed but not common. I have found 
it only twice in our area, under redwoods, in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. 
COMMENTS: In my fickle fungal opinion, this striking species is one of the most beautiful 
and elegantof all the waxy caps, its rarity serving to accentuate its beauty. In a genus noted 
for its bright colors. this species still manages to stand out-its pointed pink to 
salmon cap and pink gills render it distinct. H. psittacina and H. /aeta can be pinkish, but 
are smaller, usually slimy, and are never as sharply conical. No/anea sa/monea of eastern 
North America is also similar, but gives a pinkish spore print and does not have waxy gills. 
Hygrophorus calyptraeJormis is a synonym. 
Hygrocybe virescens (Lime-Green Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, 0 btusely conical or convex becoming plane, urn bonate, or with uplifted 
margin in age; surface smooth, moist or tacky but not truly viscid; color variable when 
young (honey-yellow or green mixed with dull orange, etc.), but soon becoming citrine- 
green to yellow-green ("lime-green") overall. Flesh thin, fragile, greenish, waxy. GILLS 
adnexed to free, whitish or with citrine-green tints, thick, soft. waxy. STALK 3-7 cm long, 
3-8 mm thick, more or less equal, smooth, hollow in age, not viscid; lime-green with a 
whitish base. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10)( 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Gill tissue parallel. 
HABIT A T: In scattered groups or tufts under redwood. northern California, apparently 
quite rare. I have seen only one substantial fruiting-in December of 1971 at Van Damm 
State Park in Mendocino County. Subsequent expeditions to the same area failed to turn 
it up. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The striking "lime-green" color of the cap and stalk make this one of the 
easiest of all waxy caps to identify. Unfortunately, it is one ofthe most difficult of all waxy 
caps to find! The above description is adapted from that of Alexander Smith. who 
originally found it near Trinidad, California. Whereas many waxy caps are cosmopolitan 
(particularly Hygrocybes), this one appears to have a sharply limited habitat and 
geographical distribution. The only other green waxy cap, H. psittacina. is smaller. 
slimmer, and slimier, and is green when young rather than in age. 
Hygrocybe psittacina 
(Parrot Waxy Cap) 
Color Plate 18 
CAP 1-3 cm broad, bell-shaped or convex to broadly umbonate or plane in age; surface 
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, usually shiny when dry; color extremely variable: at 
first dark green to bright green or olive-green, but soon fading to some shade of yellow, 
pink, orange, rufous, vinaceous, ochre-buff, tawny, etc.; margin translucent-striate when 
moist. Flesh thin, soft, waxy, odor mild. GILLS adnate to very slightly decurrent, but 
sometimes seceding; well-spaced, soft, thick, waxy; at first greenish. then fading like the 
cap (but often yellower or redder), and often retaining slight greenish tints. STALK 2-6 (8) 
cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapering upward, hollow, smooth, very slimy or viscid 
when moist, greenish when young but soon fading to yellow or cap color (pink, orange, 
etc.). VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6.5-10 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Gill tissue parallel. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in damp soil, moss, humus, etc.; widely 
distributed. Fairly common in our area in late fall and winter but easily overlooked. Like 
HYGROCYBE 
119 
most of our Hygrocybes it favors redwood, but also occurs under other trees as well as on 
mossy road banks or in grass. The largest fruiting I've seen was in a swampy hardwood 
forest in Pennsylvania. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but slimy and insubstantial. Raw specimens make a colorful but 
slippery supplement to salads, sliding down your throat before you can savor them. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hygrophorus ps;ttac;nus, this slippery little fungus is a 
cinch to recognize when young and fresh-there is no other small green agaric with a 
glutinous cap and stem! As it dries out, however, it changes color drastically, and faded 
specimens have been known to fool the most seasoned Hygrocybe-hound. The rate, 
extent, and nature of the color changes seem to vary according to environmental condi- 
tions, but close inspection will often reveal a faint olive tinge somewhere on the fruiting 
body. Even when there is no green present, the small size and slimy-viscid stalk will dis- 
tinguish it from all but H. laeta (see below). The stalk can be so slimy that it is difficult to 
pluck. Other species: H. ps;ttac;na var. californ;ca is a rare fungus with a beautiful blue 
rather than gorgeous green cap in youth. H. laeta is a widely distributed species of variable 
color (violet-gray to pinkish, orange, vinaceous, etc.), but is never green when young and 
usually has decurrent gills. I t, too, has a slimy-viscid cap and stalk. H. ungu;nosa has a 
slimy-viscid, gray to dark brown to nearly black cap and stem, and is also widely dis- 
tributed. For viscid-stalked Hygrocybes with bright yellow to orange or red caps, see 
comments under H.flavescens and H. miniata. 
Hygrophorus chrysodon (Flaky Waxy Cap) Color Plate 17 
CAP 2.5-8 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface smooth, viscid 
when moist, white except for delicate yellow to golden-orange flakes or granules on the 
margin (or sometimes tinted yellow throughout); margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick, soft, 
white. GILLS typically decurrent, well-spaced, white, soft, rather waxy. ST ALK 3-10 cm 
long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal, viscid when moist, white except for a ring of yellow to golden- 
orange granules at apex (or in rainy weather, the granules dispersed throughout). VEIL 
evanescent, leaving slime on stalk. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 )( 3.5-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious in woods; widely distributed, but not very common 
in our area. It is said to favor conifers, but in coastal California it shows a definite pre- 
ference for madrone and tanoak, fruiting sporadically during the late fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but slimy and bland (for more details see H. sordidus). 
COMMENTS: The exquisite flakes of gold on the cap margin and/ orstalk apex (see color 
plate!) are unique to this beautiful species. However, rain may obliterate the granules or 
disperse their yellow pigment over the entire cap and stem surfaces, leading to confusion 
with H. gliocyclus. H. eburneus, and other white or yellowish waxy caps. 
Hygrophorus eburneus (I vory Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly umbonate to plane or with 
uplifted margin; surface smooth, extremely slimy or viscid when wet, pure white or some- 
times slightly yellowish in old age or occasionally with small pinkish spots; margin at first 
inrolled. Flesh soft, white, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, well-spaced, thick, soft, 
waxy, pure white to very slightly yellowish in old age. ST ALK 4-15 (18) cm long, 0.3-1 (2) 
cm thick, equal or tapered toward base, usually rather slender; smooth or with punctate 
apex, slimy-viscid when moist, pure white, but sometimes discoloring slightly yellowish Qr 
pinkish in age. VEIL evanescent, depositing slime on stalk. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
6-9 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
--:::::-- 
-.-- 
- 
 
, 
. 
. 
'. 
Hygrophorus eburneus. Sometimes called ..Cowboy's Handkerchief," this common pure white waxy 
cap is easily told by its slimy cap and stem. In wet weather the cap is coated with such a thick layer 
of slime that it looks as if someone blew their nose on it. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or tufted on ground in woods, very widely distributed 
but most common on the west coast. In our area it is mycorrhizal with hardwoods and is the 
most common fall and winter Hygrophorus of our oak-madrone woodlands. In other 
regions it may grow with conifers, e.g., in Oregon it is often abundant in oak-pine forests 
and in New Mexico it fruits in the late summer and fall under pinyon pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and collected by some people in spite of its sliminess (see comments 
on edibility of H. sordidus). 
COMMENTS: The pure white slimy cap and slimy stem plus the soft, waxy white gills 
typify this cosmopolitan Hygrophorus. which is the type species ofthe genus. Sometimes 
the layer of slime is so thick that it's difficult to pick up the mushroom. At other times the 
slime dries out, in which case there is likely to be debris glued irrevocably to the cap-a sure 
sign that H. eburneus ranks with Limacella illinita and H. gliocyclus (among others) as 
the ..slipperiest and slimiest gilled fungus among us." (L. il/inita is also white, but has free 
gills, while H. gliocyclus is squatter, slightly yellower, and is monogamous with pine). 
H. piceae is a very similar species with a pure white viscid cap and non-viscid stalk. It is 
common under conifers, especially spruce, in the Pacific Northwest and northern Califor- 
nia. For similar species with a buff- or ochre-tinged cap, see comments under H. gliocyclus. 
Hygrophorus gl;ocyclus (Glutinous Waxy Cap) 
CAP (2) 4-10 (15) cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming broadly umbonate, plane, or even 
shallowly depressed; surface smooth, very slimy or viscid when moist, white to pale cream, 
usually more yellowish or buff toward the center; margin at first inrolled. Flesh white, 
fairly firm. GILLS adnate to decurrent, fairly well-spaced, thick, soft, somewhat waxy; 
whitish to pale or dingy yellow, or sometimes tinged faintly pinkish. STALK 2-6 cm long, 
(0.6) 1-2.5 cm thick, typically rather squat, equal to ventricose (swollen in the middle) or 
tapered at base, smooth, very slimy when moist except at apex; dingy white to creamy, 
solid. VEIL evanescent, leaving slime on stalk and sometimes an obscure ring (annulus). 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 )( 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in needle duff under pines, widely distributed. Fairly 
common in our area in fall, winter, and early spring, sometimes growing with H. hypo- 
thejus. I have found it along the coast with Monterey and bishop pines, and in great 
numbers inland with Coulter, digger, and ponderosa pines. 
120 
. #' ' 
'- 
,\ .. 
. 
. . t 
'. 
\. 
1- 
.", 
... 
 I. 
 
- 
Hygrophorus g/iocyclus. mature specimens. This species is just as slimy as H. eburneus. but is 
stockier and slightly yellower. It is common under pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and "choice," according to some, but like H. eburneus. disagreeable 
to collect because of the copious slime (see comments on edibility of H. sordidus). One 
book describes how to remove the slime from the mushrooms, but says nothing about 
removing the slime from your hands. 
COMMENTS: The creamy-white to yellowish cap, stocky stature, thick layer of slime on 
the cap and stem (when moist), somewhat waxy gills, and association with pine are the 
hallmarks of this humdrum Hygrophorus. It is thicker, squatter, and yellower than H. 
eburneus. and the stalk is indisputably viscid, in contrast to H. sordidus. A closely-related, 
equally slimy pine-lover, H. flavod;scus, is also widespread but has pinkish gills in youth; 
H. glut;nosus of eastern North America and the Pacific Northwest is the same color as 
H. gliocyclus but favors hardwoods and shows reddish-brown spots on the stalk apex as it 
dries; H. white;; of northern California has the color of H. gliocyclus but the stature of 
H. eburneus; H. cossus is a slimy white species that develops ochraceous tones on the cap 
as it ages and has a distinctive odor (like "goat moth larvae"), but is more common in 
Europe than North America; H. chrysasp;s also discolors in age but has no odor and gills 
that dry dark brown. H. ponderalus (see H. sordidus) is large and white. 
Hygrophorus subalpinus (Subalpine Waxy Cap) 
CAP 4-15 (25) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface 
viscid when moist but soon dry, smooth, pure white or developing a slight yellowish tinge 
in age; margin sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh thick, firm at first but soft in age, white; 
odor and taste mild. GILLS white when young, often creamy or tinged dingy yellowish in 
age; typically adnate to decurrent, narrow, close, soft and/ or waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long, 
1-5 (7) cm thick at apex, usually thick and stout, often with a rounded basal bulb when 
young (but often more or less equal in age); firm, dry, solid, white. VEIL somewhat mem- 
branous, disappearing or forming a narrow, flaring or flange-like, median to inferior 
ring on the stalk Uust above the bulb). SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on ground under conifers; known only from the 
mountains of western North America. It is a common "snowbank" species in the Sierra 
Nevada, Cascades, and Rocky Mountains, but also appears in the summer and late fall. 
I have yet to find it on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Deer consider it a delicacy; I don't. Although tempting because of its 
robustness and penchant for growin in the spring when there are few edible agarics out 
121 
122 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
and about, it decays quickly and does not have the greatest texture and flavor (see com- 
ments on edibility of H. sordidus). 
COMMENTS: This hefty white Hygrophorus is easily told from other waxy caps (H. 
sordidus. et al) by its thick dry stalk and whitish color, the presence of a veil that often 
forms an annulus (ring), and association with mountain conifers (see photograph at top of 
p. 109). The annulus, when present, can mimic the volva of an Amanita because it tends 
to sit so low on the stalk. Amanitas, however, do not have decurrent gills and are rarely as 
robust. The presence of an annulus can also lead to confusion with Armillaria ponderosa 
and A. olida(another springtime conifer-lover), but both of those mushrooms have strong 
odors. Russula brevipes is also somewhat similar, but has brittle flesh and lacks a veil. 
Hygrophorus sordidus (Sordid Waxy Cap) 
CAP 5-20 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or with uplifted margin; surface 
smooth, viscid when moist but not often slimy and soon dry; white or sometimes tinged 
yellowish-buff at center; margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick, firm, white. GILLS adnate 
to decurrent, soft but only slightly waxy; white, sometimes dingy yellowish in age. STALK 
6-10 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, solid, smooth, firm, white, not 
viscid. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-8 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, associated 
principally (if not exclusively) with oaks, widespread but primarily southern. In our area 
it fruits with live oak in the fall and winter. It is quite abundant some years, but almost 
completely absent others. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but not choice. I ruined an otherwise superb curry in my sole attempt 
to make it palatable. The sliced caps neither absorbed the surrounding spices nor 
contributed any special flavor of their own. The turmeric did turn them yellow, however, 
making them look for all the world like undercooked and overfed banana slugs-gummy, 
amorphous masses of slime that coagulated around or completely engulfed the peas 
and savory chunks of potato, rendering the entire dish inedible (though unforgettable). 
Since its attractive appearance belies its "slugulose" qualities, I can only conclude that the 
scientific soul who named it had a similar and equally sordid experience with it. 
COMMENTS: Our heftiest Hygrophorus. its size alone distinguishes it from most 
other white members of the genus. The stalk is not viscid as in H. gliocyclus and H. ebur- 
neus. nor is there a veil as in H. subalpinus. It is likely to be mistaken for a Clitocybe or 
Hygrophorus sordidus. A robust white waxy cap with a viscid cap, dry stem, and white gills that are 
only slightly waxy. H. ponderatus (not illustrated) is an equally robust, viscid-stalked white species. 
\  
" 
, t. . ...\ 
 ! 
" - lj 
" 
.... .,. , ", 
.. 
., ); 
'\ 
.c 
... . il1 
HYGROPHORUS 
123 
Russula because of its fleshiness, but the gills are soft, and at least to the experienced 
Hygrophorus-hunter, waxy. H. penarius has a slightly darker cap but is otherwise similar. 
H. PerJumus of the Sierra Nevada has a fragrant odor. H. ponderatus is a similar but 
slightly more flavorful, widespread species whose stalk is viscid or lubricous(at least over 
the lower portion); in California it usually grows with conifers. 
Hygrophorus russula (Russula-Like Waxy Cap) 
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex to plane or with uplifted margin in age; surface viscid when wet 
but soon dry; coral-pink to vinaceous-red, usually streaked with purple-red or vinaceous 
fibrils; smooth or minutely scaly, occasionally staining yellowish when rubbed or in age; 
margin often paler or whitish and incurved when young. Flesh thick, white or tinged pink; 
odor and taste typically mild. GILLS usually adnate but sometimes adnexed or slightly 
decurrent, close to crowded (120-150 reach the stalk), soft, slightly waxy; white at first but 
soon flushed pink and developing purple-red to vinaceous stains in age. ST ALK 3-10 cm 
long, 1.5-3.5 cm thick, usually rather stout; solid, dry, smooth, equal or tapered below; 
white, soon stained or streaked pink to reddish or vinaceous. VEIL absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-8 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue slightly divergent. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in rings in mixed woods and under hardwoods, 
associated mainly with oaks; widely distributed and common in eastern North America, 
but infrequent on the west coast. In our area I find it occasionally in the late fall and early 
winter in tanoak-madrone woods at higher elevations in the coastal mountains. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, according to some, but my lingering distaste for fleshy 
waxy caps (see comments on edibility of H. sordidus) has discouraged me from sampling it. 
One authority calls it "the best of the family for the table" -a classic example of damning 
with faint praise, if you ask me. On the other hand, local Hygrophorus-hound Luen Miller, 
who suffers from an acute case of"McIlvaine-mania,"* says of H. russula: "N ot as good as 
H. sordidus, but as an edible species it is not to be despised. It has a noble waxy texture and 
makes a toothsome meal. Although it lacks the supreme succulence of H. sordidus, it 
largely makes up for it in possessing a copious supply of wax, which coats the mouth and 
throat for hours after eating it, the way good ice cream does. All authorities pronounce it 
excellent. It is delightful scalloped or stewed, or better yet, made into catchu p and poured 
over food. The Tartars, I am told, know it as 'poor man's candle' since the dried 'carps 
offer a weak flickering flame when lit." 
.See footnote on p. 419! 
Hygrophorus russula, mature specimens. The entire fruiting body develops dark red streaks and 
stains; the gills are close together and only slightly waxy. 
. 
I ..... }l\t.' 
.. '. 
.- 
" ." 
... 
.. '. 
0., 
\\> , 
.- 
.. .. 
\'   '.. 
*, "'"', 
\. 
1/1 .. ", 
.,. ", .. 
124 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
COMMENTS: A beautiful, robust Hygrophorus. best recognized by its coral-pink to 
vinaceous (wine-colored) or vinaceous-red color, absence of a veil, and growth with 
hardwoods. As the name implies, it has somewhat the stature of a Russula. but the stalk 
does not snap open cleanly like chalk. It was originally placed in Tricholoma. but the gills 
are usually adnate rather than notched, and quite soft and waxy. For similar waxy caps 
associated with conifers, see H. purpurascens. 
Hygrophorus purpurascens (Purple-Red Waxy Cap) 
CAP (3) 6-12 (20) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface slightly 
viscid when wet, otherwise dry; whitish to coral-pink with darker (vinaceous-red to purple- 
brown) splashes, streaks, and/ or fibrils; margin incurved at first and usually paler. Flesh 
thick, firm, white; odor mild, taste mild or bitter. GILLS adnate to decurrent, white at first 
but soon flushed pink, then spotted or stained purple-red to vinaceous; fairly close, soft, 
slightly waxy. STALK (3) 5-12(15) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick. equal ortapered below, solid, 
firm, not viscid; colored or stained more or less like the cap. VEIL fibrillose, white, forming 
a slight superior or apical ring or hairy zone on stalk, or disappearing entirely. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8)( 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered, gregarious, orin troops under conifers, especially spruce 
and pine; widely distributed in northern and western North America. It does not occur in 
our area, but is fairly common in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades from spring through 
fall, and fruits prolifically in late summer in the spruce forests of the Rocky Mountains. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but some variants are unpalatable (bitter) even when cooked-as 
I can personally attest. 
COMMENTS: This waxy cap and its close relatives {see below) are very common at times 
in our western mountains. They resemble H. russula in their reddish-pink to vinaceous- 
red color, but favor conifers rather than hardwoods. H. purpurascens is distinct by virtue 
of its fibrillose veil, which is often evident only in young, unexpanded specimens. Its 
close relatives include: H. erubescens, quite similar but lacking a veil and with a frequent 
tendency to slowly stain yellow when bruised or left overnight in the refrigerator. It is 
normally a fairly robust mushroom, but a slender form occurs rarely in our area with pine. 
H. capreolar;us is a similar but smaller, more slender (stalk about 1 cm thick), spruce- 
loving species with well-spaced gills and fruiting body evenly colored dark vinaceous-red 
in age. I have collected it several times under Sitka spruce in northern coastal California, 
but its distribution parallels that of H. purpurascens. H. amarus is also similar, but 
is very bitter-tasting and tends to develop pronounced pale yellow to bright yellow tones on 
the cap (or whole fruiting body) in age. It mayor may not have a very slight fibrillose veil 
(check young specimens!); it's fairly common under spruce and fir in the Rocky Mountains. 
Hygrophorus pudor;nus (Spruce Waxy Cap) Color Plate 16 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, obtuse or convex with an inrolled margin, becoming broadly 
convex or plane in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, pale tan to pinkish or flesh- 
color, or pinkish-orange toward the center and pinker or paler at the margin. Flesh thick, 
firm, white or tinged cap color; odor mild to faintly fragrant. GILLS adnate to decurrent, 
fairly close, soft, waxy, sometimes whitish but more often pinkish to pale flesh-color; not 
developing reddish stains. STALK 4-20 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, 
solid, dry to tacky but not truly viscid, whitish to buff or pinkish or colored like cap; lower 
portion fibrillose, upper portion conspicuously punctate (with tiny whitish scurfy scales or 
tufts that darken to reddish-brown when dried or in age, and turn yellow-orange in KG H). 
VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6.5-9.5 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Gill tissue divergent. 
HYGROPHORUS 
125 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, particularly spruce; widely 
distributed but erratic in its fruiting habits. It does not occur in our area (probably due to 
the absence of spruce), but [ have seen large fruitings in December with Sitka spruce in 
northern California, and in August with Engelmann spruce in the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but mediocre. Some variants are said to have a "turpentine-like taste," 
but I cannot vouch for the accuracy of this comparison, since [ have never tasted tur- 
pentine. (Have you?) 
COMMENTS: This attractive, rather robust waxy cap is difficult to characterize but 
relatively easy to recognize (see color plate). The viscid pinkish to pinkish-salmon or pale 
tan cap, punctate stalk apex, and waxy gills are good fieldmarks. The viscid cap distin- 
guishes it from the similarly colored Camarophyllus pralensis. Several varieties and color 
forms have been described, including var. fragrans, large and tall, with a yellow-orange 
stalk base and tendency to stain yellow or orange when bruised. Another beautiful waxy 
cap, H. saxati/is, occurs with conifers in the Pacific Northwest, especially on rocky hill- 
sides. It has a viscid, whitish to pale buff cap (sometimes with darker watery spots) and 
lovely pale apricot to pinkish, decurrent gills. Still another distinctive species, H. goetzii, 
is rather small and slender, with a rosy or pinkish cap and creamy gills often tinged with the 
cap color. It is sometimes common in the late spring and summer in the Sierra N evadaand 
Cascades, often near or even in melting snow. 
Hygrophorus roseibrunneus (Rosy-Brown Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-10 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, or with an uplifted 
margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, reddish-brown to pinkish-cinnamon to 
rosy-brown or brown at least at the center and often overall; margin often paler or whitish. 
Flesh white, soft, odor mild. GILLS usually ad nate, but sometimes decurrent or adnexed; 
close, soft, somewhat waxy, white. STALK 3-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or 
tapered below, often curved near base; smooth, white, not viscid; apex often prominently 
punctate. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-9 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or in groups, associated with oak in our area 
and sometimes common in the late fall and winter (along with H. brunneus). It was first 
collected in Palo Alto, California, but also occurs in eastern North America. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. I have tried it. 
COMMENTS: The reddish- to rosy-brown color of the cap (or center of the cap), non- 
viscid stalk, waxy white gills, and mild odor are the fallible fieldmarks ofthis species. The 
punctate stem apex is characteristic of many waxy caps, but in this one it is especially at- 
tractive. Leucopaxillus amarus is similarly colored but has adrycap, non-waxy gills, bitter 
taste, and white mycelium at the base of the stem. Just as common in our area isH. brun- 
neus, very similar but for its yellow-brown to tawny-brown cap (or cap center). A species 
endemic to California, H. albicastaneus, is also similar, but ranges from pure white (when 
young) to yellow-brown to peach- or ochre-tinged (in age). It has a non-viscid stalk and 
usually grows with oak, but stains rusty orfulvous in potassium hydroxide.H. subpungens 
is a small, slender-stemmed species with a pinkish-brown to yellow-brown to salmon- 
centered cap and very faint fruity odor; it occurs locally under alder, oak, and Douglas-fir. 
H. tennesseensis, widespread, is also similar but favors conifers and has a bitter taste and 
potato-like odor. There are also several similar species with a viscid stalk, including: H. 
/aurae, with a whitish cap margin, favoring hardwoods; H. discoideus, slightly darker, 
favoring conifers; and H. verna/is, a western springtime "snowbank" species with a pink- 
ish-buff to pale vinaceous cap and sordid yellowish patches on the lower half of the stalk. 
126 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
Hygrophorus bakerensis (Brown Almond Waxy Cap) 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface smooth, 
slimy or viscid when moist, cinnamon-brown to yellow-brown or tawny, the margin 
usually paler or whitish. Flesh thick, white; odor sweet but sometimes faint, like almond 
extract or crushed peach pits. GILLS white to creamy or pinkish-buff, usually decurrent 
but varying to adnate; soft, somewhat waxy. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.8-2.5 cm thick, equal 
or tapered downward, smooth, solid, dry; white to pinkish-buff. VEIL absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 7.5-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious under conifers, known only from the Pacific 
Northwest and northern California; very common at times in the fall and early winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but bland (it doesn't taste like it smells). 
CO MMENTS: This species is one of the commonest and most characteristic waxy caps of 
the Pacific Northwest. The reddish-brown to yellow-brown cap, waxy decurrent gills, non- 
viscid stalk, and almondy odor set it apart. The gills and stalk are sometimes beaded with 
droplets in moist weather, but there is no latex as in Lactarius. The gills are usually decur- 
rent, in contrast to Co/lybia oregonensis. a similarly colored, strongly fragrant mushroom 
with adnexed or notched, non-waxy gills. H. agathosmus has the same odor, but its cap is 
gray, not brown. Other fragrant waxy caps from the Pacific Northwest and California 
include: H. monticola and H. vinicolor, similar but with larger spores (the latter with an 
unpleasant taste); H. variicolor, also similar but with lower half of stalk distinctly viscid 
or glutinous; and H. paciJicus, a strongly aromatic (but not almondy) species with a russet 
to tawny to pinkish-buff, often lobed or wavy cap, pale yellowish ills. and larger spores. 
Hygrophorus speciosus (Larch Waxy Cap) Color Plate 15 
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate orexpandingto plane or even centrally 
depressed; surface slimy or viscid when moist, smooth, bright orange-red to orange, often 
fading to orange-yellow; margin often paler. Flesh white or tinted yellow, soft. GILLS 
adnate to decurrent, white to pale yellow, the edges usually yellow; well-spaced, thick, soft, 
waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or thicker below, white or with 
yellow to orange stains over lower portion; viscid to slimy when moist, at least below. VEIL 
single (var. speciosus) or double-layered (var. kauffmani,); outer layer evanescent, leaving 
slime on stalk; inner layer when present fibrillose, sometimes forming a slight ring on stalk. 
SPO RE PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious in woods and bogs under conifers, especially 
larch but also pine; common in the late summer and fall throughout the range of larch, but 
also frequent with ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Edible; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This is one of the few brightly colored waxy caps belonging to the genus 
Hygrophorus in its strictest sense(i.e., waxy caps with divergent gill tissue). It is easily told 
from the numerous red to orange Hygrocybes by its habitat, viscid stalk, and white to pale 
yellow decurrent gills. The cap is never olive-brown as in H. hypothejus. H. pyrophilus 
is similar; it has a red cap, less viscid stalk, and was found in burnt ground near Mt. Shasta. 
Hygrophorus hypothejus (Olive-Brown Waxy Cap) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate, plane, or depressed; surface smooth, 
viscid or slimy when wet, color variable: typically dark brown to olive-brown at the center 
and greenish-yellow to yellow at the margin when young (but sometimes entirely olive- 
brown), often developing yellow-orange to reddish-orange tones in age, especially near 
the margin. Flesh thin, yellowish to whitish; odor mild. GILLS decurrent or occasionally 
-- 
--- 
... 
 
. 
L 
, '\ 
"' 
r'. " 
 ,l l. 
,I'" 
,. 
Hygrophorus hYPolhejus commonly grows with pine, often in the company of H. g/iocyclus. Gills 
are pale yellow to orange, decurrent, and fairly waxy, and the cap is slimy when wet. 
adnate, well-spaced, thick, soft, waxy, at first pallid but soon becoming pale yellow, and in 
age sometimes brightly colored (like margin of cap). STALK (3) 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) 
cm thick, equal or tapered downward; yellow at apex, otherwise pallid or variously colored 
(like cap) and viscid or slimy when moist. VEIL evanescent, leaving slime on stalk and 
sometimes an obscure fibrillose ring. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9 x 4-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers, particularly pine-very 
widely distributed and often abundant in cool weather. It is common from late fall through 
early spring in our coastal pine forests. 
EDIBILITY: Bountiful, but bland. See H. sordidus for details. 
COMMENTS: This waxy cap is best recognized by its olive-brown to olive-yellow cap 
when young which is sticky or slimy and convex to depressed in age, the decurrent gills, and 
association with pine. The colors are extremely variable, especially in age, and young 
specimens bear little resemblance to old ones until you find stages in between. Both slim and 
relatively robust specimens can be found. Other species with an olive-brown to grayish cap 
and viscid stalk include: H. Juligineus, very similar but with a darker ( olive to blackish) 
cap, common in cool weather under conifers (mainly in eastern North America); H.Jusco- 
albus, with larger spores (9-13 microns long) and H. limacinus, with even larger (10-17 
microns) spores; and two species which lack an inner (fibrillose) veil: H. occidentalis, 
small-spored, cap brown to grayish with a pallid margin, often under oak; and H. mega- 
sporus, with spores 12-18 microns long. All ofthese species favor conifers and have white 
to grayish gills; none develop the bright colors typical of mature H. hypothejus. 
Hygrophorus olivaceoalbus (Sheathed Waxy Cap) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex or broadly umbonate to more or less plane; surface slimy or 
viscid when moist, dark brown to nearly black at the center, usually paler (grayish to 
olive-brown) toward the margin, and usually with a streaked appearance from darker 
fibrils. Flesh thick, white, soft, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent. thick, soft, waxy, 
pure white or pallid, sometimes becoming grayish. STALK (3) 5-12 (15) cm long, 1-3 cm 
thick, equal or thicker below; smooth and white above the ring, viscid to slimy (when moist) 
below and sheathed with blackish to grayish-brown, olive-brown, or gray fibrils which 
break up into patches or scaly rings. VEIL double-layered, the outer layer evanescent and 
depositing slime on stalk, the inner layer fibrillose and sometimes forming an obscure ring 
at top of fibrillose sheath. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-12 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
128 
HYGROPHORACEAE 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers (especially spruce) 
in western and northern North America, fruiting from late summer through early winter. 
I have seen it in northern California under Sitka spruce and in the southern Rocky 
Mountains under Engelmann spruce and blue spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but bland and slimy. 
COMMENTS: This handsome Hygrophorus can be distinguished from similarly colored 
waxy caps by the gray to dark brown fibrillose sheath on the stem. The contrasting colors 
are very striking. The coastal variety (also called H. persoonil) is usually quite dark and 
slimy; the Rocky Mountain version is often paler (grayer) and only slightly viscid if at all. 
Other species: H. ;nocybiform;s has a grayish-brown sheath and veil, but its stalk is not 
viscid, and its dark gray cap is only 3-7 cm broad; it occurs in the Pacific Northwest under 
conifers. H. tephro/eucus, H. pustu/atus, and H. morris;; are even smaller and have small, 
pointlike grayish scales on the stalk. See also the species listed under H. hypothejus. 
Hygrophorus agathosmus (Gray Almond Waxy Cap) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane or with margin uplifted; surface smooth, viscid when 
moist, dull gray to ashy-gray, brownish-gray, or at times grayish-olive; margin incurved at 
first. Flesh soft, whitish; odor sweet, like almond extract (but sometimes faint). GILLS 
adnate to slightly decurrent, close orwell-spaced, soft, waxy, white or sometimes grayish in 
age. STALK 4-10 (16) cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, equal or narrowed below, smooth, not 
viscid; white or tinged gray. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10.5)( 4.5-5.5 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under conifers, widely distributed and fairly common 
in cool weather, but rather infrequent in our area. It is partial to spruce, but is associated 
locally with Douglas-fir (probably because there isn't any spruce). 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but bland. It is unfortunate that it doesn't taste like it smells. 
COMMENTS: The grayish cap, waxy gills, dry stalk, almondy fragrance, and association 
with conifers are the telltale traits of this fine fungus. The odor is sometimes faint, but if 
several are placed together in a closed container it usually becomes evident. H. calophyllus 
and H. camarophyllus are somewhat similar but do not have an almondy odor. Other 
species: H. odoratus is a small, slender version of H. agathosmus with an almondy odor 
and larger spores (11-14 microns long); it occurs in the Pacific Northwest under conifers. 
H. occ;denta/;s has a viscid stalk, weaker odor, and grows under oak or conifers. 
Hygrophorus agalhosmus, mature specimens. Note the Douglas-fir needles stuck to the cap, indi- 
cating that it was viscid. Cap is grayish, gills white and waxy, odor almondy.1t also grows with spruce. 
 
,, 
" 
.., . 
/fJ!' , 
-. 
. 
. 
.. 
. . 
\. 
..... 
HYGROPHORUS 
129 
Hygrophorus calophyllus (Gray-Brown Waxy Cap) 
CAP 4-11 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface smooth, viscid or 
slimy when moist, evenly colored deep olive-brown to dark gray-brown to umber, the 
margin sometimes slightly paler. Flesh soft, white, thick; odor mild or faintly fragrant. 
GILLS white or flushed a delicate pink, well-spaced, thick, soft, waxy, usually decurrent. 
ST ALK 5-12 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, smooth, not viscid; apex 
white, otherwise colored like the cap but usually slightly paler. VEIL absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on ground under conifers, western North America, 
not common. I have found it only once in our area. with Douglas-fir, in December. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. 
COMMENTS: Whether white or pink, the gills contrast sharply with the dark cap and 
stem, making this a most attractive mushroom. Often the gills will develop their pinkish 
tint only as they mature, leading one to wrongly assume that the developing spores are 
pink! The stalk is not viscid as in H. h}pothejus and H. olivaceoalbus, and the soft, clean, 
waxy gills distinguish it from Clitocybe. Very similar but more common is H. camaro- 
phyllus, with a dry to only slightly viscid (never slimy), streaked, grayish-brown cap and 
white to grayish-tinted (never pink) gills. It also fruits under conifers, sometimes near 
melting snow, and is easily mistaken for a Clitocybe. H. marzuolus grows almost 
exclusively in the spring, often near snow. It has well-spaced gills and is entirely pallid 
when young, but soon becomes grayish overall (including the gills). 
TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
c9@ 
spores i 
THIS is by far the largest and most diverse family of pale-spored agarics. The spore print 
is usually white, but ranges to buff, yellowish, pale lilac, or pinkish. A stem is normally 
present, but in several of the shelflike, wood-inhabiting species it is rudimentary or even 
absent. The gills are typically attached to the stem, but in some ofthe smaller forms they 
are free. Though most of the species are terrestrial, many grow on wood-whereas other 
pale-spored families are almost exclusively terrestrial. They are largely woodland fungi, 
but a few, such as Marasmius oreades, grow in grass. 
The best way to recognize the family is to eliminate the other pale-spored families. The 
gills are not normally soft, thick, and waxy as in the Hygrophoraceae, nor shallow, blunt, 
and fold like as in the Cantharellaceae; the fleshy forms do not have noticeably dry, brittle 
flesh as in the Russulaceae (and their tissue lacks sphaerocysts-a microscopic feature), 
nor do they ha ve a volva as in the Amanitaceae, and the few species with a veil do not ha ve 
the free gills typical of the Lepiotaceae. (There are some exceptions to the above, but they 
are discussed under individual species or genera.) 
The size and complexity of the Tricholomataceaeare such that no generalizations can be 
made regarding edibility-other than that some are poisonous and some are not. Many 
have not been adequately tested and others are too small to be of value. The safest approach 
is to learn the distinguishing characteristics of each edible species-and there are some 
plentiful collectable delectables that are well worth getting to know! The most notable 
are the oyster mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus), man-on-horseback (Tricholomaflavo- 
virens), honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea), matsutake (Armillaria ponderosa), 
fairy ring mushroom (Marasmius oreades), and blewit (Clitocybe nuda). Several lesser- 
known species (e.g., Lentinus ponderosus) are also excellent. 
130 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
The Tricholomataceae embraces more genera than any other family of gilled 
mushrooms, and its taxonomy is still in a state of flux. Many ofthe genera are defined by 
esoteric chemical and anatomical (microscopic) characteristics, which presents obvious 
problems when attempting to construct (or use) a key based solely on field characters. It 
helps to break down the genera into three large groups: wood-inhabiting, shelflike forms 
(typified by P/eurolus); fleshy-stalked, mostly terrestrial forms (typified by Trich%ma 
and Clitocybe), and thin, fragile- or cartilaginous-stalked, terrestrial or wood-inhabiting 
types (typified by Mycena, Co/lybia, and Marasmius). 
In the following key, only the more distinctive genera are included; the more difficult or 
obscure ones are then keyed out under the distinctives ones, sometimes on a species- 
by-species basis. 
Key to the Tricholomataceae 
I. Growing on other mushrooms; gills thick and widely spaced or poorly formed to practically 
absent .............................  . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Asterophora, p. 200 
I. Not growing on other mushrooms, or if so then gills well-developed, thin, close .......... 2 
2. Fruiting body pinkish to salmon, orange, or yellow-orange; cap surface conspicuously reticulate 
(netted or veined and pitted); cap 2-5 cm broad; stalk central or off-center, tough; spore print 
pinkish; found on dead eastern hardwoods (e.g., maple); infrequent .. Rhodotus palmatus 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Stalk absent, or if present then typically off-center to lateral; usually growing on wood (or 
woody material such as coffee bean waste or wood chip mulch) or on moss ............ 4 
3. Stalk present, well-developed, more or less central; growing on ground or wood ......... 6 
4. Fruiting body tough and leathery or corky; gill edges longitudinally split and cap densely hairy 
or cap concentrically zoned or grooved (and often velvety) and gills often mazelike (forming 
elongated pockets) or wavy; found on hardwoods ..... (see Polyporaceae& Allies, p. 549) 
4. Fruiting body fleshy, or iftough then not as above .................................. 5 
5. Edges of gills conspicuously serrated (toothed) or eroded, even when fresh ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lentinus & Lentinellus, p. 141 
5. Not as above; gill edges usually entire (but sometimes wavy) ..... Pleurotus & Allies, p. 132 
6. Stalk arising from an underground "tuber" (the "tuber" cylindrical or bulbous, often hollow); 
cap usually scaly, fibrillose, or granulose; not common .............. Squamanita, p. 197 
6. Not as above (but stalk may have a tapered underground "tap root") .................. 7 
7. Cap granulose (covered with a layer of mealy or powdery granules that are sometimes washed 
off by rain); veil present (check young specimens!), sometimes forming an annulus (ring) on 
stalk; stalk granulose below the veil .............................. Cystoderma, p. 198 
7. Not as above; veil absent. or if present then cap and stalk not granulose ................ 8 
8. Veil present, usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk ... Armillaria & Allies, p. 189 
8. Veil absent or rudimentary and evanescent, not forming an annulus ................... 9 
9. Gills and stalk bruising dark gray to black (sometimes slowly) or developing such stains in age; 
basidia with siderophilous granules; not common in our area . Lyophyllum & Allies, p. 173 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Stalk fleshy, usually at least 5 mm thick .......................................... II 
10. Stalk usually thin and hollow or stuffed and either fragile or cartilaginous (tough), typically 
5 mm thick or less (occasionally thicker but then with a tough cartilaginous outer rind) . 23 
II. Fruiting body partially or completely purple, violet, or lilac when fresh (at least the gills); odor 
not radishlike; usually on ground or compost .................................... 12 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
12. Gills thickish and fairly well-spaced; stalk fibrous and/ or fibrillose; spore print white or lilac- 
tinged .......................................................... Laccaria, p. 171 
12. Gills close, not thick; spore print dull or dingy pinkish ........... Clitocybe & Allies, p. 148 
13. Copious white mycelial mat usually present at base of stalk orin substrate; stalk and gills white or 
yellowish but not gray; cap and stalk dry, dull, unpolished, often tough; stalk not hollow; spore 
print white; spores with amyloid warts; found in woods or under trees Leucopaxillus, p. 166 
13. Not with above features; spore print variously colored (white, buff, pinkish, etc.) ....... 14 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
131 
14. Spore print white, yellowish, or buff(or in one case brownish) ....................... 15 
14. Spore print pinkish to pinkish-buff .............................................. 27 
15. Typically growing in dense clusters in disturbed soil (along roads, paths, etc., but sometimes also 
in woods); gills whitish to gray; stalk at least I cm thick; caps typicallyatleast3cm broad; spore 
print white (not buff); basidia with siderophilous granules ... Lyophyllum & Allies, p. 173 
15. Not with above features ....................................................... 16 
16. Gills pinkish, flesh-colored, cinnamon, or somewhat vinaceous, thickish and fairly well-spaced; 
cap up to 6 cm broad; stalk rather tough and fibrous, not white; spores spiny Laccar;a, p. 171 
16. Not with above features ....................................................... 17 
17. Gills typically adnate to decurrent ............................................... 18 
17. Gills typically notched, adnexed, or even free (occasionally adnate but not decurrent) ... 21 
18. Gills and flesh olive-yellow to yellow to orange; cap not viscid; gills not repeatedly forked; 
growing on or near wood (but wood often buried or not visible) or from roots ......... 19 
18. Not with above features ....................................................... 20 
19. Fruiting body orange to yellow-orange or with olive tones; cap and stalk smooth, without 
scales; associated with hardwoods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . .. Omphalotus, p. 146 
19. Fruiting body pale yellow to yellow, often with differently colored scales or fibrils on cap or 
stalk; associated mainly with conifers .......................... Tr;cholomops;s, p. 144 
20. Cap viscid or slimy when moist and/ or gills thick, widely spaced, and clean or waxy-looking 
. .. . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Hygrophoraceae, p. 103) 
20. Not as above ............................................. CI;tocybe & Allies, p. 148 
21. Growing on or near wood (sometimes very rotten or buried); flesh and gills often (but not 
always!) yellow to pale yellow ................................ Tr;cholomops;s, p. 144 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Cap smooth, without fibrils or scales, usually white to gray to grayish-brown or dark brown 
when fresh and moist; gills crowded; found in many habitats but especially in grassy or land- 
scaped areas or in mountains soon after snow melts; spores amyloid .. Melanoleuca, p. 169 
22. Not as above; cap variously colored (yellow, greenish, brown, grayish, white, reddish-brown, 
etc.); found in woods or with trees; spores not amyloid .............. Tr;choloma, p. 176 
23. Spore print pinkish to ochre-brown; cap bell-shaped to conical when young, reddish-brown to 
dark brown to blackish (the margin often paler); stalk similarly colored, minutely velvety; 
odor usually strong and fishy or reminiscent of cucumber; giant cystidia present on gills; not 
common in our area (but widespread) ........................ Macrocyst;d;a cucum;s 
23. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
24. Cap conical or bell-shaped when young (but may expand in age), often translucent-striate when 
moist, margin not usually incurved when young; stalk not polished or tough Mycena, p. 224 
24. Not as above ................................................................. 25 
25. Gills purple to pinkish, flesh-colored, or dingy cinnamon, rather thick and well-spaced; cap 
convex to plane or uplifted, not conical or bell-shaped; stalk tough, fibrous, not white; growing 
on ground; spores usually spiny ..................................... Laccar;a, p. 17 I 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Cap small (up to 2.5 cm broad), cap and stalk golden-yellow to pale yellow and covered with 
scurfy or mealy particles; gills creamy to yellow, usually adnate to decurrent; growing on logs 
and sticks of hardwoods in eastern North America and on aspen in the Southwest and Rocky 
Mountains ......................: Cyptotrama chrysopeplum (=X erul;na chrysopepla) 
26. Not as above ................................................................ 27 
27. Gills typically adnate to decurrent ............................................... 28 
27. Gills notched to adnexed or free, or sometimes adnate Marasm;us, Collyb;a, & Allies, p. 201 
28. Gills and/ or cap pale yellowish to yellow, orange, pinkish, or greenish when fresh (may fade!); 
fruiting body small or minute (cap often less than 2.5 cm broad); stalk usually 1-3 mm thick; 
cap usually depressed centrally in age; often found on logs or with grass, moss, or lichen 
........................ ............. . . . ........ Omphal;na& Xeromphal;na, p. 221 
28. Not as above ................................................................ 29 
29. Stalk thin, tough, and pliant or if thick then with a tough outer cartilaginous rind; gills usually 
adnate, if decurrent then usually widely spaced ..... Marasm;us, Collyb;a, & Allies, p. 201 
29. Not as above; gills often decurrent, usually close or crowded ..... CI;tocybe & Allies, p. 148 
132 
TRICHOLOMAT ACEAE 
PLEUROTUS & Allies 
Small to large wood-inhabiting mushrooms usually growing shelf like. CAP smooth or hairy, dry 
or viscid. Flesh soft, rubbery, pliant, or tough. GILLS adnate to decurrent, edges typically not 
serrated. STALK absent or if present usually lateral or off-center. occasionally central. VEIL 
absent (except in Pleurotus dryinus). VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT pale (white to yellowish. 
pale lilac. or pinkish). Spores smooth, not amyloid except for Panellus. 
THIS is an artificial grouping of pale-spored, wood-inhabiting agarics with a consistently 
off-center to lateral or absent stalk. The most common genus, Pleurotus, can be recognized 
by its rather soft, fleshy fruiting body. Hohenbuehelia includes a number of species once 
placed in Pleurotus but now segregated because of their semi-gelatinous to rubbery- 
pliant flesh and large, thick-walled sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills. Panus and Panel/us 
incorporate those forms with a tough, often hairy fruiting body (the latter with amyloid 
spores), while Phyl/otopsis includes species with pinkish, sausage-shaped spores. 
All of the above genera are small but widely distributed. The oyster mushroom 
(Pleurotus ostreatus) and its relatives are among our best edible mushrooms, but most of 
the other species are either too small, too tough, or too rare to be of value. 
Key to Pleurotus & Allies 
I. Veil present when young but often disappearing in age; flesh very thick; cap medium-sized to 
large, typically with grayish fibrils, hairs; or scales (but sometimes whitish or ochre); gill edges 
normally entire (not serrated); growing on hard woods( often living) Pleurotus dryinus, p. 136 
I. Not with above features ........................................................ 2 
2. Veil present, at least when young, sometimes forming an annulus (ring) on stalk ......... 3 
2. Veil absent in all stages ......................................................... 4 
3. Fruiting body small, tough, brownish; cap less than 2.5 cm broad; veil membranous; spores 
amyloid; growing on dead hardwoods ........... Tectel/a patel/aris(=Panus operculatus) 
3. Not as above; larger .............................. (see Lentinus& Lentinel/us, p. 141) 
4. Cap minute (2-8 mm broad), bluish-gray to bluish-black or grayish-black; fruiting body shaped 
like an inverted cup; gills widely spaced; stalk absent; growing on hardwoods, shrubs, vines, 
etc., but not on mosses ..................................... Resupinatusapplicatus 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap small (less than 2.5 cm) and hairy, white to brownish; gills forking orveinlike and very wavy 
(crisped); on hardwoods in eastern North America Trogia crispa (see Schizoph)'lIum. p.590) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Cap small (less than 2.5 cm), often rubbery or gelatinous, white to grayish; gills often veinlike 
or even absent; usually (but not always) growing on mosses; mostly northern Leptoglossum 
6. Not as above ........................................................... _ . . _ .. 7 
7. Cap small or minute (up to 2.5 cm broad), white to creamy or tinged purplish or pinkish .. 8 
7. Not as above (larger and/ or differently colored) ................................... II 
8. Gills very widely spaced and often with veins between them; stalk usually present and darkening 
in age from base upward; common along west coast. . . (see Marasmiel/us candidus, p. 206) 
8. Not as above .......... '........... . .. . . . .. '" ................... ........... ... 9 
9. Fruiting body white or whitish; gills fairly well-spaced to widely-spaced; fruiting body not 
tough; spores not amyloid ............... Pleurotus (=Cheimonophyl/um) candidissimus 
9. Not as above; spores amyloid .................................................. 10 
10. Gills pinkish-gray; cap usually with purplish or vinaceous tints; growing in groups on dead 
hardwoods (especially birch) ...................................... Panel/us ringens 
10. Gills pallid to pale pinkish-gray; cap more or less same color and often with a gelatinous layer 
when young; found on dead conifers (especially larch) ................... Panel/us mitis 
II. Gills usually veined (especially near stalk or base of cap) or repeatedly forked; gills orange to 
yellowish or olive-yellow, or if not then lower stalk brown and velvety (see Paxillaceae, p. 476) 
II. Not with above features .... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 12 
12. Gills orange to yellow-orange, olive-yellow, or yellowish. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 13 
12. Gills some other color (white, gray, brownish, violet, etc., but may age or discolor yellowish) 15 
J 
Pleurotus ostreatus, gill detail. The white gills, white or lilac-tinged spores, off-center stalk, and fleshy 
texture typify Pleurotus. (Dan Harper) 
13. Cap densely hairy or fuzzy; stalk absent or rudimentary . _ . . . . Phyl/otops;s n;dulans, p. 140 
13. Not as above; cap not hairy, or if hairy then stalk present ........................... 14 
14. Cap hairy and taste bitter-acrid or cap viscid when moist or old and flesh white ......... 26 
14. Cap not hairy; flesh not white ............................... (see Omphalotus, p. 146) 
15. Cap fairly large to very large (10-50 cm broad when mature); either growing on hard woods and 
cap coarsely hairy or found on or near conifers and stalk usually well-developed ....... 16 
15. Cap smaller, or if large then not as above ......................................... 17 
16. Cap coarsely hairy; growing on hardwoods ...................... Panus str;gosus, p. 140 
16. Stalk well-developed; growing on or near conifers ....... (see Lent;nus ponderosus, p. 143) 
17. Cap with dense brown hairs and fibrils, funnel-shaped or with a deeply depressed center; gills 
decurrent, very crowded, pallid; stalk well-developed; common in the tropics and also along 
the Gulf of Mexico .................................... Panus (=Lent;nel/us) er;n;t;s 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap only 2-4 cm broad, viscid when moist, pallid to pale orange becoming pinkish to caramel- 
brown; gills close to fairly well-spaced (not crowded); spores amyloid . Panel/us long;nquus 
18. Not with above features; common. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. 19 
19. Gills pallid (white to creamy, yellowish, or gray) _.................................. 20 
19. Gills darker (tan to brown, reddish-brown, violet-tinted, etc.) ............... _ . . . . . . .. 26 
20. Gills narrow (shallow) and crowded; fruiting body small to medium-sized ............. 21 
20. G ills broad or fairly broad ( deep), well-spaced to close, but not crowded; fruiting body medium- 
sized to large ............................................................... 23 
21. Cap pure white when fresh, but may become creamy in age ..... Pleurotus porr;gens, p. 135 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Cap dark grayish-brown to bluish-black; usually found in the wild ...................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. H ohenbuehelia atroeaerulea (see H. petaloides group, p. 136) 
22. Cap some shade of brown or paler; found in wild or often in gardens, flower pots, etc. ...... 
.................................... . Hohenbueheliapetalo;desgroup & others, p. 136 
23. Stalk absent or rudimentary, not well-developed; cap with ridges and/ or spines; taste un- 
pleasant .................. Hohenbuehelia mastrueatus (see H. petaloides group, p. 136) 
23. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
24. Cap white to tan or pinkish-tinged, often breaking up into scales in age; stalk present; found 
on living hardwoods (elm, etc.), often high up in the tree; widespread but not yet reported 
from California; edible but rather tough .... Hypsizygus tessulatus (=Pleurotus ulmarius) 
24. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
25. Stalk well-developed and often long (4-22 cm); gills usually adnexed or notched; cap creamy or 
tinged pinkish, often with watery spots; usually on living hardwoods . Pleurotus elongatipes 
25. Stalk absent, or if well-developed then gills typically decurrent; cap white, gray, brown, greenish, 
etc.; very common, especially on hardwoods ......... Pleurotus ostreatus& others, p. 134 
134 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
26. Cap small (3 em broad or less); gills ochre-buff to brownish to pale cinnamon or ta wny-olive in 
old age; taste usually acrid or bitter .......................... Pane/Ius stipticus, p. 138 
26. Not as above; usually larger .................................................... 27 
27. Cap densely hairy .............................................. Panus rudis, p. 139 
27. Not as above; cap more or less smooth (or breaking up into scales) ................... 28 
28. Cap viscid when moist or in age, yellow-green to olive-green, olive-brown, or with violet tones; 
stalk absent or lateral; growing shelflike ...................... Panel/us serotinus, p. 137 
28. Cap not viscid, violet to reddish-brown, tan, etc., but never greenish or yellow; stalk often well- 
developed, lateral to off-center or central ...................... Panus conchatus, p. 138 
Pleurotus ostreatus 
(Oyster Mushroom) 
Color Plates 27, 28 
CAP 4-15 cm broad or more, oyster- or fan-shaped, convex becoming plane or sometimes 
funnel-shaped; surface smooth, slightly lubricous when moist but not viscid; color 
variable: white to gray, grayish-brown, tan, or dark brown (sometimes yellowish in old 
age); margin inrolled when young, often wavy or lobed. Flesh thick, white, firm but soft, 
tougher near the stalk; odor and taste mild. GILLS fairly close, broad, decurrent (if stalk 
is present), white or tinged gray but often discoloring yellowish in old age. STALK absent 
or if present usually short, stout, and off-center or lateral (but sometimes central); 0.5-4 
cm long and thick; solid, firm, dry, usually hairy or downy at least at base. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT white to pale lilac or lilac-gray; spores 7-9 )( 3-4 microns, oblong to 
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Occasionally solitary but usually in shelving masses or overlapping rows or 
columns on hardwood logs and stumps; sometimes also on standing trees, rarely on 
conifers; common throughout most of the northern hemisphere. Its preferred hosts 
include elm, cottonwood, alder, and sycamore, but in our area it favors oak and tanoak, 
prod ucing large crops after the first fall rains and smaller crops thereafter through the 
spring. I have also seen stupendous fruitings (several hundred pounds!) growing in clusters 
in a treeless field where crushed coffee beans were dumped. It is easily cultivated on a wide 
variety of substrates, including compressed sawdust, shredded Time magazines, and 
presumably coffee grounds. If an "oyster log" is dragged home from the wild and kept 
moist, it will produce crops regularly. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious-breaded and fried it is superb and remarkably remi- 
niscent of seafood. Be sure to check for small beetles between the gills (these can be re- 
moved by dousing the mushroom briefly in water), and of course, for maggots. The tough 
stem or basal stump of tissue should be removed. Large specimens can be pounded like 
abalone to make them tender. P. ostreatus and its Asian counterpart, P. sajor-cajou, are 
now cultivated commercially and sold fresh under the name "tree oysters." 
COMMENTS: Pure, pale, and graceful, the oyster mushroom is easily distinguished by its 
white gills, tender flesh, smooth cap, and shelflike growth habit on wood. The cap color 
and position of the stem depend to some extent on the location of the fruiting body. When 
growing out of the side of a log, the stem is lateral or absent, since there is no need to elevate 
the. cap. When growing from the top of a log, however, the stem can be central, leading to 
confusion with ClilOcybe. The cap is generally darker in sunlight and correspondingly paler 
in dim surroundings, but distinct color forms also seem to occur, including a brown- 
capped form that grows on bush lupine along the ocean and a giant thick-fleshed form 
that is common on cottonwood in inland valleys. In fact, P. ostreatus has long been 
recognized as a "collective" species, i.e., a group of closely related but distinct forms. 
Fortunately, they all appear to be edible, so that their exact taxonomy needn't concern you 
(at least, it doesn't concern me!). Other species:P. sapidus is now regarded as a synonym for 
P. ostreatus; P. columbinus is a rare species with a bluish- or greenish-tinted cap, but is 
otherwise very similar;P. cornucopiae grows in dense, upright clusters on woody debris in 
" 
So you think oyster mushrooms or "tree oysters" (Pleurolus oSlrealus) always grow on trees? Left: 
Clusters growing in a treeless field on decomposing coffee beans. Right: A cluster growing out of a 
kitchen chair. (The owner of the chair claims to be a sloppy eater who unknowingly helped incubate 
the developing mycelium by sitting in the chair. A fortuitous leak in his roof elicited this crop of 
oyster mushrooms. He now waters the chair regularly!) 
the Rocky Mountains and probably elsewhere. It has a lined or ridged, nearly central stalk 
and depressed or funnel-shaped cap that is open (incised) on one side. It is edible when 
young but often develops a bitter or unpleasant taste in age. For a smaller, thinner, white 
species growing on conifers, see P. porrigens. 
Pleurotus porrigens (Angel Wings) 
CAP 4-8 (I 0) )( 2-5 cm, fan-shaped to tongue- or petal-shaped; surface smooth, not viscid, 
pure white to milky-white, but sometimes creamy in old age; margin at first incurved, often 
lobed or wavy. Flesh very thin, pliant, white, odor and taste mild. GILLS crowded, thin, 
narrow, white or yellowish, decurrent if a stalk is present. STALK absent or present only 
as a narrowed, stubby white base. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-7)( 5-6 
microns, nearly round, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: In shelving groups or overlapping clusters on old rotting conifers, especially 
hemlock; widely distributed. It is very common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and 
northern California, but I have yet to find it south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but in my humble fungal opinion, bland and insubstantial. However, 
some people proclaim it superior to P. ostreatus. 
Left: Pleurolus porrigens, a thin white cousin of the oyster mushroom that grows on dead conifers 
Right: Pleurolusdryinus(see p.136) resembles other oyster mushrooms, but boasts a veil, remnants 
of which can be seen clinging to the margin of the cap. 
\ 
 
,- 
 .. 
136 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
COMMENTS: Also known as Pleurocybella porrigens and Pleurotellus porrigens, this 
species can be distinguished from other types of Pleurotus by its thin, pliant, white fruiting 
body and narrow, crowded gills. It is to rotting conifers what P. ostreatus is to rotting 
hardwoods-i.e., common and cosmopolitan. The shining white fruiting bodies stand 
out vividly in the forest gloom, looking so exquisitely pure and unsullied that it is easy to 
see how they acq uired the nickname" Angel Wings." Other species: P. lignatilis (=C litocybe 
lignatilis) is a similar whitish species with narrow, crowded gills and a more prominent 
stem. It frequently has a farinaceous odor and prefers hardwoods rather than conifers. 
Pleurotus dryinus 
(Veiled Oyster Mushroom) 
CAP 4-20 cm broad, broadly convex sometimes becoming plane or slightly depressed in 
age; surface dry, with soft grayish fibrils or scales, but sometimes whitish or in age yellow- 
ish; margin at first inrolled. Flesh very thick, white, firm; odor mild to pungent or fragrant. 
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, often veined or forking on the stalk; white, but sometimes 
discoloring yellowish in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually off-centerbut 
sometimes central; rather tough, often short, equal or tapered downward; solid, whitish. 
VEIL membranous, white to grayish, forming a slight ring on stalk or leaving remnants 
on cap margin or disappearing entirely. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-12 (17) )( 3.5-5 
microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on hardwoods (usually living); widely distributed 
but not common. Alder is a favorite host; it is also reported on oak, and I've found it 
growing locally from the wound of a living madrone, in December. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but rather tough. 
CO MMENTS: The thick firm flesh and soft hairs or scales on the capare good fieldmarks; 
so is the veil when it is visible (see photograph at bottom of p. 135). It might be confused 
with Lentinus lepideus, which has serrated gills, or Panus strigosus, which is differently 
colored. P. corticatus, Panus dryinus, and Armillaria dryina are synonyms. 
Hohenbuehelia petaloides group (Shoehorn Oyster Mushroom) 
CAP 2-7)( 3-7 (10) cm, spatula- to funnel-shaped or shoehorn-like when upright (i.e, split 
or open on one side), fan- or petal-shaped when shelflike; tapering to a stemlike base; 
surface smooth or with a whitish bloom when young and often downy toward the base, 
moist to somewhat rubbery-gelatinous but not viscid except when very wet; some shade of 
brown, tan, or grayish-brown; margin often lobed or wavy, at first incurved or inrolled. 
Flesh pliant, usually white (sometimes watery tan). GILLS narrow, thin, crowded, deeply 
decurrent, white or tinged gray, often becoming yellowish or creamy in age and often 
becoming crisped (wavy) in dry weather. STALK lateral or off-center, continuous with 
cap, often short (14 cm long), equal or tapered downward, up to 2.5 cm thick, white or 
grayish; fuzzy, downy, or minutely hairy. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9 
)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Gills with large, thick-walled cystidia. 
Hohenbuehelia peta/oides group. Note the crowded gills and shoehorn-shaped fruiting body. The 
white specks on the caps at left are an abnormality (probably a fungal parasite). 
'\ 
II. 
" 
.. 
..", 
. 
-- 
 ... 
 
, 
 
- 
- --- 
 
- , 
, 
-,- "- 
'., 
;;::: \'-" 
,... " 
, " 
 
.. 
. 
. . 
t 
. , . 
I: 
. 
 
, 
Hohenbuehelia pelaloides group. Left: Close-up of gills. The edges often become wavy as the gills dry 
out, but are not serrated (toothed). Right: These young specimens remind me of penguins. They 
came up in' a potting mix composed largely of wood chips. 
HABIT AT: Usually in groups or small clusters on rotting or buried wood, sawdust mulch, 
etc.; widely distributed. This species "complex" is common year-round in our area in 
nurseries, flower pots, landscaped areas where wood chip mulch has been used, etc. It 
occurs less commonly in the wild, usually on rotting conifers such as hemlock. I have seen 
it in Yosemite National Park in the spring and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice (according to most sources); I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Pleurotus petaloides, this species and its close relatives 
are best distinguished by their crowded gills, brown cap, white spores, and lateral stem 
or stemlike base. Terrestrial fruiting bodies are often reminiscent of upright, rolled-up 
leaves or shoehorns, while those that grow shelflike on wood are usually fan-shaped as in 
other oyster mushrooms. The gelatinized layer of tissue beneath the surface of the cap is 
seldom evident unless the specimens are waterlogged. U nd.er the microscope, however, it is 
often discernible. H. geogenia is a very similar species with a hazel-brown to yellow-brown 
cap that differs mi<:roscopically. Like H. petaloides. it is apt to be looked for in Clitocybe, 
but the cap is open or split on one side and the stalk is usually off-center. Other species: 
H. atrocaerulea has a brown to bluish-black, mussel-shaped cap which is felty at least 
toward the base; it grows on wood, including yucca. H. angustatus has a pale (pinkish- 
bufO cap and round spores. H. mastrucatus has a grayish cap, unpleasant taste, and broad 
gills that are fairly well-spaced. All of these species were formerly included in Pleurotus. 
Panellus serot;nus (Late Oyster Mushroom) 
CAP 2.5-10 (15) c,m broad, kidney- or fan-shaped; surface viscid when moist or in age, 
color variable: olive-green to yellow-green, ochre, greenish-brown, or with violet tones; 
margin incurved, often lobed or wavy. Flesh thick, firm, white, with a gelatinous layer 
under the cuticle. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, pale orange to ochraceous to pale 
yellow, often fading in age. STALK absent or if present, laterally attached, short, and 
stubby (0.5-2.5 cm long); yellow to brownish or colored like cap, but hairy or velvety . VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT yellowish; spores 4-6 )( 1-2 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth, 
typically amyloid (at least in dried specimens). 
138 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in shelving groups on dead hardwood logs and branches (espe- 
cially wild cherry), sometimes also on conifers; widely distributed. Fairly common in the 
Pacific Northwest in the fall and winter, but I have yet to find it in our area. Like Flammu- 
lina velutipes. it is a cold-weather fungus, and its appearance is usually a sign that the 
mushroom season is almost over. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but mediocre; it sometimes develops a bitter taste as it ages. 
COMMENTS: The viscid, greenish to yellowish or violet-tinted cap and pale yellow to 
orange gills, plus the short, stubby stem and growth on wood make this an easy mushroom 
to recognize. According to Alexander Smith, the spores of some forms do not display 
the amyloid reaction until dried out or stored in a herbarium. 
Panel/us stipticus 
CAP 0.5-3 cm broad, spatula-, kidney-, or fan-shaped, convex to plane or depressed near 
the stalk; surface dry, minutely hairy or scurfy, buff to ochre-buff, tan, brownish, or 
cinnamon-brown, sometimes concentrically zoned. Flesh thin, tough, white or pale 
yellowish; taste usually acrid or astringent. GILLS close, narrow, often forked, brownish 
to pale cinnamon or ochre-buff; adnate to decurrent, often luminescent. STALK 0.5-2 cm 
long, 3-8 mm thick, offenter to lateral, usually narrowed at base, often somewhat 
flattened; same color as cap or paler (to nearly whitish). VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 3-5 )( 1.5-3 microns, elliptical to oblong orsa usage-shaped, smooth, amyloid. 
HABITAT: Usually gregarious or in clusters or overlapping tiers on dead hardwoods; 
widely distributed, more common in eastern North America than in the West. It occurs in 
California but I have yet to find it in our area. It usually fruits in the fall, but the fruiting 
bodies do not rot quickly and consequently can be found practically year-round. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible due to its small size, tough texture, and bitter taste. 
COMMENTS: But for its luminescent gills, this listless little wood-rotter wouldn't 
attract enough attention to merit mention. Because of the brownish gills it can be mistaken 
for a Crepidotus or small Paxillus, but the spore print is white and the texture much 
tougher. The species epithet refers to its use as a styptic (bloodlotter). For other listless 
Panel/us species, see the key to Pleurotus and Allies. 
Panus conchatus (Smooth Panus; Conch Panus) 
CAP 4-17 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or broadly depressed in age; surface 
dry, smooth or minutely downy, often cracked into small scales in age; vinaceous-brown or 
violet-tinted when young and moist, fading to brownish, reddish-brown, or tan in age or 
as it dries; margin often wavy, at first inrolled. Flesh rather tough, firm, white; taste mild. 
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, narrow, often forking near stalk, tan to buff, or when moist 
often violet-tinted. STALK 2-5 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick; off-center to lateral or sometimes 
central, usually tapered downward; solid, tough, colored more or less like cap; covered with 
fine hairs at least when young. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7)( 2.5-3.5 
microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups or clusters on hardwood logs, stumps, and fallen 
branches; widely distributed but rather infrequent in our area, where it fruits in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Tough but apparently harmless. 
COMMENTS: Also known as P. torulosus, this mushroom is almost entirely violet when 
young and moist, but fades in age to tan or reddish-tan. The color, plus the growth on 
wood, decurrent gills, and non-hairy cap are good field marks. The stem is sometimes 
, 
II 
 
'-- 
Panus conchatus (=P. torulosus). These specimens are brownish, but were distinctly violet or vina- 
ceous when younger Gust like P.rudis). Note smooth (not hairy!) cap and growth on wood. 
central, leading to confusion with Clitocybe, and it is consequently keyed out under that 
,genus. The cap is not hairy as in P. rudis, nor do the gills have serrated edges as in 
Lentinus. 
Panus rudis (Hairy Pan us) 
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, fan-shaped or wedge-shaped to somewhat irregular in outline, 
convex becoming plane or depressed; surface dry, covered with dense, coarse, stiff, 
velvety hairs, reddish-brown to tan, but often violet when fresh and wet; margin incurved, 
often lobed. Flesh tough, thin, white; taste slightly bitter. GILLS decurrent, close, nar- 
row, edges entire; white, creamy, or colored like cap. STALK a short, stout plug oftissue 
up to 2 cm long, off-center to lateral or sometimes central; tough, solid, hairy like the cap 
and more or less same color. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white or yellowish; spores 
5-7 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Usually in groups on rotting hardwood stumps and logs, widely distributed. 
I have seen it several times in the fall on tanoak, but it is rather rare in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but very hairy. You'd do better to brush your teeth with it than eat it. 
Pan us rudis grows on hardwood stumps and logs. The cap is hairy, the stalk off-center to lateral. 
Young specimen at left has a violet cap, mature individuals at right are tan. 
140 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
COMMENTS: The hairy cap, tough texture, white spores, and short lateral to offenter 
stem set this singular fungus apart. As in P. conchatus, fresh wet caps are a gorgeous deep 
violet, but soon fade to reddish- or pinkish-brown. 
Panus strigosus (Giant Panus) 
CAP 10-40 cm broad or more, fan-shaped to broadly convex, plane, or slightly depressed; 
surface dry, with coarse hairs, white to buff or creamy, discoloring yellowish in old age or 
when dried. Flesh thick, rather tough, white or yellowish, taste mild. GILLS broad, white 
to buff or even tinged lilac or brownish, becoming yellowish in old age; usually decurrent, 
edges typically entire. STALK 2-15 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, usually off-center or lateral; 
solid, tough, white to buff or aging yellowish; equal or thicker below, coarsely hairy 
especially toward base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 10-13 )( 3-5 microns, oblong, 
smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or clustered (but rarely more than four together), usually in wounds 
of living hardwoods; widely distributed but rare, at least in the West. It favors maple and 
birch, but occurs in Arizona on walnut. Three gigantic local specimens were brought to 
me, but the collector didn't note the host. Each cap was more than two feet in diameter! 
EDIBILITY: Reportedly edible, but too rare and tough to be of consequence. 
COMMENTS: But for the hairy cap this humongus fungus might be mistaken for a giant 
oyster mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus). Lentinus ponderosus rivals it in size but grows on 
conifers and is not as hairy. The species epithet means "strigose," which means hairy. 
Phyllotopsis nidulans 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped to scallop-shaped in outline, broadly convex 
to plane; surface dry, often covered at first with a white chamois-like, cottony pubescence, 
otherwise pale orange to orange-buff, yellow-orange, or fading to buff, and densely hairy 
or fuzzy; margin at first inrolled. Flesh colored like cap or paler; odor typically strong and 
disagreeable (like sewer gas or rotten eggs), but sometimes mild. GILLS close, narrow, 
orange-buff to orange-yellow or pale orange. STALK absent or rudimentary. VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT pale pinkish to apricot-pink to pinkish-brown; spores 5-8 )( 
2-4 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: In groups or shelving masses on rotting logs and stumps (of both hardwoods 
and conifers); widely distributed. In our area it is common on dead oaks in the fall and 
Phy//olopsis nidu/ans. A common wood-inhabitor, easily told by its hairy or fuzzy cap, orangish to 
yellow-orange gills, and obnoxious odor. Note the absence of a stalk. 
."' \ t I f 
\ . 
.. 
\r1I 
" .-.... 
, 
t 
r' / 
, 
./- 
,', 
....\. 
t> 
/"  
 
. 
, 
.' .. 
C ::. 
.:'100:' ,...t 
-:-",:,...., .. 
."\ ". 
 
 
" " 
,  
-.: ;::, 
;:: 
J.. 
.. 
t. 
PHYLLOTOPSIS 
141 
winter, and in the Sierra Nevada and Rocky Mountains I have seen it on aspen. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. The odor is so disgusting that only a zealot with the iron con- 
stitution of Charles McIlvaine would consider eating it. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Claudopus nidulans and Panel Ius nidulans, this 
rather attractive pale orange shelving mushroom is easily recognized by its peach-fuzz- 
like cap and obnoxious odor (the latter feature, however, is lacking in some collections). 
Paxillus panuoides is somewhat similar, but has yellowish-buff spores and veined or 
forked gills. Crepidolus species have brown spores, Panellus species have white to yel- 
lowish spores, while C/audopus species have pinkish spores but do not have orange gills. 
LENTINUS & LENTINELL US 
Small to medium-sized or very large fungi usually growing on wood. CAP often hairy or scaly. 
Flesh firm or tough. GILLS usually adnate to decurrent, edges usually toothed. serrated. or ragged. 
STALK absent to lateral, off-center, or central. VEIL absent or sometimes present and forming 
a slight annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white to yellowish or buff. Spores 
smooth or rough, amyloid (Lentinellus) or not amyloid (Lentinus). 
THESE pale-spored, wood-inhabiting agarics can usually be recognized by their ragged 
or serrated gill edges (see photo on next page). Other white-spored wood-inhabitors do 
not normally have serrated gills unless they are very old or weathered. In Lentinellus the 
fruiting body is small to medium-sized and the spores are amyloid, while in Lentinus the 
fruiting body is sometimes gigantic and the spores are not amyloid. In both genera the stalk 
can be central, leading to confusion with Trich%mopsis, C/itocybe, Armillariella, and 
other wood-rotters, but more often than not it is off-center to lateral or even absent. 
Both genera are small and neither is particularly common, at least in our area. Some 
of the fleshier Lentinus species are edible, but by and large this group is not one to tempt 
the "toadstool-tester." A notable exception is Lenlinus (=Tricholomopsis) edodes, 
the renowned shiitake or "black mushroom" of Oriental cuisine. For centuries it has been 
grown on log "teepees" in Japan, and more recently on sa wdust mixtures. It is now being 
grown commercially in North America and is sold fresh or dried in many markets and 
specialty shops. Shiitake ..logs" (cultivation kits) are even available for those who want to 
row their own (see photo on p. 31). In North America the shiitake has not yet been found 
in the wild, but it may very well escape cultivation and establish itself on native oaks (or 
other hardwoods). For this reason it is keyed out below, along with several other species. 
Key to Lentinus & Lentinellus 
1. Stalk typically well-developed and central to off-center or sometimes lateral ............ 2 
1. Stalk typically absent or present only as a stubby lateral point of attachment to wood, not 
well-developed.................................. Lentinel/usursinus& others, p. 144 
2. Veil present when young, often leaving remnants on stalk and/ or cap in age ............ 3 
2. Veil absent (check young specimens if possible) .................................... 6 
3. Found on hardwoods along Gulf of Mexico and in tropics; fruiting body Collybia-like but 
tough; gills usually staining reddish-brown when bruised ............. Lentinus detonsus 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Usually growing on conifers (including fence posts and railroad ties); cap whitish to buff or 
yellow, often with darker scales ............................. Lentinus lepideus, p. 142 
4. Not as above; growing on hardwoods or cultivated commercially ..................... 5 
5. Cap with a dense coating of dark brown to black hairs or small scales which become sparser 
in age, revealing the whitish to buff background; veil leaving a slight ring on stalk or remaining 
intact (covering the gills and never breaking) ......................... Lentinus ligrinus 
5. Cap brown to dark brown, often with whitish veil remnants (especially near margin); native to 
Asia, cultivated in U.S. but not yet naturalized (see photo on p. 31) ...... Lentinus edodes 
. 
 ' 
,. 
 
... 
.. 
Gill detail in Lentinus ponderosus. The serrated edges are characteristic of Lentinus and Lentinel/us. 
6. Cap more than 8 cm broad when mature; stalk over I cm thick; fruiting body tough or hard; 
found on or near conifers (but wood sometimes buried!) ..... Lent;nus ponderosus, p. 143 
6. Not as above; smaller .......................................................... 7 
7. Growing in clusters on hardwoods, stalks often fused; caps some shade of brown, often 
irregular or misshapen and deeply depressed in age; not uncommon in eastern North America, 
much rarer in the West ...................................... Lent;nellus cochleatus 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Stalk usually grooved and stuffed (inside) with soft whitish tissue; cap and stalk reddish-brown 
to pinkish-brown, smooth; taste usually acrid; found on ground or woody debris; spores 
amyloid ................................................. Lentinellus omphalodes 
8. Not with above features ........................................................ 9 
9. Cap 3-8 cm broad, pinkish-tan to tan; found on conifers (e.g., Sitka spruce) along the Pacific 
Coast ...................................................... Lentinuskauffman;; 
9. Cap up to 4 cm broad, brown to orange-brown or cinnamon; found on hardwoods; widely 
distributed .................................................... Lent;nus sulcatus 
Lentinus lepideus (Train- W reeker) 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid, whitish to buff or 
pale yellow, but usually with darker (brownish) scales; margin sometimes beaded with 
droplets when young. Flesh thick, tough, white, but often aging or bruising yellow; not 
decaying readily, odor usually distinctive (pungent or fragrant). GILLS usually decurrent 
but sometimes notched or adnate, whitish to buff or in one form yellow, often bruising 
brownish and/ or yellowish in age; edges entire when young but often serrated in age. 
ST ALK 3-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central to somewhat off-center, tapered at base; solid, 
tough and hard, colored more or less like cap, usually with brownish to reddish-brown 
scales or fibrils below ring. VEIL membranous, forming a pallid, superior to apical ring 
on stalk which may be slight or disappear in age. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 9-12 
x 4-5 microns, almost cylindrical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on conifer logs, stumps, fence posts, and 
other lumber, sometimes also on oak; widely distributed and fairly common in cool 
weather in the coniferous forests of the West, but rare in our area and less frequent than 
L. ponderosus in the Sierra Nevada. It used to be common on railroad ties, resulting 
in derailments and the common name, "train-wrecker." It causes a brown rot in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good, but the tough flesh requires thorough cooking. 
Use only young caps-older specimens may have an unpleasant taste. 
COMMENTS: The scaly cap, serrated gills (at least in age), membranous veil, white 
spores, and growth on wood (sometimes buried!) set apart this species. Like L. ponde- 
rosus, it decays slowly, and old or weathered specimens can be difficult to recognize. 
Several variants occur, including a yellow one. 
142 
. 
 
- 
" 
, ..... 
.. 
\: 
, 
I 
 
.. 
" 
.. 
'\ 
" 
'\ 
- 
-- 
Lentinus ponderosus. Left: Mature specimens growing from a log buried by a landslide. Exposed caps 
are apt to be scalier than sheltered ones. (Bob Winter) Right: Young specimens. Note decurrent gills. 
See p. 142 for close-up ofthe serrated gills, and p. 43 for a picture of a clump growing in a lake! 
Lentinus ponderosus (Ponderous Lentinus) 
CAP 10-50 cm broad or more, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface dry or 
slightly tacky, at first smooth but in most cases soon breaking up into large scales, revealing 
the white flesh beneath; color variable depending on age and exposure: white to tan, 
yellowish, brownish, or pinkish-brown, usually discoloring yellowish or orangish in 
age. Flesh thick, tough, not readily decaying, white (but may age or bruise yellowish); odor 
often fragrant. GILLS typically decurrent, fairly close, white to yellowish, but often 
developing orangish to rusty-brown stains in age; edges serrated or torn, at least at 
maturity. STALK 5-20 cm long, 2-8 cm thick, central or off-center, usually with a nar- 
rowed, rooting base; solid, hard, tough, whitish aging yellowish to brown or rusty-orange, 
often with brownish patches or scales. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-12 
x 3-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or clusters on or near dead conifers (but often appearing 
terrestrial) in the late spring, summer, and early fall; known only from western North 
America. Although not common in ost areas, it is very conspicuous because of its large 
size. I have never seen it at low elevations, but it is often abundant in the Sierra Nevada 
in the summer on lodgepole pine. I have also collected it on ponderosa pine in the South- 
west. It produces a brown rot in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, but thorough cooking or parboiling is required because 
of its toughness. Biologist Bob Winter of Fresno says that it is avidly sought by Japanese- 
Americans as a shiitake- and matsutake-substitute, perhaps because of its chewy texture. 
COMMENTS: This large, tough mushroom rivals Catathelasma imperiaUs and CUto- 
cybe giganrea for the title of "Most Humongus Gilled Fungus Among Us." The former, 
however, has a veil and the latter has a fragile cap, and both are terrestrial, whereas L. 
ponderosus lacks a veil and grows on or near wood. Panus strigosus can also be very large, 
but grows on hardwoods and has a hairy cap and non-serrated gills. The fragrant odor of 
L. ponderosus is sometimes reminiscent of the matsutake (Armillaria ponderosa), but 
that species is terrestrial and has a prominent veil. Smaller specimens can be confused 
with L. lepideus, which is rather similar in overall aspect but also has a veil. The cap color 
and degree of scaliness vary considerably from specimen to specimen (depending on age, 
temperature, and exposure to direct sunlight), but the size, toughness, and decurrent 
gills with serrated edges are distinctive. 
143 
(; 
i 
., 
' 
"," 
  
'-., -- 
 - -'  
.;:  ;::- ' 
-:::::;ioo"'":::---  
 '"Q' 
= -- ,.4 
 / 
.-,;' ./ "/-1 
" 
. 
... # 
\\ 
,,"' 
Moo 
Lentinel/us urs;nus. Note hairy cap, ragged or serrated gill edges, and near absence of stalk. 
Lentinellus ursinus 
CAP 3-10 )( 2-5 em, kidney- to fan-shaped in outline, broadly convex becoming plane; 
surface dry, dark brown to brown, yellow-brown, or reddish-brown, with sparse to dense, 
brown to dark brown pubescence (fine hairs), at least toward the stalk; margin usually 
smooth, often paler and lobed, at first incurved. Flesh thin; taste slowly acrid or bitter. 
GILLS decurrent (if stalk present), close, broad, dingy white to pinkish-brown with ragged 
or coarsely toothed edges. STALK absent or rudimentary. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 2.5-5)( 2-3.5 microns, nearly round, with minute amyloid spines. 
HABIT A T: On rotting logs and stumps, usually in groups or shelving clusters; widely 
distributed. It grows on both hardwoods and conifers but is not common in our area. I 
have found it in the late fall and winter on Douglas-fir and live oak. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible due to the bitter or acrid taste. 
COMMENTS: This flaccid, fleshless, featureless fungus could carelessly be mistaken for 
for a decrepit oyster mushroom (PleuTOrus oSlrearus) were it not for the ragged gills and 
hairy cap. L. flabelliform;s is a similar but slightly smaller species with whitish pubesence 
on the cap. Another widespread species,L. vulp;nus, also has whitish pubescence (at least 
at the base of the cap), but is often ribbed or reticulate and sometimes has a stalk; it favors 
hardwoods. Still another species, L. montanus, can be told by its well-spaced gills and 
tendency to fruit on dead conifers, usually at higher elevations after the snow melts. 
TRICHOLOMOPSIS 
Medium-sized mushrooms usually found on or near rotting wood. CAP smooth or scaly, not viscid. 
Flesh often yellow. GILLS attached, usually yellow. ST ALK typicallycentral,j1eshy. VEIL absent 
or evanescent. VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth, not amyloid. Cystidia 
abundant on the edges of the gills. 
THIS is a small genus of wood-inhabiting agarics formerly distributed among Tricholoma. 
Clitocybe, and Collybia. In most species the fruiting body is largely yellow, but in T. 
platyphylla it is white to grayish-brown. Tricholomopsis may occasionally appear 
144 
TRICHOLOMOPSIS 
145 
terrestrial, but the yellow gills and yellow flesh, absence of a veil, and central, fleshy stalk are 
distinctive. None of its members are particularly good eating. Of the species keyed below, 
only T. rutilans is common in our area. 
Key to Tricholomopsis 
I. Lower portion of stalk dark rusty-brown to blackish-brown and velvety from a coating of 
minute hairs; usually growing in tufts or clusters ....... (see F/ammu/ina ve/utipes, p. 220) 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Cap and stalk yellow, or yellow beneath a layer of colored fibrils or scales; flesh and gills pale 
yellow to yellow .............................................................. 3 
2. Not as above ........................................ T. p/atyphy//a & others, p. 146 
3. Cap grayish to black at the center or with small grayish-brown to olive-brown to blackish 
scales ............................................ T. decora (see T. ruli/ans. below) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Cap and/ or stalk with reddish to purple-red scales or fibrils . Trich%mopsis ruti/am, below 
4. Cap basically yellow, without differently colored scales or fibrils, at least when young (but 
may have brownish fibrils or streaks in age) T. sulfureoides & others (see T. ruli/ans. below) 
Tricholomopsis rutilans 
(Plums and Custard) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, yellow, but covered with dark red 
to purple-red scales or fibrils which become sparser in age or toward the margin. Flesh 
thick, firm, pale yellow, odor mild. GILLS adnate or notched, close, yellow to pale yellow. 
STALK 5-10 (18) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, dry, yellow with 
reddish or reddish-purple scales like those on the cap (but usually sparser and sometimes 
entirely yellow in old age. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gill edges numerous, club-shaped. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, tufted, or in small grou ps on or near rotting conifers, wood chips, and 
humus rich in lignin; widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in cool weather (late 
fall, winter), but rarely fruiting in large numbers. I find it most often with red wood and pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but according to Chroogomphus-connoisseur Ciro Milazzo- 
who was born and raised in Brooklyn-"it tastes like rotting wood." Since I've never tasted 
rotting wood, I cannot attest to the validity of this statement. I wasn't born and raised in 
Brooklyn either. 
Trich%mopsis ruti/am is a beautiful wood-loving agaric with dark red scales on the cap and stalk. 
The scales are not always as dense or prominent as those on the young specimens pictured here. Also. 
the cap tends to broaden with age. T. decora( not illustrated) has olive-brown to blackish scales that 
are much sparser than those of T. rutilans. 
" 
'" 
146 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
COMMENTS: A real beauty when fresh, this mushroom is easily recognized by the dark 
red or purple-red fibrillose scales on a yellow background (hence its British name, "plums 
and custard"). This color combination is practically unique among fleshy-stemmed, 
white-spored agarics. If you find what looks to be a small T. rutilans with an entirely 
yellow stem, you probably have T. Jlammula, a questionably distinct species. T. decora 
is also quite similar, but has gray to brownish or black cap center and/ or scales. I find it 
occasionally on rotting redwood, but it is more common farther north. Finally, there are 
several entirely yellow species also found on rotting conifers, including: T.Jlavissima, with 
a fibrillose, fringed cap margin; and T. sulfureoides, partial to hemlock, with an evanescent 
veil, and a cap that develops small brownish scales or streaks in age. T. rutilans was origi- 
nally placed in Tricholoma. T. decora in Clitocybe. and T. sulfureoides in Pleurotus. 
Tricholomopsis platyphylla (Broad-Gill) 
CAP 4-12 em broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth, not viscid, 
often streaked; dark brown to grayish-brown, or sometimes pallid with a darker center 
and/ or fibrils. Flesh pallid, thin. GILLS adnate or more often notched, well-spaced, very 
broad (deep), often splitting or with eroded edges in age, white or grayish. STALK 6-12 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below, white or flushed cap color, hollow in age with 
a tough outer rind; base usually with white mycelial cords attached. VEIL absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 7-9)( 4-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidiaabundantongilledges. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on or near rotting logs and stumps, especially of 
hardwoods, widely distributed. In eastern North America it is common in the spring and 
early summer when few other mushrooms are out and about, and it is also said to be quite 
common in Arizona. In our area, however, it is rather rare and fruits in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some people are adversely affected by it and the flavor 
is poor. Also, it is not particularly easy to identify. 
COMMENTS: This mushroom has few obvious relatives and has consequently been 
placed in several different genera, including Co/lybia and Oudemansie/la. It is somewhat 
reminiscent of Pluteus cervinus. but does not ha ve pinkish spores. If not clearly growing on 
wood it can be mistaken for a Tricholoma or robust Co/lybia, but the very broad, fre- 
quently eroded gills and white mycelial cords (rhizomorphs) are distinctive. The latter 
may only be evident ifthe mushroom is dug out carefully and completely, and even then are 
sometimes absent. T.Jallaxis a closely related species with yellowish-tinted gills and stalk, 
found on conifers in the Rocky Mountains. 
OMPHALOTUS 
Golden-yellow to olive-yellow 10 bright orange mushroomsgrowingfrom hardwood trees. stumps. 
and roots; often clustered. CAP smooth. GILLS well-developed. with acute edges, typically 
decurrent. often luminescent whenfresh. STALK central or off1:enter, fleshy. VEIL and VOL V A 
absent. SPORE PRINT white or tinged yellow. Spores smooth, not amyloid. 
POPULARLY known as "jack-o-Iantern mushrooms," these are brightly colored agarics 
wi th a fleshy stem and decurrent gills that often glow in the dark. Their luminescence is best 
seen by sitting alone in a dark closet with the mushroom while eating a grilled cheese 
sandwhich. Unless you are a voracious eater, this method helps combat boredom while 
allowing your eyes to adjust to the darkness. After a few minutes an eerie silvery-green 
glow will become visible, growing gradually brighter with each bite (of the cheese sand- 
which) until each gill is clearly outlined. Fresh, actively-sporulating specimens glow the 
brightest, but even they will not always cooperate. 
OMPHALOTUS 
147 
Jack-o-lantern mushrooms are strictly wood-inhabitors, but frequently appear terres- 
trial because they like to grow on roots or old, buried stumps. Two to four species occur in 
North America, but only one on the west coast. They contain muscarine and are poisonous. 
Key to Omphalotus 
l. Fruiting body pumpkin-colored (bright yellow-orange to orange); common in eastern North 
America, Mexico, possibly the Southwest .......... O. olearius(see O. o/ivascens. below) 
l. Fruiting body golden-yellow to yellow-orange, but usually toned with olive (sometimes 
other colors also present); restricted to the west coast ............... O. olivascens, below 
Omphalotus olivascens Color Plates 40, 4] 
(Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom; Western Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom) 
CAP 4-16 (25) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, 
not viscid, color variable: bright golden-yellow to orange with olive tones often present 
also, varying to dull orange, brownish-orange, olive, or slightly reddish. Flesh rather 
thin, pliant, colored more or less like cap; odor mild. GILLS olive to bright yellow-orange 
(often yellow with olive tints), decurrent, close, usually luminescent when fresh. STALK 
4-20 cm long, 1-4 (8) cm thick, central to off-center, equal or tapered downward, solid, 
dry, more or less colored like cap or gills, or dingier olive. SPORE PRINT white to yellow- 
ish; spores 6-8)( 5.5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth. 
HABIT A T: In tufts or clusters or occasionally solitary on or around hardwood trunks, 
stumps, and buried wood; known only from the west coast, but replaced elsewhere by 
O. o/earius (see comments). Common in our area from fall through early spring, especially 
on oak, manzanita, madrone, and chinquapin. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! Profuse sweating and gastrointestinal distress are typical symp- 
toms; muscarine is one of the toxins (see p. 894). It is sometimes eaten under the mistaken 
impression that it is a chanterelle. 
COMMENTS: The bright yellow-orange to olive color, decurrent gills, pale spores, and 
tendency to grow in clusters distinguish this handsome mushroom. The chanterelle 
(Cantharel/us cibarius) is somewhat similar but has thick, shallow, blunt, fold like gills and 
Ompha/otus o/ivascens often-but not always-grows in clusters. The gills are well-developed, 
decurrent, and have thin edges. Entire fruiting body is golden-yellow to orange or olive (see color 
plates), including the flesh. 
, 
..... 
.. 
, 
.. 
148 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
white flesh; the false chanterelle (H ygrophoropsis aurantiacus) is smaller and has oranger, 
repeatedly forked gills, while Gymnopilus species have dark orange to rusty-brown spores. 
All lack the olive tones characteristic of mature O. o/ivascens. 
The commonjack-o-Iantern mushroom of eastern North America is essentially the same 
as O. o/ivascens except that it is pumpkin colored (bright orange to yellow-orange, without 
any olive tones). Formerly called Clitocybe illudens, it is now called O. olearius (or O. i/- 
ludens by those who consider it distinct from the O. olearius of Europe). According to one 
report, its luminescence is sometimes bright enough to read a newspaper by. And then 
there's the tale ofthe shipwrecked sailor on an uninhabited island, who wrote a last message 
by the light of a jack-o-Iantern mushroom, using the ink from a shaggy mane and the stalk 
of an Agaricus as a pen. Unfortunately, he starved to death because he was afraid to eat any 
of the mushrooms he found! 
CLITOCYBE & Allies 
Fairly small to large mushrooms found mostly on the ground, sometimes on rotten wood. CAP 
convex to plane or often depressed to funnel-shaped at maturity, rarely viscid. GILLS usuall) 
adnate to decurrent and usually white to gray pr buff. STALK central, usually fleshy, but often 
slender. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT while 10 buff. yellowish. or dull pinkish. 
Spores smooth or roughened but not ridged or angular; usually not amyloid. 
THIS is a large and complex group of soft, fleshy, pale-spored mushrooms with no veil 
and a central, usually fleshy stem. The spore color is typically white, buff, or yellowish, but 
in some species-at one time honored with their own genus, Lepista-it is dull or pale 
pinkish. How, then, can you separate C/itocybe from other pale-spored mushrooms? 
Mostly by a process of elimination: the gills are not soft and waxy as in the Hygrophora- 
ceae, nor orange as in Hygrophoropsis and Omphalotus, nor thick, blunt, shallow, and 
foldlike as in Cantharellus; the flesh is not granular and brittle as in Russula, there is no 
latex as in Lactarius, and the white-spored species do not have the notched gills 
characteristic of Tricholoma-though this is a somewhat capricious character, since the 
attachment depends to some extent on the age and shape of the cap; the" Lepistas" are easily 
confused with the Entolomataceae (particularly the genus Entoloma), but the latter have 
deeper, more vividly colored spores which are angular or longitudinally ridged under the 
microscope; the wood-inhabiting Clitocybes generally have a central stalk, thus 
eliminating Pleurotus, Pan us, and other shelflike types; the smaller Clitocybes with slender 
stems are apt to be mistaken for Ompha/ina, in which the fruiting body is very small, and 
Collybia, which has a cartilaginous stem of a different texture from the cap, and adnexed to 
adnate but not decurrent gills; finally, there are a number of small but common genera 
(e.g., Laccaria, Leucopaxi/lus, Lyophyllum) that are best distinguished by learning the 
individual species. Whew!! 
"Except for the blewit (c. nuda) and its close relatives, C/itocybe is a lackluster group 
whose aesthetic and gustatory value is practically nil. Confirmed C/itocybe experts will 
be the first to admit that the anonymous throngs of white to grayish Clitocybes that litter 
our wintertime woods are exceedingly difficult to differentiate. Clitocybes are most preva- 
lent in coniferous forests, but also occur under hardwoods and in grass or manure. Like 
the Tricholomas, they are largely cold weather fungi, most abundant in our area from 
December through February. 
Though the blewit is a safe and popular edible mushroom, several Clitocybes are 
poisonous, including the small grass-inhabiting species, C. dealbata. The larger forms 
are slightly easier to identify but may be just as difficult to digest. Several have a disagree- 
CLITOCYBE & ALLIES 
149 
able odor, notably C. nebularis and C. robusla. On the other hand, the anise-scented types 
(e.g., C. decepliva and C. odora) are edible and quite good. 
Over 200 species of ClilOcybe occur in North America. About50 are listed for California, 
but a diligent effort to catalog our Clitocybes would probably double that number. Only 
some of the more easily identified species are described here, including a few smallish 
types with amyloid spores that are now placed in the genera Myxomphalia. ClilOcybula. 
and Cantharel/ula. If your "ClilOcybe" does not key out satisfactorily, check the Hygro- 
phoraceae (if the spores are white) or the Entolomataceae (if the spores are pinkish). 
Key to Clitocybe& Allies 
I. Odor distinctly licorice- or aniselike .............................................. 2 
1. Not as above (but odor may be sweet, e.g., like root beer) ............................ 3 
2. Fruiting body entirely or partially blue-green to greenish or grayish-green .. C. odoTa, p. 161 
2. Fruiting body lacking blue or green tints ................... C. decepl;va& others, p. 162 
3. Spore print pink or pinkish; fruiting body often (but not always) purple ................ 4 
3. Spore print white to yellowish or buff, or tinged lilac or brownish; fruiting body not commonly 
purple, and if purple then growing on wood ..................................... 13 
4. Stalk 3-7 mm thick; growing in grass, manure, straw, etc. _............... C. taTda, p. 152 
4. Stalk thicker, or growing in woods ............................................... 5 
5. Spore print bright pink; cap and stalk dingy cinnamon to vinaceous-brown; gills decurrent; 
growing in woods (especially pine), mainly in eastern North America ...... C. maTl;oTum 
5. Not as above; spore print dull pinkish to pinkish-buff or flesh-colored ................. 6 
6. Gills (and usually rest of fruiting body) distinctly bluish-purple to purple or pale purple (lilac) 
when fresh (but often fading in age); very common ..................... C. nuda, p. 153 
6. Not as above; gills not distinctly purple ........................................... 7 
7. Stalk distinctly purple to lilac-tinged when fresh. . . . . . . . . . .. C. saeva(see C. nuda, p. 153) 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Fruiting body with subtle vinaceous or lilac tints when fresh ............ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . 
. .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. glaucocana& C. gTaveolens(see C. tarda, p. 152) 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Fruiting body white when fresh, soon developing rusty to reddish stains ............... _ . . 
.. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Collyb;a maculata, p. 217) 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Cap pinkish to orangish to orange-brown or reddish-brown; spores angular in end view .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Entolomataceae, p. 238) 
10. Not as above; cap white to watery brown, tan, hazel, buff, pinkish-buff, gray, etc. ....... II 
II. Typically growing in clusters ..................... C. subconnexa group & others, p. 155 
11. Typically growing scattered to gregarious or in rings ............................... 12 
12. Cap watery brown to tan, hazel, buff, or whitish; growing in pastures, lawns, or sometimes 
in woods (especially oak) ......................... C. bTunneocephala & others, p. 154 
12. Cap white becoming pinkish-buff to dingy buff or tan in age; growing in woods; widespread 
. . . . . . _ .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c. ;,;na (see C. brunneocephala, p. 154) 
13. Growing on burnt ground or debris; cap small(less than4 cm), blackish to grayish-brown to gray 
orolive-brown ................................ Myxomphal;amauTa& others, p.165 
13. Not growing in burned areas, or if so, then very differently colored ................... 14 
14. Gills forked repeatedly and usually orange or odor very fragrant (somewhat like root beer) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. (see Paxillaceae, p. 476) 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Growing on wood (sometimes very rotten or buried) or on coffee grounds ............. 16 
15. Growing on ground. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 24 
16. Gills bright yellow to orange; fruiting body small . (see Omphal;na& X eTomphalina, p. 221) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
150 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
17. Fruiting body entirely or partially vinaceous, purplish, or reddish-tinged when fresh and moist 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (seePleurotus& Allies, p. 132) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap open or incised On one side; gills very crowded, narrow . (seePleurotus& Allies, p. 132) 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Gill edges serrated or eroded and/ or fruiting body tough, hard, fairly large to very large (cap 
10-50 cm broad when mature; stalk 2-5 cm thick) ..... (see Lentinus& Lentinellus, p. 141) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Cap ochre-brown to pinkish-brown or cinnamon when fresh, not typically growing in clumps or 
dense clusters ........................... C. americana & others (see C. in versa, p. 156) 
20. Not as above; cap differently colored (brownish to gray or white), or growing in clumps . 21 
2 I. Stalk white, usually tough and short, at least I cm thick; cap without hairs or scales, often pale; 
spore print frequently tinged lilac ..................... (seePleurotusostreatus, p. 134) 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Typically growing in clumps or dense clusters on wood; cap not white( or if watery whitish, then 
stalk usually rather long and less than 5 mm thick) ................................ 23 
22. Typically growing solitary, scattered, or in small groups but not clumps; cap variously colored 
............................................................................ 24 
23. Stalk typically less than 5 mm thick; growing on rotting conifers ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see ClitocybulaJamilia& C. abundans under Co//ybia acervata, p.215) 
23. Stalk generally thicker than above; found in southern United States, usually on hardwoods . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. (seeArmillariella tabescens under A. mel/ea, p. 196) 
24. S pore print brownish; fruiting body small and white or grayish; cap often somewhat hairy, espe- 
cially toward margin; not common Ripartites(R. tricholoma is the most widespread species) 
24. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
25. Stalk thin (usually 1-3 mm thick); fruiting body small; cap white or yellow, pinkish, vinaceous, 
or tinged faintly gray ......................................................... 26 
25. Not as above; stalk thicker or fruiting body differently colored ....................... 27 
26. Growing on ground in groups or troops under pine or other conifers or growing on logs, sticks, 
berry canes, etc.; gills very widely spaced ....... (see Marasmius. Collybia, & Allies, p. 201 
26. Notasabove ............................... (seeOmphalina&Xeromphalina, p.22I) 
27. Cap orange-buff to orange-brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon, purplish-brown, pinkish- 
brown, pinkish-tan, or tan when fresh .......................................... 28 
27. Cap white to buff, grayish, olive-gray, olive-brown, greenish, brown, or darker ......... 34 
28. Gills widely spaced ............................. (see Camarophylluspratensis, p. 110) 
28. Gills fairly close to crowded .................................................... 29 
29. Fruiting body medium-sized to large; stalk 1-4 cm thick; cap usually 7 cm or more broad when 
mature and at that stage usually depressed or funnel-shaped ........... C. maxima, p. 157 
29. Fruiting body smaller, thinner, or differently shaped; not as above ................... 30 
30. Usually growing in grassy areas or lawns; stalk typically 5 mm thick or less; cap not usually 
depressed ............................................ (see Calocybe carnea, p.176) 
30. Not as above; growing in woods ................................................ 31 
3 I. Cap vinaceous-red to purplish-red, gills yellow-ochre; growing at high altitudes under conifers 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see C alocybe onychina under C. carnea, p. 176) 
3 I . Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Gills white to pale buff; cap tan to pinkish-tan, flesh-colored, etc. .................... 33 
32. Gills often pale pinkish-cinnamon or colored like cap in age; cap orange to orange-brown, 
cinnamon, reddish-brown, reddish-tan, etc. .................. C. inversa& others, p. 156 
33. Stalk white, buff, or tinged only slightly with the cap color ............... C. gibba, p. 157 
33. Stalk colored like cap or darker. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. squamulosa(see C. gibba, p. 157) 
34. Spore print pale yellowish to buff; odor rancid; stalk at least I cm thick ............... 35 
34. Spore print white, or if yellowish to buff, then not as above ......................... 36 
35. Cap white ....................................... C. robusta(see C. nebu/aris, p. 159) 
35. Cap grayish to buff or brownish .................................. C. nebularis, p. 159 
CLITOCYBE & ALLIES 
151 
36. Growing in grass, straw, or compost, often in groups or rings but not in massive clusters; cap 
usually less than 5 cm broad, white to grayish, buff, or tinged pinkish ................ 37 
36. Not as above; growing in woods or under trees, or differently colored ................. 38 
37. Cap broadly convex to plane or umbonate; gills usually notched but sometimes adnate or very 
slightly decurrent; spores amyloid; not often growing in rings .... (seeMelanoleuca, p. 169) 
37. Cap convex becoming plane or depressed; gills adnate to decurrent, grayish-white to buff or 
pinkish-buff; spores not amyloid; often growing in rings ...... C. dealbata& others, p. 163 
38. Cap white or whitish .......................................................... 39 
38. Not as above ................................................................ 41 
39. Typically growing in large clusters along roads and paths in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky 
Mountains .................................................... C. dilatata, p. 159 
39. Not as above ........ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 40 
40. Cap medium-sized to very large (8 cm broad or more) .. C. candida(see C. gigantea, p. 158) 
40. Cap smaller, generally less than8 cm broad.. C. variabilis& others (see C. a/birhiza, p. 161) 
41. Cap and/ or gills greenish to bluish-green, more than 2 cm broad; growing in woods in eastern 
U.S. or under western mountain conifers .... C. aeruginosa & others (see C. odora, p. 161) 
41. Not as above ................................................................ 42 
42. Growing in tight clumps ( occasionally solitary) from a fleshy mass oftissue which is often buried 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. sclerotoidea, p. 164 
42. Not growing in clumps from a fleshy mass of tissue ................................ 43 
43. Base of stalk or surrouding humus with conspicuous white mycelial threads; common under 
mountain conifers, especially as or just after the snow melts .......... C. albirhiza, p. 161 
43. Notasabove _............................................................... 44 
44. Gills gray; cap with a hoary bloom when young; growing under mountain conifers, usually near 
melting snow .................................. (seeLyophyllummontanum, p.175) 
44. Not as above ................................................................ 45 
45. Base of stalk (or flesh in base) pinkish to pale orange .. (see Tricholoma saponaceum, p. 184) 
45. Not as above ................................................................ 46 
46. Gills forked repeatedly; cap grayish to grayish-brown; gills sometimes reddish-stained; usually 
growing in moss in northern and eastern North America .............................. 
........................... Cantharellulaumbonata(see C/itocybecyathiformis, p. 164) 
46. Not as above ................................................................ 47 
47. Stalk very thick (2-5 cm); gills whitish to buff to dingy tan or yellowish, but not gray .... 48 
47. Not as above ................................................................ 50 
48. Cap 1040 cm broad, white becoming buff or dingy brownish in age, thin and easily broken at 
maturity, margin often obscurely ribbed .......................... C. gigantea, p. 158 
48. Not as above ................................................................ 49 
49. Odor strongly unpleasant; cap grayish to dingy tan C. septentrionalis(see C. gigantea, p. 158) 
49. Not as above; cap more or less grayish-brown .......... C. crassa(see C. nebu/aris, p. 159) 
50. Stalkless than4 mm thick; cap small(up t05 cm broad but usually less than3 cm),darkgreenish 
to olive-brown, sooty-brown, ashy-gray, or blackish .............................. 51 
50. Not as above; usually larger .................................................... 53 
51. Cap minutely scaly or scurfy at center .... C. epichysium(see Myxompha/ia maura, p. 165) 
51. Not as above ................................................................ 52 
52. Cap and gills yellow-green to green, dark green, olive, etc. ........................... _ . 
. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. atroviridis & others (see C. odora, p. 161) 
52. Not as above; not greenish . Omphaliaster& Fayodia spp. (see Myxompha/ia maura, p. 165) 
53. S talk clothed with dark scurfy scales; gills well-spaced; cap dark brown to blackish; growing on 
rotten wood or in rich humus ..... Clitocybula atrialba (see Clitocybe cyathiformis, p. 164) 
53. Not as above; stalk not clothed with dark scurfy scales ............................. 54 
54. Cap typically incised or open on one side; gills crowded and narrow (shallow) ............. 
........................................ (seeHohenbueheliapetaloidesgroup, p.136) 
54. Not as above ................................................................ 55 
152 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
55. Typically growing in clusters; stalk usually I cm thick or more ....................... 56 
55. Not as above ................................................................ 57 
56. Cap tan to brown or purple-brown; spore print off-white to pale buff; known from Alaska .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. polygonarum (see C. subconnexa group, p. 155) 
56. Cap gray, brown, tan, etc.; spore print white; widespread . (see Lyophyllum & Allies, p. 173) 
57. Gills distinctly grayish to grayish-brown, at least at maturity ........................ 58 
57. Gills white to buff or yellowish ................................................. 59 
58. Stalk I cm thick or more at apex; cap6-15 cm broad or more C. harperi(see C. nebularis. p.159) 
58. Stalk usually less than I cm thick; cap 2-5 (7) cm broad ............ C. cyathiformis, p. 164 
59. Stalk 1-3 cm thick at apex; usually growing on or near rotting wood ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. C. avellaneialba(see C. clavi pes. p. 160) 
59. Not as above; stalk up to 1.2 cm thick at apex; growing on ground. . .. . .. .. . .. . . . .. . .. 60 
60. Cap brown to grayish-brown or olive-brown ...................................... 61 
60. Cap paler ........................... C. coniferophila& others (see C. albirhiza. p. 16l) 
61. Gills distinctly decurrent; cap usually depressed at maturity .... C. clavipes & others, p. 160 
61. Gills only very slightly decurrent if at all; cap broadly convex to plane or slightly umbonate 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (seeMelanoleuca, p. 169) 
Clitocybe tarda 
CAP 1-6 (9) cm broad, convex with an incurved margin, then plane to broadly funnel- 
shaped or at times umbonate; surface smooth, not viscid, flesh-colored to brownish or 
grayish with a faint lilac or vinaceous tinge when moist, fading as it dries. Flesh thin, odor 
mild or slightly fragrant. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent or at times notched, close, 
grayish to brownish-buff or pinkish-buff, often with a lilac tint when fresh. STALK 2-6 cm 
long, 3-8 mm thick, usually slender, equal or slightly thicker below, colored more or less 
like cap or paler, fibrillose. SPORE PRINT dingy pale pinkish; spores 6-8)( 3-5 microns, 
elliptical, finely roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or clustered or sometimes in rings in grass, dung, 
manure, straw heaps, old fields, compost piles, etc. Widespread and not uncommon in 
our area after heavy rains, late fall through spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but thin..;fleshed and not particularly easy to identify. I haven't tried it. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as Lepista tarda and Trich%ma sordidum, this is a smaller, 
slimmer version of the blew it. It isn't purple, but when fresh and moist it often has a slight 
lilac or vinaceous hue-especially the gills. It can easily be mistaken for a Melanoleuca, 
but the spore print is pale pinkish. The cap color is difficult to characterize but is generally 
some shade of buff, brown, or even gray. Two other pinkish-spored" Lepistas" with subtle 
purple tints are: C. graveo/ens, with a strong, disagreeable odor (like "moldy hay"), and 
C. g/aucocana. Both of these are much larger and more robust than C. tarda, and in fact 
they closely resemble the blew it (c. nuda) but for their subtler color( older specimens can 
scarcely be distinguished). Both species are rare and fortunately, not poisonous. 
Clitocybe tarda is a slim, trim version of the blewit, but has only a slight violet tinge (if any), and is 
thus easily confused with other grayish or brownish Clitocybes. The spore print, however, is pinkish. 
 
,..,\.- 
..... 
1 
- 
- 
,. 
t f 
:to, 
/./ I 
/' 
#.. 
v.. " 
.. , 
 "- 
,. 
 , . 
. 
- 
Clitocybe (=Lep;sta) nuda. the blew it, has a characteristic shape that is hard to describe but easy 
to recognize. Note stocky build and inrolled margin when young The monstrosity on the left is a stem 
which kept growing after the cap was cut off. 
Clitocybe nuda 
(Blewit) 
Color Plate 32 
CAP 4-14 (18) cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming broadly 
umbonate to plane, or with an uplifted, often wavy margin in age; surface smooth,lubri- 
cous when moist but not viscid, often somewhat lustrous when dry; purple, or purple 
shaded with brown or gray when fresh, soon fading to brownish, flesh-color, tan, etc., 
but the margin often retaining purple tones well into maturity. Flesh thick, rather soft, pur- 
plish to lilac-buff; odor faintly fragrant when fresh (like frozen orangejuice), taste pleasant 
to slightly bitter. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, or sometimes decurrent; 
purple or pale purple to bluish-purple or grayish-purple when fresh, fading to buff, pinkish- 
buff, or brownish in age. STALK 2.5-7 (10) cm long, 1-2.5 (3) cm thick at apex, equal or 
more often with an enlarged base; dry, fibrillose, purple to pale purple or colored like the 
gills; base often covered with downy purple mycelium. SPORE PRINT dull pinkish to 
pinkish-buff; spores 5.5-8 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious, often in rings or arcs-in woods, brush, gardens, 
compost piles, i.e., wherever there is organic debris; widely distributed. It seems to favor 
cool weather but is common in our area throughout the mushroom season. A favorite 
abode is in brambles under live oak, often in the company of chanterelles; it is also common 
under pine and cypress, and I have found it on Ano Nuevo Island in beach grass and 
elephant seal dung. A single mycelium will produce several crops a year, so check your 
patches regularly. I know of one fairy ring sixty feet in diameter that produces about 200 
blewits each time it fruits! Known as a"trashinhabitor" because of its fondness for virtually 
any type of decomposing organic matter, it can be grown on a wide range of substrates, 
including shredded newspapers and compost. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very popular-a favorite with beginners and gourmets alike, 
and one of the most plentiful edible wild mushrooms in our area. It has the dubious dis- 
tinction of being one of the few purple foods that actually tastes good. It is even popular 
in fungophobic England and Scotland, where it is sometimes sold in markets. 
COMMENTS: The ubiquitous blewit is the quintessential embodiment of spunk and 
persistence-cut one down and two will grow back! Decapitated stems will often continue 
153 
154 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
to grow as if nothing had happened-a new cap will not form, and a grotesque (but edible) 
cancerous-looking pale purple growth will take its place. The blewit's trademarks are its 
beautiful purple to bluish-purple color with inrolled cap margin when young, stout stature, 
absence of a veil, faintly fruity fragrance, and dull pinkish spores. The cap has a character- 
istic lu bricous feel when moist, but may look quite different-polished and silvery-violet- 
when dry. The amount of purple present varies considerably depending on the age and 
moisture content of the mushroom, and possibly the habitat or geographical area (some 
forms, such as the one commonly found under cypress, tend to be quite pale, with only a 
slight violet tinge). Old faded blewits are barely recognizable, but by that stage are usually 
bug-bitten anyway. 
Other purple mushrooms include: Inocybe lilacina. with brown gills (when mature), 
brown spores, and a small umbonate cap; many Cortinarius species, with a cobwebby veil 
when young and rusty-brown spores; Mycena pura. small and slender with white spores; 
the Laccaria amethystina group, with white or lilac-tinged spores and a long, tough, 
fibrous stem. Of these, onJy the Inocybe and possibly the Mycenaare poisonous. There are 
also several bluish Entoloma and LeplOnia species, but they are not nearly as purple. 
Synonyms for the blew it are almost as numerous as the blew it itself. They include: 
Tr;ch%ma nudum, Rhodopx;llus nudus, Lep;sta nuda, and incorrectly, Tricholoma 
personatum. "Blewit," incidentally, is a corruption of "blue hat"-though the blewit is 
more purple than blue. In Europe the blewit is often called the "wood blewit." to distinguish 
it from the "field blewit" or "blue-leg," C. saeva(=Lep;stasaeva, Tr;cholomapersonatum). 
The latter is very similar to C. nuda in shape and stature and is equally delicious, but shows 
purple only on the stem-the cap and gills being grayish to pinkish-buff to watery tan (or 
the gills tinged vinaceous). Also, it tends to grow in pastures or grass rather than in the 
woods. It is infrequent in North America but has been reported from California. See also 
C. tarda. and the species discussed under it. 
Clitocybe brunneocephala 
CAP 4-13 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming broadly umbonate to plane 
or uplifted; surface moist or lubricous but not viscid, smooth, watery brown to tan, hazel, 
buff, or even whitish (usually darker when young). Flesh thick, pallid, odor mild or 
pleasant. GILLS usually notched but often adnate or slightly decurrent, close, buff to 
grayish-buff or pale brown, then dusted pinkish with spores. STALK 2-5 (10) cm long, 1-3 
(4) cm thick (usually about 2); equal or enlarged below, often stout and relatively short, 
solid, dry, smooth, buff or colored like the cap (but usually paler). SPORE PRINT rosy- 
buff or dull pinkish; spores 5-8 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious, often forming fairy rings, late fall through early 
spring, mainly in lawns and pastures, but also at the edges of woods or under trees ( cypress, 
oak, etc.); known only from California. It was very abundant in our area during the warm 
and wet winter of 1977-78, but has been rather rare since. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good-I have tried it. Be sure not to confuse it with 
poisonous Entolomas, however, or C. olesonii (see comments below). 
COMMENTS: Listed in the first edition as "Lepista sp. (unidentified)," this interesting 
relative of the blewit has recently been rechristened C. brunneocephala by clitocybiologist 
Howard Bigelow. The shape, stature, and characteristically lubricous feel of the cap when 
moist are very reminiscent of the blewit and blue-leg, but there is no purple anywhere on 
the fruiting body. The gills are usually notched, but as in most "Lepistas" their attachment 
varies considerably. I nearly always find it growing in grass, but a very similar species with 
a pungent or unpleasant odor, C. oleson;;, is common und<;r oak in southern California 
II\. . 
I 
. . 
.c 
.  ... 
.. 
'\ 
(" 
) 
C/ilocybe brunneocepha/a is built like a blewit but is never purple. It is sometimes common locally 
in lawns and pastures as well as under oaks. 
and the Sierra Nevada foothills. Both C. brunneocephala and C. olesonii(whose edibility 
I haven't determined) are larger and stouter than C. tarda. and do not grow in clusters 
like C. subconnexa and C. densifolia. They can be separated from most Entolomas by their 
duller spore color, non-angular spores, and in the case of C. brunneocephala. by the grass- 
land milieu. Other pinkish-spored species: C. praemagna, a western prairie and sagebrush 
species, is quite similar but has a white cap when young that becomes tan to dull brownish 
in old age; C. (=Lep;sta) ;r;na is a widespread woodland species that often has a fragrant 
blewit-like odor. Its cap is white to pinkish-buff, dingy buff, or pale tan, and its spores 
are slightly larger than those of C. brunneocephala. 
Clitocybesubconnexagroup 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex with an incurved margin becoming plane or with uplifted 
margin; surface smooth, dry, satiny white at first, often discolored or spotted slightly in 
age. Flesh thick, whitish, rather brittle; odor usually mild or faintly pleasant. GILLS 
adnate to decurrent, crowded, narrow, pallid soon becoming buff, then dull pinkish as 
the spores ripen. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.5-2 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker below, smooth, 
dry, dull grayish to buff with a whitish silky-fibrilose coating. SPORE PRINT pinkish-buff 
or flesh-colored; spores 4.5-6 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT A T: In groups on ground, usually tufted or clustered, widely distributed. In our 
area both this species and C. densifolia (see comments) are fairly common from fall through 
early spring in woods or at their edges, brushy areas, and open places. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. It is good when fresh according to some 
sources, but can develop an unpleasant astringent taste in age. There is also the possibility 
of confusing it with C. dilatata or a poisonous Entoloma. 
COMMENTS: This common species can be identified by its whitish color, adnate to 
decurrent gills, dull pinkish spores, and tendency to grow in clusters-though solitary 
fruiting bodies can be found. A very similar and equally common species, C. densiJolia, also 
grows in clusters, but has smaller spores, narrower gills, and a whitish cap that becomes 
dingy buff to grayish in age. Both species, like the blewit, seem to grow almost anywhere. 
They are larger and fleshier than Clitopilus prunulus and do not smell as nice, nor have 
they longitudinally ridged spores. They differ from Clitocybe brunneocephala in their 
more typically decurrent gills and clustered growth habit, and from C. dilatata in their 
pinkish spores. Other species: c.fasc;culata(=Tr;cholomapanaeolum var. caesp;tosus) is 
155 
, 
.. ' 4_...... 
to 
,. " 
'" " ..."If 
:1\.. 
'" 
.... 
,, 
#' 
,.. ..., \ 
( 
..... 
', 
..;z. 
/ ,.... 
" 
.,. \ 
Clitocybe subconnexa group gives a dull pinkish spore print, has adnate to decurrent gills, and 
grows in clusters in a wide variety of habitats. 
also very similar, but has a rancid-farinaceous odor and taste and tends to grow in clusters 
along roads; C. subalpi1Ul is a brown to dark brown clustered species known from the 
Pacific Northwest; C. polygonarum has a tan to brown or purple-brown cap, but has 
off-white to pale buff spores; it also grows in clusters and is common in Alaska. 
C litocybe inversa 
CAP 2-10 cm broad, broadly convex or centrally depressed with an incurved margin, 
becoming broadly depressed or even funnel-shaped in age; surface dry, dull orange to pale 
orange-brown, orange-tan, tan, reddish-tan, ochre-buff, or cinnamon-brown; margin 
often paler. Flesh thin; odor mild or sharp. GILLS distinctly decurrent, close, buffto pale 
pinkish-cinnamon or colored like cap but paler. STALK 3-10 cm long, 4-8 mm thick, equal 
or thickened below, typically rather slender and often curved, colored like cap or paler, 
smooth or with whitish hairs at base. SPORE PRINT white to creamy-yellowish; spores 
4-5 )( 3.5-4 microns, nearly round, minutely prickly (or appearing smooth). 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or tufted on ground in woods; widespread but 
particularly common on the west coast, from Alaska to southern California. In our area it is 
fairly common in the late fall and winter in mixed woods and under oak or pine, sometimes 
in large fairy rings. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended 
Clitocybe in versa is a cheerful orange-brown to cinnamon color. Left: Several typical examples. 
Right: Close-up of the decurrent gills. 
'\' 
\ \\ 
. 
), 
i:., 
 '. 
Il 
", 
CLITOCYBE 
157 
COMMENTS: Also known as Lepista in versa, this species can be told by its cheerful 
color, depressed cap, decurrent gills, and white or pale spores. C. gibba is rather similar 
but differently colored, while Rhodocybe nuciolens has pinkish spores. The common form 
of C. in versa in our area has a slightly yellowish spore print and sharp, spicy or pepperlike 
odor. It may actually be C. flaccida, a very similar species. In eastern North America C. 
gilva is quite common; it differs in having a plane to only slightly depressed, yellowish to 
dull pinkish cap. Other similarly- colored Clitocybes include: C. sinopica, in humus or on 
burnt ground, with an orange-brown to rusty-cinnamon cap, yellowish spores, and 
farinaceous odor and taste; C. ectypoides, northern, growing on rotting conifers, with a 
minutely scaly ochre-brown cap; and C. americana, the most common and widespread 
wood-inhabiting Clitocybe, with a watery brown to pinkish-brown or cinnamon cap that 
fades to whitish as it dries, growing on hardwood stumps and logs. 
Clitocybe gibba 
(Funnel Cap) 
Color Plate 34 
CAP 3-8 cm broad, plane or with a central depression, soon becoming funnel-shaped; 
surface smooth, not viscid, tan to pinkish-tan, flesh-colored, or pinkish-cinnamon, but 
fading in age; margin often wavy. Flesh thin, whitish; odor mild or faintly sweet (like 
cyanide). GILLS deeply decurrent, crowded, white or pale buff. ST ALK 3-8 cm long, 0.4-1 
cm thick, usually rather slender, equal or thicker below, smooth or faintly fibrillose; whitish 
to buff, the base often with white down. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-8)( 3.5-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in small groups on ground in woods, especially under 
oak but also with conifers; widely distributed. In coastal California it fruits in the winter 
and early spring but is not common; in New Mexico it is common in August along with 
C. squamulosa(see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and excellent, but not a good mushroom for beginners-too many 
species of unknown edibility resemble it. Many mushroom books rate it as mediocre, but 
it's probably a case of each author taking another's word for it. 
COMMENTS: The pale pinkish-tan cap which is funnel-shaped at maturity plus the 
crowded, whitish, decurrent gills and pallid slender stem render this species distinct. 
C. infundibuliformis is a lengthy synonym. It is paler than C. inversa, especially in its gill 
color, and more slender than C. maxima. C. squamulosa is a very similar species in which 
the stalk is the same color as the cap or darker. It is a prominent feature of our western 
coniferous forests, particularly at higher elevations in the spring and fall. It is interesting 
to note that C. gibba releases hydrogen cyanide gas into the atmosphere. So does the 
common fairy ring mushroom, Marasmius oreades, as well as several other mushr90ms 
and plants such as lupine and almond. The gas is not released in sufficient quantity to 
harm humans, however. 
Clitocybe maxima (Large Funnel Cap) 
CAP (4) 7-20 (30) cm broad, at first broadly convex or plane with an inrolled margin, 
becoming depressed or broadly funnel-shaped; surface dry, usually smooth, pale pinkish- 
tan or flesh-colored varying to reddish-tan, sometimes spotted; margin sometimes paler 
and sometimes lobed or radially ribbed. Flesh thin, white, firm becoming flaccid; odor mild 
or rather unpleasant. GILLS soon deeply decurrent, close, white to pale buff or tinged 
pinkish-buff. STALK 3-10 (15) cm long (I) 1.5-3 (4) cm thick, equal or with an enlarged 
base; solid, fairly firm, whitish to buff or becoming colored like cap, fibrillose-striate, base 
usually with white down. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-9 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. 
... 
.,'". 
C/itocybe maxima is essentially an overgrown version of C. glbba (see color plate). Along with its 
close relative C. geotropa. it is fairly common under conifers in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific 
North west. Note deeply decurrent gills and depressed or vase-shaped cap. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or more often in groups or rings on ground in woods or clearings; 
widely distributed and fairly common in the late summer and fall in the mountains of 
western North America. I've see large fruitings near Mr. Rainier in Washington and in 
the Sacramento Mountains of southern New Mexico, but I have not found it in California. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This large, handsome Clitocybe is easily told by its thick stem, decurrent 
whitish gills, and pinkish-tan, broadly funnel-shaped cap. It is essentially an overgrown 
C. gibba. and some consider it a variety ofthat species. C. geotropa is a very similar edible 
species with more or less round spores. It tends to be longer-stemmed and more leather- 
colored when young, and its cap often has a broad central umbo, even when funnel- 
shaped. It is also widely distributed, but rare; I have seen it only in the southern Rockies. 
Clitocybe gigantea (Giant Clitocybe) 
CAP (5) 8-35 (45) cm broad, convex becoming plane and then broadly funnel-shaped; 
surface smooth, not viscid; white becoming buff or pale tan, especially at the center; easily 
broken when mature; margin at first inrolled, often obscurely ribbed in age. Flesh white, 
in age becoming fragile; odor and taste pleasant to slightly disagreeable. GILLS close, 
pallid soon becoming pale buff or creamy-buff, often pale dingy tan in old age; crowded, 
decurrent, at least some forked. ST ALK 4-10 cm long, 24 (6) cm thick, often rather stout, 
equal or enlarged slightly at either end; white, or in age pallid with darker fibrils. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 34.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious, often in arcs or huge rings, in open woods 
and grassy (but usually wooded) areas; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific 
Northwest and Rocky Mountains. I have seen it and the very similar C. candida (see com- 
ments) in the mountains of northern New Mexico and southern Arizona. Neither species 
has been reported from California, but they may well occur. 
EDIBILITY: Temptingly large and handsome, but poor in flavor and difficult to digest. 
158 
CLITOCYBE 
159 
COMMENTS: This mammoth mushroom is often so wide in proportion to its thickness 
that the cap breaks or crumbles if handled carelessly. Its size and fragility, plus the buff- 
colored decurrent gills, pale cap, and white spore print are diagnostic. Young, compact 
specimens can be mistaken for C. irina, C. praemagna, or C. robusta, but have white 
spores. Older individuals resemble Leucopaxillus, but are not nearly so tough, and lack 
the white mycelial mat at the stem base. C. candida is a very similar but more common 
species with a slightly "smaller" cap (6-30 cm) that remains white until old age. Another 
large species, C. septentrionalis, has a dull grayish to dingy tan ca p, strong unpleasant odor, 
and short thick stalk. I have seen it in groups or clumps under ponderosa pine in both 
Oregon and New Mexico. Along with C. gigantea and C. candida it is placed in the genus 
Leucopaxillus by some mycologists because of its weakly amyloid spores. There are also 
numerous large grayish Clitocybes with white, non-amyloid spores. The most common in 
our area is C. harperi (see comments under C. nebularis). 
C litocybe dilatata 
CAP 2-15 cm broad, convex to plane or often somewhat misshapen; surface dry, smooth, 
gray when young, but soon white or chalky-white, sometimes with buff areas; margin at 
first incurved, often wavy in age. Flesh white to grayish, firm; odor mild, taste typically 
somewhat sour or disagreeable. GILLS adnate to decurrent, whitish to buff, close. ST ALK 
5-12 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, whitish, fibrillose, fibrous, often 
curved. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-6 x 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Basidia 
lacking siderophilous granules. 
HABIT A T: In densely-packed groups or clusters in sandy or gravelly soil along roads, 
trails, etc.; very common in the fall in thePacificN orthwest and Yukon. I have not seen it in 
California, but it may occur in the northern part ofthe state, and Chuck Barrows reports it 
from New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Probably poisonous-it is thought to contain muscarine. 
COMMENTS: The white spores and growth habit in clusters (often quite large) in dis- 
turbed ground is unusual for a Clitocybe and serves to distinguish this species from its 
brethren. It is most likely to be confused with the Lyophy/lum decastes group (espe- 
cially L. connarum), which also grows along roads, and with the C. subconnexa group, 
which has pinkish spores. C. cerussata var. difJormis is a synonym. 
Clitocybe nebularis (Cloudy Clitocybe) 
CAP 6-25 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface dry, finely 
fibrillose or often with a hoary bloom, gray to grayish-brown to buff, often darker at the 
center, sometimes with watery spots or appearing streaked; margin at first incurved, often 
wavy or lobed in age. Flesh thick, white; odor rancid and disagreeable. GILLS adnate to 
decurrent, close, whitish becoming dingy yellowish or buff. ST ALK 6-15 cm long, 1.54 cm 
thick, base often enlarged and covered with white down; whitish, or with dingy brownish 
fibrils, firm but easily broken. SPORE PRINT pale buffto yellowish; spores 5.5-8.5 x 3.5- 
4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious, often in large rings, under both hardwoods and 
conifers; widely distributed but especially common on the west coast. It is fond of cold 
weather and in our area seldom appears before December. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but far from incredible. It is indigestible unless thoroughly cooked, 
its flavor is said to be poor, and its rank odor doesn't exactly make you want to rush home 
and throw it in the frying pan. 
P... 
, . 
Clitocybe nebularis is a common large cold-weather Clitocybe. Note decurrent gills and grayish cap 
which is broadly convex at first but becomes depressed in age (the ones on left look darker than they 
are because of shadow). Cap margin is often frilled or lobed and the skunklike odor can't be missed. 
COMMENTS: The outstanding feature of this large, drab, cold-weather C/itocybe is the 
unpleasant odor, which has been likened to that rancid flour, rotting cucumbers, skunk 
cabbage, mice cages, and beer barf. In size and stature it is reminiscent of Leucopaxillus 
albissimus, but is grayer, decays much more rapidly, and has pale yellowish spores. 
C. robusta (=c. alba) is a closely related species with the same stature, spore color, and 
rancid odor. However, it has a pure white, sometimes lustrous cap. I have found it several 
times in our area in mixed woods but it is more common in eastern North America. There 
are also a number of large, undistinguished grayish Clitocybes that have white spores and a 
more or less mild odor. These include: C. harper;, with darker (grayish) gills, fairly 
common in our area and throughout the West under conifers; and C. crassa, a springtime 
Rocky Mountain species with a thick, massive stalk. 
Clitocybe clavipes (Club-Foot) 
CAP 2-10 cm broad, broadly convex or plane becoming depressed or funnel-shaped; sur- 
face more or less smooth, not viscid, brownish to grayish-brown or olive-brown, often 
paler toward the margin. Flesh pallid, odor mild or often somewhat fragrant or fruity. 
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, at first white, then yellowish-buff in age. STALK 2-7 cm 
long, 0.5-1.2 cm thick at apex, typically club-shaped (enlarged below), pallid with grayish 
or sordid olive-buff fibrils; base often spongy and covered with white down. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-8.5 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious under conifers and in mixed woods, late 
fall and winter; widely distributed. It is particularly abundant in pine plantations in 
eastern North America, rather infrequent in California (although several similar species 
occur). I have not seen it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. Not only is there the danger of confusing it 
with poisonous species, but it has reportedly caused coprine-like poisoning when 
consumed with alcohol (see p. 896). 
COMMENTS: I must often strain to find something interesting to say about Clitocybes, 
and this species-the type of the genus-is no exception. The drab grayish-brown cap, 
decurrent gills, white spores, and club-shaped stem are characteristic, but there are many 
" 
. 
"" 
Clitocybe clavipes has a swollen stem base, decurrent gills, and grayish-brown cap, but there are 
dozens of similar, difficult-to-differentiate C1itocybes. 
more or less similar species. One ofthese, C. avellaneialba, is fairly common in the Pacific 
Northwest and northern California in humus or near decayed logs. It is somewhat larger, 
with a darker cap, white gills and stem, and elongated spores(8-1 0 microns long). Another 
western species, C. leopardina, is also similar but has a viscid, watery-spotted cap and 
more or less equal stalk. It has been found by Greg Wright in southern California. 
Clitocybe albirhiza (Snowmelt Clitocybe) 
CAP 2-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane to broadly umbonate, then depressed; surface 
smooth or with whitish down, or sometimes with riverlike lines; watery brown to pale buff 
to cinnamon-, pinkish-, or grayish-buff. Flesh thin, colored like cap; odor unpleasant or 
mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, pale buff or colored more or less like cap. ST ALK 
3-8 cm long, 0.4-2 cm thick, equal or tapered at either end, often hollow in age, sometimes 
fluted; colored more or less like cap, the base with a dense mass of white mycelial threads. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-6 )( 2.5-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious, often in small clusters or rings, on ground 
under conifers; common in the mountains of western North America, especially in the 
spring shortly after the snow melts (sometimes found with Lyophyllum montanum). 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species is merely one of a metagrobolizing myriad of mundane white 
to buffy-brown or grayish Clitocybes that are exceedingly difficult to distinguish. In other 
words, they are better neglected than collected! It can be separated from its numerous look- 
alikes, however, by the dense mass of white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at the base of 
the stem and in the surrounding humus. I ts growth in the spring is also distinctive. Other 
smallish Clitocybes include: C. cerussata, with whitish cap; C. variDbilis, with pure white 
cap when fresh and spores 5.5-8 microns long, found under conifers; C. candicans, also 
with a white cap, but favoring hardwoods; and C. conijerophila, one of several conifer- 
loving species with a dingy buff cap. All of these lack the rhizomorphs characteristic of 
C. albirhiza, and in California are more likely to fruit in the fall or winter than the spring. 
C litocybe odora 
(Blue-Green Anise Mushroom) 
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface smooth, not viscid, 
bluish-green to dingy greenish, gray, or grayish-brown with a slight blue-green tinge, to 
nearly whitish in dry weather. Flesh whitish or tinged cap color; odor strongly fragrant, 
anise-like, at least when fresh. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, blue-green to greenish or 
dark green in one form, whitish to buff or pinkish-buff in another. ST ALK 2-6 (9) cm long, 
0.5-1.5 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker at either end; smooth, white to buff or cap-colored. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish-cream or buff; spores 6-8 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
..... '. 
;... L 
Anise mushrooms. Left: Clitocybe deceptiva (formerly C. suaveo/ens), a young specimen. Right 
Mature specimens of Clitocybe deceptiva, a whitish to buff species, and Clitocybe odor a, a partially 
or completely greenish or bluish-green species (far right). Both smell like anise when fresh. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups in woods; widely distributed. It favors oak in eastern 
North America, but in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific Northwest it is often abundant 
under conifers. In our area it is rare-I have seen it only twice, under oak in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but best used as a flavoring agent because of the strong taste. 
COMMENTS: The blue-green to dull greenish color combined with the anise or licorice 
odor immediately identify this mushroom. The form with blue-green tints in the gills and 
stalk is var. pacificus, while the typical variety shows the color mainly in the cap. The other 
anise-scented Clitocybes( C. decepliva, etc.) are never blue-green. C. aerug;nosaofeastern 
North America has a greenish cap, but has white spores and does not smelllike anise; a very 
similar but unidentified greenish species with a distinctive (but not anise-like) odor occurs 
in the Sierra Nevada under conifers. There are also several small (cap 1-2.5 cm broad, stalk 
1-4 mm thick) greenish species that connect Clitocybe to Omphalina. These include: C. 
atrov;rid;s (=Omphalina chlorocyanea?), with a green to blackish-green to olive-gray cap 
and paler gills, found in grass, moss, or on lichens; Omphal;na grossula, greenish-yellow 
to olive-yellow, favoring lichens and moss; and O. wynn;ae, with a greenish-yellow to 
olive-brown cap and yellow to greenish-yellow gills, usually found on rotting conifers. 
Clitocybe deceptiva 
(Anise Mushroom) 
CAP 1-6 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, not 
viscid, color variable: pale brown to grayish-brown fading to buff or watery whitish, 
sometimes with a darker marginal band; margin at first incurved. Flesh thin, pallid, odor 
distinctly fragrant and anise-like when fresh. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, 
white or cap-colored or slightly darker. STALK 2-7 cm long, 1.5-5 (7) mm thick, equal or 
thicker at base, smooth, more or less colored like cap, usually rather slender. SPORE 
PRINT pale pinkish-buff; spores 6.5-9)( 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in damp places under conifers; western North 
America. I n our area this species and its close relatives( see comments) are often common in 
the fall, winter, and early spring under redwood and pine, or occasionally oak. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but best used as a flavoring agent (in cakes, breads, cookies, etc.), 
because of its strong, anise-like (but not sweet) flavor. Be sure each and every specimen 
smells like anise-there are numerous look-alikes without the anise odor, some of 
which grow in the same habitats and are poisonous! 
COMMENTS: Better known as C. suaveolens, the distinct anise odor of this species and 
its close relatives separate them from the dozens of other small, nondescript white to 
grayish or buff-colored Clitocybes (see C. albirhiza). Similar anise-smelling species in- 
clude: c.Jragrans, practically identical, but with a paler cap and white spores, and growing 
162 
CLITOCYBE 
163 
under hardwoods as well as conifers; C. oramophila, with a dull pinkish or flesh-colored 
cap when moist and pale creamy spores; and C. obsoleta, with a strongly fragrant but not 
aniselike odor. 
Clitocybe dealbata (Sweat-Producing Clitocybe) 
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, not viscid, 
white to dingy white, grayish, or buff, sometimes with a pinkish tinge in wet weather, 
sometimes with watery spots. Flesh thin, grayish to white; odor mild. GILLS grayish-white 
to buff or pinkish-buff, close, adnate to decurrent. STALK 1-4 cm long, 2-7 mm thick, 
equal or slightly thicker at either end, colored like cap, smooth, rather tough. SPORE 
PRINT white or rarely creamy; spores 4-5.5 )( 2-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in rings, in pastures and other grassy places; widely 
distributed and common locally in the fall and winter. In the Pacific Northwest it fre- 
quently mixes company with Marasmius oreades, but in our area is more often found 
with Agaricus campeslris and A. cupreobrunneus. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous-and potentially fatal to small children in the" grazing" stage! It 
produces profuse sweating, salivation, diarrhea, etc. Muscarine is the main toxin (see 
p. 894 for details). 
COMMENTS: The dingy grayish-white color, close decurrent gills, white spores, small 
size, and growth in grass distinguish this drab, undistinguished mushroom, also known 
as C. sudorifica. In our area it frequents pastures while the edible and somewhat similar 
fairy ring mushroom (Mar.asmius oreades) grows mainly on lawns; in other regions, how- 
ever, they may grow together. However, the fairy ring mushroom has a browner, frequently 
umbonate cap and well-spaced gills that are never decurrent. The edible ClilOpilus 
prunulus is also similar, but has pinkish spores. There are numerous woodland look-alikes 
in the genus ClilOcybe, and all should be strictly avoided. Closely related, poisonous 
grass-inhabiting species include: C. augeana, very similar but with a farinaceous odor, 
sometimes rivulose in age (developing riverlike lines or cracks on the cap), and growing in 
manure and compost as well as in grass; C. rivulosa, with cap often rivulose and tinged 
flesh-color, growing in grass; and C. morbifera, with a grayish-brown cap, in grass. 
Clitocybe dealbata is a small poisonous grass-inhabiting mushroom with closely spaced, adnate to 
decurrent gills. Overall color is dingy gray to buff, leading to confusion with the edible fairy ring 
mushroom (M arasmius oreades). 
.1' 
-.... 
, 
. 
 ., 
i '\"t: 
<- 
V( { 
'(1/ 
..& 
" .  
 
'" 
,!,,",.. 
.. 
., 
. ,'t!" 
./ 
'" 
" 
. , 
). 
." '".- 
\ "\.., ..... 
.. {1: " 
'... -- 
. 
. '\ 
. . 
". '"" 
,  
. . ; ,} ,  . 
..,".  ' 
. ..,t 
.," < 
')\ 
'F 
to  
, 
'C" 
'k .... 
), 
.. 
+-     
. . 
.. 
'If 
 
, &'\ .. y,,,  . ' 
., .,. 
h<, .. 
. 
- 
" : 
...... 
C/itocybe sc/erotoidea. Note growth habit in small, tight clumps. Each clump arises from a mass of 
tissue thought to be aborted He/vella /acunosa. 
Clitocybe sclerotoidea (Parasitic Clitocybe) 
CAP 0.5-4 (5) cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed centrally; surface dry, 
unpolished, with a fine whitish fibrillose coating which rubs off; pallid to sordid buffto 
brownish or grayish, sometimes with darker watery spots. Flesh whitish, odor mild. GILLS 
adnate or slightly notched becoming decurrent, pale buff or pinkish-buff darkening to 
gray, olive-gray, or grayish-brown. ST ALK2-4(8)cmlong,3-10 mmthick,equalorthicker 
at either end, solid, colored like cap or paler from soft, matted, downy white hairs; arising 
from a fleshy mass of tissue which is often at least partially buried. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 8-11 x 3-4 microns, subfusiform (elongated), smooth. 
HABIT AT: Typically in small, tight clumps on ground under pine, known only from the 
Pacific Coast; common at times in our area in the winter and spring. The fluted black 
elfin saddle (Helvella lacunosa) is often found nearby. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like myself, likely to remain so. 
COMMENTS: I can find hidden virtues in almost any fungus, but this drab Clitocybe 
defies me-its mediocrity is downright stupefying. It serves as a compelling reminder that 
organisms do not exist for our enjoyment alone, and should not bejudged accordingly. It 
can be recognized by its small size, dingy color ( or lack of color), and habit of growing in 
compact clumps from a fleshy mass of tissue. S mall, aborted individ uals are usually present 
in each clump, and occasionally large, solitary specimens are encountered. The tissue mass 
from which they arise ("sclerotium") is actually composed of hyphae from both C. 
sclerotoidea and Helvella lacunosa-suggesting that the Clitocybe is parasitic on the 
Helvella. It is interesting to note, however, that the Helvella occurs with both hardwoods 
and conifers, while C. scleroto;dea is confined to pine, at least in my experience. 
Clitocybe cyathijormis 
CAP 2.5-8 cm broad, centrally depressed with an inrolled margin, becoming funnel- 
shaped in age; surface smooth, not viscid, dark brown to dark gray-brown, but fading in 
age to grayish or paler brown. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild. GILLS at first adnate butsoon 
deeply decurrent, pallid becoming grayish or grayish-brown, close. STALK 5-12 cm long, 
0.4-1 cm thick, equal or thicker below, often rather long, colored like cap or paler, fibrillose, 
often with whitish down at base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-6 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
164 
CLITOCYBE 
165 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups in humus or on rotten logs, in woods and at their 
edges; widely distributed. Not uncommon in our area in the fall and winter, especially 
under redwood. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It is said to be edible, but there are many very similar 
species of unknown edibility. 
COMMENTS: This species is one of numerous small to medium-sized, grayish, white- 
spored agarics with decurrent gills and a depressed to funnel-shaped cap. Because of its 
amyloid spores it has been placed in several different genera, including Cantharellula and 
Pseudoclitocybe. Similar species with amyloid spores include: Canthare//u/a umbonata, 
common in moss beds in northern and eastern North America, with crowded, narrow, 
whitish, forked gills that stain reddish in age; and C/itocybu/a atria/ba, cap 2-10 cm broad 
and blackish-brown, gills well-spaced and white to grayish, stalk clothed with dark scurfy 
scales, growing in rich humus or on rotting hardwoods in the Pacific Northwest. The first of 
these were formerly placed in Cantharellus. the second in Clitocybe. Also see Myx- 
ompha/ia maura and C/itocybe albirhiza. 
Myxomphalia maura 
CAP 1-3.5 (5) cm broad, convex or centrally depressed with an in curved margin, be- 
coming plane or centrally depressed; surface viscid when moist but soon dry and often 
shiny, smooth, dark grayish-brown or olive-brown to blackish-brown, fading to gray or 
paler as it dries. Flesh thin, white to grayish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, 
white to pale grayish (usually paler than cap). ST ALK2-6 cm long, 2-5 (6) mmthick,more 
or less equal, smooth, colored more or less like cap or slightly paler, but not fading as 
quickly. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-6.5x 3.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptical 
to nearly round, smooth or very minutely ornamented, amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on burnt soil and debris, especially under 
conifers; widely distributed and fairly common in our area in the appropriate habitat, fall 
through spring. I often find it with Pho/iota brunnescens and Psathyrella carbonicola. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too puny to be of value. 
Left: C/itocybe cyathiformis. mature specimens. Right: Myxompha/ia maura. a small mushroom 
that favors recently burned areas. Note the adnate to decurrent gills. 
---- 
 ,- 
.... i,. 
<Of ... 
,;- I 
\\\, 
1\ I 
--" 
, 
166 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
COMMENTS: The habitat on burnt soil distinguishes this undistinguished mushroom 
from a host of similar grayish-brown look-alikes. Lyophyllum atratum (=C ollybia atrata) 
is another species that grows in burned-over areas; it is quite similar but has darker (gray) 
gills and non-amyloid spores (the two are sometimes found growing together). Fayodia 
anthracobia is a minute charcoal-lover (cap upto 1 cm broad) with round, warted,amyloid 
spores. Omphaliaster asterosporus and O. borealis have warted or starlike spores, but 
are larger (cap 2-5 cm broad), have grayish to grayish-brown gills, and prefer moss (under 
conifers) to burnt soil. Another small widespread species, Clitocybe (=Omphalina) 
epichysium, has a dry cap about 2 cm broad that is dark sooty-brown to olive-brown or 
ashy and minutely scaly or scurfy at the center. It is fairly common in our area in mixed 
woods and under conifers, but not in burnt soil. See also C. cyathiformis. 
LEUCOPAXILLUS 
Medium-sized to large terrestrial mushrooms. CAP convex to plane or depressed, margm usually 
in rolled when young; surface dry, unpolished. Flesh rather tough and dry. GILLS attached, close, 
usually white or yellowish. STALK typically central, fleshy, tough, often with a conspicuous white 
mycelial mat at base. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores amyloid, rough. 
THIS is a small but very conspicuous group of robust mushrooms with a dry, unpolished 
cap, white to pale yellow gills, a tough, fleshy stem, and white, amyloid spores. In some 
species the gills peel rather easily from thecap(asinthebrown-sporedgenusPaxillus). The 
flesh is rather dry and brittle as in Russula. but the stature of the fruiting body is quite 
different and the fibrous stalk does not snap open cleanly like chalk. Also, most Leuco- 
paxillus species have a copious white mycelium that permeates the surrounding duff and 
frequently adheres to the base of the mushroom when it is plucked-a character not found 
in Russula. 
Confusion with Clitocybe and Tricholoma is also likely (Leucopaxillus species were 
originally placed in those genera), but they are not so tough and rot more readily. In 
contrast, Leucopaxillus species are remarkably resistant to bacterial decay-antibiotic 
substances have been isolated in some of them and their fruiting bodies, like those of 
Laccaria, persist for weeks and thus appear to be more common than they actually are. 
Leucopaxi//us a/bissimus. mature and dried-up specimens. Note the tremendous variation in size, 
shape, and stature. Some of these are quite old and shrivelled. 
......t..,,... . 
.. 
I' .or 
f  :!- 
 
-h- 
..... 
... 
".t\ 
....:;:", 
d 
. 11\ 
'" 
... -...... 
.. .... 
.. 
Co 
". 
\ 
'. 
-;. 
J. 
Ii  
Leucopaxi//us a/bissimus. Young white specimens. (Ralph Buchsbaum) 
Less than ten species of Leucopaxi/lus are known from North America. The two 
common ones in our area fruit prolifically and are likely to be among the first agarics you 
encounter. They are strictly woodland fungi and may be mycorrhizal. Though alluringly 
large and firm, they are difficult to digest because of their toughness. However, they are 
not known to be poisonous, so intrepid toadstool-testers may opt to experiment with 
the mild-tasting forms. They have one compelling advantage-a single large specimen 
can fill a basket! 
Key to Leucopaxillus 
I. Gills pale clear yellow when young; cap 9-30 cm broad, buff to dingy tan or yellow-brown; found 
under hardwoods in eastern North America and southern Arizona ........... L. tricolor 
L Not as above; gills not yellow when young (but may be dingy yellowish in old age) ....... 2 
2. Cap brown to reddish-brown, medium-sized; taste bitter. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. amarus, p. 168 
2. Cap white, buff, pale tan, yellowish, etc; medium-sized to very large; taste mild or bitter .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. albissimus & others, below 
Leucopaxillus albissimus (Large White Leucopaxillus) 
CAP 5-20 (40) cm broad or more, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming 
plane or depressed in age; surface dry, dull, unpolished. white becoming buff, yellowish, 
or even tan (at least toward center) in age, often cracked or splitting in age or dry weather; 
margin sometimes obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick, tough, white; odor unpleasant or frag- 
rant, taste also variable (mild or bitter). GILLS white to slightly yellowish in old age, 
attached (typically decurrent at least by lines, but ranging to adnate or even adnexed); 
close. STALK 5-20 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, tough, solid, equal or enlarged at the middle or 
below (often with a narrowed base); white, discoloring slightly in age; base usually im- 
bedded in a white mycelial mat; smooth or often scaly (especially in mid-portion). SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8.5 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, warty, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (often in large rings) in woods, mainly 
under conifers; widely distributed. It is common in our area in the cool winter months, 
particularly under redwood, but also with other trees, including eucalyptus. It is slow to 
grow and even slower to decay. 
168 
TRICHOLOMAT ACEAE 
EDIBILITY: A tempting specimen, but I don't recommend it-even the non-bitterforms 
are coarse and difficult to digest. Thorough cooking would be necessary. 
COMMENTS: Several varieties of this widespread species have been described based on 
differences in cap color, taste, and spore characters. The above description is based 
primarily on the variety common in our area, var. paradoxus (=L. paradoxus). It has a 
rather strong but not unpleasant odor and a distinctive but not usually bitter taste. It is 
white when young, but usually becomes dingy yellowish, buff, or pale tan as it ages or 
dries out. A white mycelial mat can usually be seen permeating the duff around the mush- 
room or adhering to its base. However, its most outstanding attributes are the large size, 
tenacious toughness, and resolute resistance to decay, as evidenced by the following two 
"tried and true" methods for distinguishing it from C/iwcybe nebularis and other large 
look-alikes: 
1) Choose a firm (not waterlogged) specimen and throw it against a wall, housemate's 
head, or other dense, hard, thick object. If it (the mushroom) remains more or less intact, 
it is probably L. albissimus; if it shatters, chances are it was a Cliwcybe. 
2) Choose a firm (not waterlogged) specimen and leave it out on the porch, or hide it 
in your housemate's closet. If after one week it (the mushroom) shows no visible signs of 
decay, it is probably L. albissimus; if unchanged after one month it is definitely L. albis- 
simus. If, on the other hand, it shows visible or smellable signs of decay (i.e., has begun 
to rot or is reduced to a heap of writhing maggots), chances are, once again, that it was a 
C/iwcybe. (Note: L. albissimus can behave like a C/iwcybe iftoo old or maggot-riddled.) 
Other species: L. alb;ss;mus var. lentus is quite similar to var. paradoxus, but is usually 
smaller (stalk only 0.8-1.5 cm thick and smooth); var. p;ce;nus is similar in color, but has 
a bitter taste; var. typ;cus also has a bitter taste but is pure white; L. laterar;us is a hard- 
wood-loving species with a very bitter taste, pinkish-buff-tinged cap, and round spores; it 
is particularly common in eastern North America. 
Leucopaxillus amarus (Bitter Brown Leucopaxillus) Color Plate31 
CAP 5-12 (15) cm broad, broadly convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming 
plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, unpolished, smooth, dark brown to brown, pecan- 
brown, or reddish-brown, evenly colored or paler at the margin, sometimes cracked or 
faded in age; margin often obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick, firm, dry, white; odor mild or 
pungent; taste very bitter. GILLS typically adnate but ranging from notched to slightly 
decurrent by lines; close, white. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-2 (4) cm thick, equal or en- 
larged below, smooth, dry, solid, white or sometimes discolored brownish below; base 
imbedded in acopious white mycelial mat. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 3-5 microns, 
nearly round, warted, amyloid. Cystidia numerous on gill edges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious (often in rings) under conifers and oaks; common and 
widely distributed. In our area it is often abundant in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible-it smells like "creepy crawlers" and tastes like a 
mildewed army tent. If you're lost in the woods and have nothing to eat, you'd do better 
to follow the example of Charlie Chaplin and stew your boots before venturing to make a 
meal of this mushroom. 
COMMENTS: Also known as L. gent;aneus, this mundane mushroom can usually 
be recognized by its dull, boring brown to reddish-brown cap, white gills, bitter taste, 
absence of a veil, and moldy-looking white mycelium that usually permeates the sur- 
rounding humus and frequently adheres to the stem when it is plucked. The latter feature 
helps to distinguish it from brown-capped Tricholomas (e.g., T. imbricatum). Hygro- 
phorus roseibrunneus can also be similar in color, but has soft and waxy gills. As with L. 
albissimus, several varieties and forms have been described. In addition to the color plate, 
L. amarus is shown on p. 918. 
169 
MELANOLEUCA 
Small to medium-sized terrestrial mushrooms. CAP usually smooth. broadly convex to plane or 
often umbonate; often hygrophanous. GILLS close or crowded, attached (usually adnate or 
notched). usually white. STALK central. typically rather stiff. straight. semi-cartilaginous; often 
slender. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white or creamy. Spores minutely warted or 
roughened. amyloid. Cystidia often present on gill edges. 
THESE rather unimposing whitish to gray or brownish mushrooms have been aptly 
characterized as "overgrown Collybias," for the stature ofthe fruiting body is intermediate 
between that of Tricho!oma and Co//ybia. The straight, semi-cartilaginous stem, close to 
crowded (and often notched) gills, and smooth, dull-colored, frequently umbonate cap 
are the principal fieldmarks. 
Melanoleucas can grow almost anywhere, but in our area are found most often on lawns 
or shaded areas in pastures and parks. They are also quite common under conifers in the 
Sierra Nevada and other mountain ranges. I can find no mention of poisonings attributed 
to Melanoleuca, but the North American species are not well known. Two widespread 
species are described here, and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Melanoleuca 
I. Gills tan to ochre. creamy-ochre. or pale pinkish-cinnamon. at least in age; cap 5-13 cm broad; 
stalk usually quite tall .......................................... M. cognata, p. 170 
I. Not as above; gills typically whitish, sometimes with a slight yellow or pinkish tinge ...... 2 
2. Cap viscid when moist, 4-8 cm broad, white or in age often tinged or stained yellow; stalk white, 
usually scurfy, 0.7-1.5 cm thick; fairly common in central and southern California in a variety 
of habitats ........................................................... M.lewisii 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Cap yellowish-brown fading to yellowish-white; fairly common under hardwoods in eastern 
North America ................................................... M. alboflavida 
3. Not as above; cap some shade of brown or gray when moist (but may fade in age) ........ 4 
4. Growing under mountain conifers. usually shortly after the snow melts ................ 5 
4. Growing in lawns. pastures. etc., sometimes also in woods. but not typically as above ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. melaleuca group. below 
5. Stalk fleshy, usually more than I cm thick; cap medium-sized to fairly large ............... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. evenosa group. p. 171 
5. Stalk usually less than I cm thick; cap medium-sized to fairly small ...................... 
.. . . . .. . .. . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. lU. graminicola& others (see M. mela/euca group, below) 
M elanoleuca melaleuca group 
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, broadly convex to plane to shallowly depressed, often with a low 
broad umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid; dark brown to gray to grayish- 
brown when moist, often fading to buffy-tan, gray, or even paler in sunlight (or as it dries). 
Flesh thin, whitish, odor mild. GILLS narrow, close or crowded, white, usually notched 
but varying to adnate or even very slightly decurrent. STALK 2-8 cm long, 3-6 (12) mm 
thick, equal or with a slightly swollen base, rather slender. stiff, whitish or with darker 
(brown) fibrils, apex sometimes minutely scaly or scurfy. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
6-8 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid. Harpoonlike cystidia typically 
present on gill edges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground in open places (lawns, pastures, etc.), under 
trees, along roads and trails, in straw and wood chips, and also in the woods; common and 
widely distributed, but usually fruiting at lower elevations. Common in our area 
throughout the mushrom season but most numerous in the winter and early spring. 
'"1 '- 
.... - 1'.' 
".. . 
, \..<1/1... 
. i ' 
t t l JI, 
\ ,. 
.. 
\.. . 
..., 
,- . 
:.e, 
,..'J 
..;". .  . 
.. 
"1 
 t,  
- .. 
..... 
. , 
'....... 
, 
 \ , 
. 
" 
.. 
"' 
\... 
M elanoleuca melaleuca group is common in grassy areas, but also grows under trees and in the woods. 
Cap is usually dark when young and moist (see specimen on right), but may fade considerably in age 
or sunlight. Note crowded white gills. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. The caps are delicious fried in butter, but since it is not an easy 
mushroom to recognize, I hesitate to recommend it. Also, the edibility of closely related 
species has not been adequately ascertained. 
COMMENTS: The above description will actually fit a number of closely related 
Melanoleucas whose exact identities are best left to Melanoleuca-masters. As a group they 
are characterized by a smooth, hygrophanous, dark brown to grayish ( or paler) cap, close 
white gills, straight stalk, and strongly amyloid, warted spores. Specimens growing in 
the open are generally much paler than their counterparts growing in the shade. Related 
species include: M. brevi pes, common on lawns, with a short brown to whitish stalk and 
abundant cystidia on the gills; and M. polioleuca, with a hoary bloom on the cap when 
fresh. There are also several species that fruit prolifically in the spring and early summer 
in the coniferous forests and alpine meadows of western and northern North America. The 
most common of these, M. graminicola, is similar to M. melaleuca in color and stature, 
but lacks cystidia on the gills. Another, M. evenosa, is larger and more robust (seedescrip- 
tion). Although probably harmless, none of these species should be eaten until better 
known. M. vulgaris is a synonym for the tongue-twisting M. melaleuca. 
Me/ano/euca cognata 
CAP (5) 7-13 cm broad, broadly convex to plane, usually with a broad umbo, sometimes 
becoming slightly depressed in age; surface smooth and sometimes shiny, dry or slightly 
viscid, brown to ochre-brown, fading to pale tan in age, the center sometimes darker. Flesh 
whitish; odor often slightly sweet, rancid, or "peculiar" (Smith). GILLS pallid becoming 
tan, creamy-ochre, deep ochre, or pale pinkish-cinnamon; crowded, attached (usually 
notched). STALK 6-12 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or with a swollen base, longitudinally 
lined or twisted-striate, straight, colored more or less like cap or paler, the base some- 
times brownish-stained. SPORE PRINT creamy or yellowish; spores7-10 x4.5-6 microns, 
elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid. Cystidia abundant on edges and faces of gills. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in mixed woods and under 
conifers in the spring, summer, and early fall; widely distributed but not common. It does 
not occur in our area but is to be looked for in the Sierra Nevada. It is fairly frequent in the 
spruce-fir-aspen forests of the southern Rocky Mountains and Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: In contrast to many of its kin, this Melanoleuca is fairly easy to recognize. 
The broad, frequently umbonate brown to ochre-tan cap, tall straight stem, and brown to 
tan or ochre mature gills are good fieldmarks. 
170 
MELANOLEUCA 
171 
Melanoleuca evenosa group (Robust Melanoleuca) 
CAP 5-19 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or wavy; surface smooth, dry to slightly 
viscid when moist, pallid to brown to grayish-brown or in age sometimes slightly ochre. 
Flesh firm, thick, white; odor often rather pleasant. GILLS crowded, white (or in age 
sometimes brownish- or ochre-stained); usually notched or adnexed. STALK 3-7 cm long, 
(I) 1.5-3 (3.5) cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, very firm, stiff, solid; white with 
brownish or cap-colored fibrils; apex or upper portion usually dandruffy or minutely 
scaly (or sometimes dandruffy throughout). SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 )( 4-5 
microns, elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, widely scattered, gregarious, or even clustered in duff under conifers 
or in grassy clearings, at the edges of forests, etc.; fairly common in the mountains of 
western North America during the spring and early summer. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Several Melanoleucas are edible and this one is fleshy enough 
to warrant cautious experimentation, but be sure of your identification! 
COMMENTS: Anyone who regularly hunts the Cascades and Sierra Nevada during the 
springtime will come across this species or species "complex," which also goes under the 
name M. subalpina. Because of its robust stature (see photo on p. 897) it is likely to be 
mistaken for a Tricholoma. However, the crowded white gills, scurfy stalk, smooth 
cap, amyloid spores, and springtime growth under conifers should distinguish it from 
most Tricholomas. Several other Melanoleucas grow under mountain conifers, but 
are more slender (see comments under the M. melaleuca group). M. cognata can be 
fairly large. but is usually taller and slimmer with tan to ochre gills in age. 
LACCARIA 
Small to medium-sized terrestrial mushrooms. CAP convex to plane, centrally depressed, or 
uplifted; not viscid. GILLS attached, rather thick. slightly waxy, pinkish IOflesh-colored. cinna- 
mon. purple. or lilac. STALK tough andfibrous, elastic, often slender, more or less central. VEIL 
and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white 10 pale lilac. Spores usually spiny, not amyloid. 
THIS small but common genus can be distinguished in the field by its thick, purple to 
pinkish or flesh-colored gills and tough, fibrous stem. The gills may be somewhat waxy- 
looking as in the waxy caps (Hygrophoraceae), but the tough stalk is distinctive and the 
spores are usually spiny under the microscope. In small individuals the stalk may be slender 
but is not noticeably fragile, and the cap is not conical or bell-shaped as in Mycena. 
Laccarias form mycorrhizae with many kinds of trees and shrubs, and are among the 
few mycorrhizal species that are easily raised to fruition in the laboratory. Their omni- 
presence in coniferou forests has caused them to be called "mushroom weeds." However, 
they also grow with hardwoods..They seem particularly fond of sandy, boggy, or other 
poor soils, and are a conspicuous fungal feature of our coastal pine forests. They persist 
for weeks without decaying, and thus appear to be more plentiful than they actually are. 
About 16 species of Laccaria occur in North America. Mostare quite variable in shape 
and color and thus difficult to distinguish in the field, but they split nicely into two groups 
-the ones that are purple and the ones that aren't. All are thought to be edible and most 
are fairly good, or at least better than some authorities would have us believe. Two repre- 
sentative species are described here. 
Key to Laccaria 
I. Downy mycelium at base of stalk and/ or gills purple to lilac when fresh (may fade in age!) 2 
l. Violet tones completely absent, even when fresh (but may be vinaceous-tinged) ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. laccata & others, p. 172 
172 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
2. Growing in sand (often buried); spores smooth L. tTullisata(see L. amethystina group, below) 
2. Not as above (but may grow in sandy soil); spores spiny ............................. 3 
3. Fruiting body medium-sized to large (cap 5-20 cm broad; stalk 1-3 cm thick); common under 
hardwoods (especially oaks) in eastern North America ............... L. ochropurpurea 
3. Not as above; small to medium-sized (cap usually less than 7 cm broad; stalk usually less than 
I cm thick, but at times up to 1.5 cm); widespread in many habitats ................... 4 
4. Gills distinctly purple when fresh ......................... L. amethystina group, below 
4. Gills with only a tinge of violet (if any) when fresh L. bicolor( see L. amethystina group, below) 
Laccar;a laccata 
(Lackluster Laccaria) 
Color Plate 29 
CAP 1.5-6 cm broad, convex becoming plane to centrally depressed or sometimes even 
with a hole in the center, the margin often uplifted in age; surface not viscid, often minutely 
scaly; color variable: flesh-colored to orangish, brownish-cinnamon, reddish-tan, 
or pinkish-brown when moist, much paler as it dries; margin often wavy or irregularly 
lobed in age. Flesh thin, tinged cap color, odor mild or sometimes radishlike. GILLS thick, 
well-spaced, somewhat waxy, pale pinkish to flesh-colored or reddish-tan, dusted white by 
spores at maturity; attachment variable but typically adnate to slightly decurrent. STALK 
2-10 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, more or less eq ual, tough and fibrous, elastic, often fibrillose, 
often somewhat twisted orcompresed; same color as moist cap or darker (reddish-brown), 
usually rather slender; downy mycelium at base white (if present). SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 7-10 )( 6-9 microns, round or nearly round, spiny. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups or troops in woods or near trees, especially in poor or 
sandy soil or in boggy areas; very common and widely distributed. In our area it can be 
found almost anywhere at anytime, but favors cool weather and pine. L. proxima and 
L. altaiea(see comments) are also common locally. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and fairly good, especially if seasoned; the tough stems should be 
discarded. Be certain of your identification, however-there are many similarly-colored 
mushrooms! 
COMMENTS: This cosmopolitan mushroom has a knack of turning up in droves when 
one is seeking more exotic or unusual species, and is thus spurned and scorned as a 
mushroom "weed." To be sure, it is as unostentatious as it is ubiquitous, without the lovely 
color of the L. amethystina group, yet in its own unexciting way it is quite beautiful. Like 
the honey mushroom, it is so vexingly variable in size, color, and shape that even veteran 
collectors have trouble recognizing some forms! The telltale traits are the overall color 
(pinkish to orangish or dull cinnamon), thick well-spaced gills, white spores, and tough 
or fibrous stem. L. proxima is a very similar, widespread species. It tends to be slightly 
larger with a more fibrillose stalk and scalier cap, but can only be told with certainty by 
its broadly elliptical (rather than round) spores. There are also several similarly-colored 
but smaller species (cap 0.54 cm broad) that usually grow in wet or boggy areas and have 
striate caps when moist. They include: L. ohiensis andL. a/taica(both of which have been 
called L. striatu/a), with larger spores (8-13 microns), the latter especially common in 
northern latitudes; andL. torti/is, a very small species with only a few( 10-15) gills and even 
larger spores. See also L. hieolor( under L. amethystina group), which has violet mycelium. 
Laccar;a amethyst;na group (Amethyst Laccaria) Color Plate 30 
CAP (I) 24 (7) cm broad, convex becoming plane, centrally depressed (sometimes with a 
hole in the middle), or withan uplifted margin in age; surface often minutely scurfy or scaly, 
not viscid; purple to brownish-purple when fresh and moist, fading to brown, gray, buff, or 
whitish (see comments!) as it loses moisture; often cracked in dry weather; margin often 
wavy or lobed in age. Flesh thin, violet-tinged; odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, thick, some- 
LACCARIA 
173 
what waxy, deep or bright amethyst-purple when fresh. gradually fading to dull purple or 
grayish-purple and eventually dusted white by spores; attachment variable but usually 
adnateto slightly decurrent. STALK 5-12 cm long, 0.3-1 (1.5) cm thick, moreorlessequal, 
typically rather long and slender, often curved or twisted; tough and fibrous, elastic, 
usually conspicuously fibrillose, colored more or less like moist cap or browner, fading as 
it dries; base usually covered with downy purple or white mycelium. SPORE PRINT 
white or tinged lilac; spores 7-11 microns, round, spiny (but see comments!). 
HABITAT: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground in forests and at their edges; wide- 
spread and common. In our area this species and its look-alikes(see comments) are par- 
ticularly abundant under coastal pines. They can fruit most any time but are partial to cold 
weather and are often abundant when other collectable delectables are scarce. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and a good choice for beginners because of its distinctive color and 
convenient availability. It has a nice texture but not much flavor, so try mixing it with 
potatoes and seasoning it with garlic. The tough, hairy stems should be discarded. 
COMMENTS: The lovely amethyst-purple gills when fresh combine with the rather long 
and tough, fibrous-hairy stem to set apart this cosmopolitan mushroom and its close rela- 
tives. The color fades rather dramatically as the mushroom loses moisture, but the gills 
usually retain their purple tint well into maturity. The common" Amethyst Laccaria" along 
the west coast has recently been given a new name, L. amethysteo-oeeidenta/is, based on 
its broadly elliptical (rather than round) spores and the tendency of its cap to fade to brown 
rather than buff or gray as in the "true" L. amelhyslina (or L. amethystea). Our local 
variety, however, sometimes fades to buff or even white, so that microscopic examination 
is often necessary to distinguish it from L. amelhyslina (the latter may occur in our area, 
but if so is uncommon). The specimens in the color plate are probably L. amelhysleo- 
occidenta/is, but are labeled L. amelhyslina group beca use their spores were not examined. 
To muddle matters even more,L. hie%r is also common in our area, especially under pine. 
It has broadly elliptical spores, but has only a slight violet or vinaceous tinge (if any) 
when fresh, except for the violet downy mycelium at the base ofthe stalk (which may, 
however, fade to white in age, leading to confusion with L. laccala). Other purple-gilled 
species: L. tru//isata has long( 16-22 microns) smooth spores and grows only in sand or sand 
dunes (often buried!).L. oehropurpurea is a robust eastern species (see key to Laccaria). 
LYOPHYLLUM& Allies 
Small to medium-small mushrooms, or if larger then usually growing in dense clusters. CAP 
typically some shade of gray or brown, but sometimes white; not viscid. GILLS attached or 
sometimes free, usually while or gray. ST ALK fleshy or thin, central, usually white, gray, or brown. 
VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth or spiny, not amyloid. Cystidia 
on gills typically inconspicuous or absent. Basidia with siderophilous (carminophilous) granules. 
LYOPHYLLUM isa nondescript amalgamation of white-spored mushrooms at onetime 
dispersed among Tricholoma, Collybia, and C/ilOcybe. They are puzzling to the amateur 
because the various species appear to have little in common aside from their drab color- 
some are slender and Collybia- or Mycena-like; others are robust and Tricholoma- or 
C/ilOcybe-like. The unifying feature is rather esoteric: the basidia contain particles which 
darken dramatically when heated in acetocarmine! (W ouldn't you?) 
Lyophyllum is a fairly sizable genus but only the L. decasles group, which fruits in large, 
dense clusters along roads and trails, is conspicuous. The rest qualify as"LBM's" and are 
treated here only perfunctorily (they are differentiated largely on microscopic 
characteristics anyway). Also included here is one species of Calocybe-a small, rare genus 
which, like Lyophyllum, has siderophilous granules in the basidia, but typically hasa more 
brightly colored cap. 
174 
TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
Key to LyophyIIum& Allies 
I. Cap pinkish-tan to reddish (sometimes fading to tan); stalk usually 5 mm thick or less 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Caloeybe earnea & others, p. 176 
I. Not as above; cap grayish to brown, black, or white ................................. 2 
2. Gills and/ or stalk staining gray or black where bruised (sometimes slowly), or developing 
grayish to black spots in age .......:..... L. semitale & others (see L. montanum. p. 175) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Growing on burnt ground or debris; stalk thin(up to 3 mm); cap small, dark brownish to black 
. . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . .. . .. . . ., ..... . .. . L. atratum(see M)'xompha/ia maura, p. 165) 
3. Not growing on burnt ground and/ or stalk thicker .................................. 4 
4. Stalk fairly thick (1-2.5 cm thick), usually white; typically growing in dense clusters (rarely 
solitary) along roads and paths or less commonly in undisturbed woods ............... 5 
4. Not as above; stalk usually slender ............................................... 6 
5. Caps white, often somewhat misshapen; taste usually sour or disagreeable; known only from 
western North America ............................... (see Clitoeybedilatata, p. 159) 
5. Not as above; caps not white, or if white then taste more or less mild L. deeastes group. below 
6. Fruiting in spring in western mountains, usually near melting snow; fruiting body grayish 
when fresh; gills gray; cap usually with a hoary bloom at first ....., L. montanum, p. 175 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Found in sphagnum bogs; cap usually with an umbo; stalk thin, fragile, often long L palustre 
7. Similar to above but not growing in bogs.... .. . ...... ... .. ....... L. rancidum& others 
Lyophyllum decastes group (Fried Chicken Mushroom) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or with slightly uplifted margin in age; surface 
smooth, often with a soapy (lubricous) feel when moist, but not viscid; color variable: dark 
brown to grayish-brown to yellowish-brown. watery tan, or paler; margin often lobed. 
Flesh firm, white; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent or often notched, 
close, white or pallid but sometimes becoming straw-colored in age. STALK 3-10 cm 
long, 1-2.5 cm thick, solid, equal or tapering downward, often curved, smooth, dry, white, 
sometimes discolored brownish in age, especially at base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
4-6 microns, round or nearly round, smooth. Basidia with siderophilous granules. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious on the ground, usually in large compact clumps and often half- 
hidden by leaves and grass; fruiting mainly in disturbed areas-along roads and beaten 
paths (sometimes even forcing its way up through asphalt), in waste places, around old 
sawdust piles, or sometimes in the woods; widely distributed. It is common along the west 
coast from Alaska to southern California and fruits in our area from early fall through 
spring or even summer. It was the single most abundant mushroom on the University of 
California, Santa Cruz campus (a very "disturbed" place!) during the 1976-77 drought. A 
couple hundred pounds could easily have been harvested. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite popular in some regions, but it hardly tastes like chicken as 
its common name implies. I've found it to be crunchy, but bland. Its abundance and habit 
of fruiting when other good edibles are scarce make experimentation worthwhile. Be 
careful, however-this is a species" complex," and some mild cases of poisoning have been 
attributed to it. These may simply have been "allergic" reactions, or may have resulted 
from confusion with poisonous species (e.g., Clilocybe dUalala). 
COMMENTS: Also known as Clitocybe multiceps and Tricholoma aggregatum, this 
exceedingly common species "complex" is best recognized by its fondness for disturbed 
places and its growth in dense clusters which may contain a hundred or more individuals 
and weigh as much as 15 pounds! Within the L. decasles group at least three species have 
. 
.,' 
.. 
Lyophyllum decastes group is especially common along roads and paths. Note clustered growth 
habit, white stalk, and absence of a veil. Another clump is shown on p. 898. 
been recognized on the basis of cap color: L. conna/um has a white or whitish cap; L.lor;- 
ca/um has a blackish-brown to dark brown cap when young, often with a hoary sheen or 
metallic luster, and a thick cartilaginous cap cuticle; as it ages, however, it fades to paler 
brown or tan, and is then indistinguishable from "typical" L. decastes. which has a brown 
to grayish-brown to tan cap. L. /oricatum is the most common of the three in our area, 
but L. decastes also occurs. A fourth, unidentified species is fairly common in our 
live oak woodlands. It has a grayish cap and grayish gills and its edibility is unknown. 
S till another species grows under mountain conifers soon after the snow melts. 
Though all of these species tend to grow in clusters, solitary individuals occasionally 
occur, and these are apt to baffle the beginner. Since the cap color and gill attachment are 
so variable, it is best only to eat those growing in large clumps in disturbed ground. Make 
sure the spore deposits on the lower caps of mature clusters are white. Poisonous Ento- 
lomas sometimes grow in clusters, but have deep pinkish spores. The Clitocybe sub- 
connexa group also grows in clusters and has pinkish spores, while C. dilalata is white- 
spored with a whitish cap and disagreeable taste. Most other fleshy, clustered terrestrial 
mushrooms have darker spores and/ or a veil. 
Lyophyllum montanum (Snowbank Lyophyllum) 
CAP 2-6.5 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface not viscid, gray to 
lead-colored beneath a hoary (whitish) bloom which may wear off; often becoming some- 
what yellower (to dingy yellow-brown) in old age. Flesh thin, brownish to whitish, odor 
mild. GILLS dark gray to gray, close, adnate to nearly free (usually adnexed). ST ALK 3-7 
cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, hoary and colored more or less like cap 
when fresh, or slightly browner; base often with white mycelial down. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 6.5-8 x 3.5-4 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Basidia with siderophilous 
granules. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers (particularly 
spruce and fir), usually near melting snow; fairly common in the spring and early summer 
in the mountains of western North America. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
175 
176 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
COMMENTS: There are a number of nondescript grayish Lyophyllums that are very 
difficult to identify. This one, however, can be told by its snowbank milieu and hoary cap 
surface when young (see photo on p. 46). Other species: L. semita/e is one of more than 50 
difficult-to-differentiate Lyophyllums that stain gray, black, or brown when bruised 
( often slowly). Its cap and gills are grayish and it is widespread under conifers or less com- 
monly hardwoods. L. infumatum also blackens, but has whitish gills when young. 
C alocybe carnea 
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate; surface dry, more or less 
smooth, usually pinkish to pinkish-brown, but varying to dark reddish or fading to pale 
tan. Flesh thin, whitish. GILLS crowded, narrow, white, adnate to slightly decurrent or 
notched. STALK 1.5-4 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal, colored more or less like cap, 
smooth or finely fibrillose. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-6 )( 2-3 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Basidia with siderophilous granules. 
HABITAT: Scattered or in groups in lawns, grassy clearings in woods, and other open 
places; widely distributed but not common. I have found it only once, on a lawn in Santa 
Cruz, California, during the seventh inning stretch of the fourth game of the 1978 
World Series (I don't remember the date). 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It is said to be edible but is easily confused with 
poisonous species. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as C/itocybe socia/is and Lyophy//um carneum, this 
pretty little lawn-lover can be recognized by its pinkish cap, crowded white gills, and white 
spores. It appears to have a wide distribution but nowhere does it seem to be common. 
A similar but slightly larger species with a purple-red cap and yellow-ochre gills, C. 
onychina, occurs in the spruce-aspen forests ofthe Rocky Mountains in the summer. 
TRICHOLOMA 
Medium-sized to large terrestrial, mostly woodland fungi. CAP viscid or dry, smooth, fibrillose, 
or scaly. GILLS typically notched or adnexed, occasionally adnate. STALK central, fleshy. VEIL 
absent (except in T. zelleri and a few others). VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores 
smooth, not amyloid. Gills only rarely with cystidia. 
TRICHOLOMA is a large and prominent, well-defined group ofterrestrial white-spored 
mushrooms with notched gills and a central, fleshy stem. It corresponds in stature to 
Entoloma (deep pinkish spores) and Hebeloma (brown spores), but has little else in 
common with those fungi. Among the white-spored genera, Collybia differs in its carti- 
laginous stalk, Tricholomopsis grows on or near wood, Hygrophorus has gills that are soft 
and waxy, Russula has dry, brittle flesh, and C lit ocybe has adnate to decurrent gills andf or 
pinkish spores. M elanoleuca, Leucopaxillus, and Lyophyllum differ microscopically and 
are keyed out in Tricholoma, while Armillaria and Catathelasma have a veil. 
Tricholoma contains several excellent edible species as well as some poisonous ones. 
The man on horseback, T. j1avovirens, is the only species I consider safe for beginners. The 
brown-capped and gray-capped species should be strictly avoided until you are intimately 
familiar with each and everyone of them. Then, and only then, should species like T. por- 
tentosum become part of your culinary repertoire. Tricholomas, incidentally, form the 
bulk of the wild mushrooms served by the Czarnecki family at their fabulous wild 
mushroom restaurant in Reading, Pennsylvania. 
TRICHOLOMA 
177 
Tricholomas are almost exclusively woodland fungi. Most species are mycorrhizal- 
especially with pine and oak, but also with spruce, aspen, fir, and other trees. They are 
partial t{) cold weather and in our area reach their peak in December or January. In colder 
regions they may continue to fruit after there is snow on the ground! 
Though Trich%ma is an easy gen us to recognize, its species are perplexing even to the 
professional. Several kinds are known only from a single locality and microscopic charac- 
teristics are not as helpful as in, say, Mycena. Over 100 species occur in North America 
and perhaps 50 in California. Fifteen are described here. 
Key to Tricholoma 
I. Cap yellow to greenish-yellow, at least at margin, or yellow overlaid with purple-red fibrils 2 
I. Cap not yellow at margin ..................................................... -. 8 
2. Stalk sheathed with cottony or shaggy scales ............. (see A rm;lIar;a & Allies, p. 189) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Cap and/ or stalk with reddish-purple fibrils or scales; flesh pale yellow to yellow .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Tr;cholomopsis rutilans, p. 145) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Flesh yellow; odor typically unpleasant and pungent (like coal-tar gas); gills yellow, widely 
spaced; cap not viscid ........................................ T. sulphureum, p. 179 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap with blackish to dark brown to purple-gray or grayish center and/ or radiating fibrils . 6 
5. Cap lacking dark radiating fibrils, entirely yellow or yellow at the margin and reddish-brown to 
brown toward the center ....................................................... 7 
6. Cap yellow to greenish-yellow with blackish to dark brown center and radiating fibrils ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. T. sejunctum & others, p. 180 
6. Not as above; cap streaked with grayish to purple-gray fibrils ....... T. portentosum, p. 180 
7. G ills yellow ..................................... _ . . . . . . . _ . .. T. flavov;rens, p. 179 
7. Gills white ..... .. ...... .. . . . . . . ... ... .... T.leucophyllum(see T.j7avovirens. p. 179) 
8. Veil present, usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk ........................ 9 
8. Veil absent or evanescent, not forming an annulus ..... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. II 
9. Cap small (up to 5 cm broad), gray to brownish-gray or bluish-gray; associated mainly with 
willow; odor usually farinaceous ..................................... T. cingulatum 
9. Not as above (but may have farinaceous odor) .................................... 10 
10. Stalk rather slender and fragile; veil fibrillose, usually forming only a slight ring on stalk .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see L;macella gl;oderma, p. 291 ) 
10. Stalk usually at least I cm thick; veil membranous, forming a persistent ring T. zeller;, p. 188 
II. Stalk belted with rusty-orange scales or scurf up to a well-defined line near apex, sometimes 
also beaded with orange droplets; cap viscid when moist, yellow-orange to tawny, orange, 
rusty-brown, or greenish .............................. T. auranl;um & others, p. 187 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Base of stalk( or interior at base) usually pale pinkish to pinkish-orange; cap not viscid, its color 
variable but usually greenish to olive-gray, sometimes shaded with brown, or grayish at center 
and pallid at margin; surface smooth or cracking, but without differently colored fibrils or 
hairs ..................................................... T. saponaceum, p. 184 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Stalk with a tapered "tap root" extending deep into humus; stalk usually with a tough or carti- 
laginous outer rind ....................... (see Caulorhiza umbonata & others. p. 218) 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
14. Odor pungent and very unpleasant (like coal-tar gas); cap pallid; gills widely spaced; associated 
with conifers _........................... T.platyphyllum(see T. sulphureum. p.179) 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Cap white to creamy when fresh (but may discolor or age yellow, reddish, tan, brown, etc.); 
stalk lacking small yellow dandruffy scales or granules at apex ...................... 16 
15. Cap distinctly colored or at least with colored scales or fibrils. even when young, or if cap white 
then stalk with yellow scales or granules at apex or growing under mountain conifers soon 
after the snow melts ......................................................... 21 
178 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
16. Fruiting body often huge (15-75 em broad!); known from Florida ............... T. titans 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Fruiting body soon developing reddish or rusty stains; taste often bitter; stalk usually longer 
than width of cap ....... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . .. (see Collybia maculata, p.217) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap with at least a few scattered grayish scales or a grayish center ..... T. pardinum, p. 183 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Cap viscid w hen moist, white or in age often tinged or stained yellow, 4-8 em broad; stalk usually 
scurfy-scaly; spores amyloid ............................... (seeMelanoleuca, p. 169) 
19. Not as above; spores not amyloid ............................................... 20 
20. Stalk usually hollow and as long or longer than width of cap, often slender; usually growing 
under redwood (in California) ...................:...... (see Hygrophoraceae, p. 103) 
20. Not as above; stalk not hollow; occurring with various trees but not redwood ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. T. resplendens & others, p. 183 
21. Found under mountain conifers in spring; odor strongly cucumber-like or fishy ........... 
................................................... (see Armillaria & Allies,p. 189) 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Cap black to gray, grayish-brown, or purplish-gray, or whitish with gray to blackish scales or 
fibrils ..................................................................... 23 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
23. Cap viscid when moist (but may dry out), often streaked ... T. portentosum & others, p. 180 
23. Cap not viscid ............................................................... 24 
24. Cap whitish with scattered pale gray to dark gray scales, at least at center; stalk thick (1.5-3 em) 
and fleshy ................................................... T.pardinum, p. 183 
24. Not as above; cap usually darker ................................................ 25 
25. Taste acrid ......................................... T. acre (see T. virgatum, p. 181) 
25. Taste not acrid ........................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. 26 
26. Cap densely hairy, scaly, .or fibrillose-scaly (scales sometimes sparse in age); cap not usually 
umbonate at maturity; veil sometimes present when very young ..................... 27 
26. Cap smooth to radially fibrillose or streaked, sometimes conical or umbonate at maturity; veil 
absent ..................................................................... 29 
27. Fruiting body fairly small (cap usually less than 8 em broad; stalk less than 1.5 em thick) . 28 
27. Fruiting body fairly robust (cap 5-18 em broad; stalk typically at least I em thick) .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . T. atroviolaceum & others (see T. virgatum. p. 18 I) 
28. Stalk with small grayish to blackish scales .. T. squarrulosum (see T. terreum group, p. 182) 
28. Stalk lacking grayish to black scales ................... T. terreum group & others, p. 182 
29. Growing on or near wood, or if not then stalk usually attached to white mycelial cords that 
arise from wood; gills broad (deep) ............. (see Tricholomopsis platyphylla, p. 146) 
29. Not as above; typically terrestrial ............................................... 30 
30. Cap streaked with radiating fibrils, conical when young, often with a pointed umbo in age .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. T. virgatum, p. 181 
30. Not as above; cap without fibrils, broadly convex to plane or with a low umbo ......... 31 
3 I. Cap with a hoary bloom when young; gills grayish; growing under mountain conifers, usually 
near melting snow; spores not amyloid ............. (see Lyophyllum montanum, p. 175) 
31. Not with above features (but may grow near snow); gills usually white or whitish ....... 32 
32. Gills crowded, pale; spores amyloid, or if not then odor often heavy and sweet ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Marasmius, Collybia, & Allies, p. 20 I) 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
33. Fibrillose veil present when young, sometimes forming a slight ring on stalk ........... 34 
33. Veil absent .................................................................. 35 
34. Cap at least slightly viscid when moist; growing with both hardwoods and conifers ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Limacella glioderma, p. 291) 
34. Cap dry, not viscid; associated with conifers (mainly pine and spruce) ... T. vaccinum, p. 186 
35. Stalk apex with small yellow scales or granules ....................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . T. acerbum & others (see T. pessundatum group, p. 185) 
35. Not as above ................................................................ 36 
TRICHOLOMA 
179 
36. Cap viscid when moist, dark to medium reddish-brown to reddish-tan, the margin often paler; 
gills often developing reddish-brown spots or stains in age ......................... 37 
36. Cap not viscid (but may be colored as above) ..................................... 39 
37. Associated with poplar or cottonwood, usually in sandy soil ......... T. popul;num, p. 185 
37. Not as above; associated with other trees ......................................... 38 
38. Odor distinctly farinaceous or cucumberlike ....... T. pessundatum group & others, p. 185 
38. Odor more or less mild _.................... T. ustale (see T. pessundaturn group, p. 185) 
39. Spore print creamy to yellowish; gills tan to ochre or pale pinkish-cinnamon in age; stalk 
straight, usually long; cap smooth, without scales; spores amyloid (seeMelanoleuca, p. 169) 
39. Not as above; spore print white; spores not amyloid ................................ 40 
40. Typically growing in disturbed soil (along roads, paths, etc.); cap smooth, grayish-brown to 
dark brown to brown orlan, etc. (but never reddish-brown) ..... (see Lyophyllum, p. 173) 
40. Not as above; growing in woods ................................................ 41 
41. Cap grayish-olive-brown .................. T. sp.(unidentified)(see T. virgaturn. p. 181) 
41. Cap brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon-brown, pinkish-brown, flesh-colored, etc. ..... 42 
42. Stalk 1-3 cm thick; cap often smooth when young and scaly in age, especially toward the margin; 
margin naked ............................................... T ;mbr;catum, p. 186 
42. Stalk usually less than 1.5 cm thick; cap scaly or fibrillose-scaly even when young; margin 
usually with hairy or woolly veil remnants when young ............. T. vaccinum, p.186 
Tricholoma sulphureum (The Stinker) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex to umbonate or sometimes plane; surface dry, smooth, yellow 
or sometimes olive-yellow, or tinged brownish to grayish-brown at the center. Flesh rather 
thin, yellow; odor usually strong and repulsive, like coal tar gas. GILLS typically adnexed 
or notched, broad, thick, well-spaced, yellow. ST ALK4-10 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, often 
rather long in relation to cap; more or less equal, smooth, dry, yellow to olive-yellow or 
with darker fibrils. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-12 x 5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and conifers, 
widely distributed. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under conifers and also 
occurs in northern California in the late fall and winter, but I have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Indisputably inedible because of the obnoxious odor; possibly poisonous. 
COMMENTS: While several Tricholomas have a distinctly disagreeable odor, this 
species has a downright disgusting one. By this trait alone it can be distinguished from the 
edible man on horseback, T. j7avovirens, which it rather resembles in color, and from 
T. sejunctum as well. Other species: Another mushroom with the same odor is T. platy- 
phyllum (=T. inamoenum?), a white to creamy species also found under conifers in the 
Pacific Northwest. 
Tricholomajlavovirens (Man On Horseback) Color Plate 33 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin uplifted in age; surface 
viscid when moist, smooth, entirely yellow or brown to reddish-brown toward the center 
and yellow at the margin, or sometimes olive-yellow; margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick, 
firm, white; odor farinaceous or sometimes like coconut. GILLS close, broad, notched or 
adnexed, yellow. ST ALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at either 
end, dry, smooth, solid; white to pale yellow or sometimes with darker stains at base. VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious under pines (rarely other conifers), often 
partially buried or visible only as "mushrumps" in the duff; widely distributed. Common in 
180 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
our area in the late fall and winter, usually in grassy, sandy, or shrubby areas with pine 
present; however, a bright yellow form is found occasionally with madrone, and in the 
Southwest it is quite common under aspen. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and excellent-one ofthe least appreciated and most flavorful of our 
fleshy fungi, though a few people are adversely affected by it. The viscid cap should be 
brushed clean in the field or the skin peeled off, and the sand removed (if it is present). 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as T. equestTe, this delectable mushroom is as depen- 
dably yellow as the blewit is purple. It lacks the blackish radial fibrils atthe center of the cap 
characteristic of T. sejunctum, and it also lacks the veil characteristic of Armillaria albo- 
lanaripes and various yellow Cortinarius species. T. sulphureum is similarly colored but 
has a dry rather than viscid cap and usually smells a wfu!' The yellow color plus the sticky 
cap (when moist), absence of a veil, white spores, and habit of hiding under pine needles 
combine to make it one of the safest-as well as tastiest-of gilled mushrooms. N one of 
which explains the misnomer "Man On H orseback"- it doesn't look anything like a horse, 
and most of the horseback riders I see are women. . . 
One local patch of T. j1avovirens produces crops that sometimes have a very strong 
coconut odor and taste, and at other times have the usual mealy(farinaceous) odor. A very 
similar edible species, T. leucophyllum, is common under aspen in the Rocky Mountains 
and Southwest, and may actually mingle with T. j1avovirens. I tdiffers only in having white 
rather than yellow gills. 
Tricholoma sejunctum 
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface slightly viscid or 
tacky when moist, smooth, yellow or greenish-yellow with dark innate (flattened) fibrils 
or streaks radiating from the blackish to brown center; sometimes with small scales in age. 
Flesh white or tinged yellow; odor farinaceous, taste often bitter or nauseating, but in some 
forms mild. GILLS fairly close, typically notched; at first whitish or creamy-white, but 
often becoming yellow near the margin of the cap or occasionally yellowish throughout. 
ST ALK 5-8 (12) cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, more or less equal or somewhat swollen below, 
firm, smooth, whitish, but often developing yellowish tints. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 5-7 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical or elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups under both hardwoods and conifers, fruiting mainly 
in the fall; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest. and I have seen 
luxuriant fruitings in California in mixed woods and under manzanita. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended-it is insipid at best and poisonous at worst. 
CO MMENTS: This species is likely to be mistaken for the edible Tricholomaj1avovirens 
because of its yellowish cap color, but the radiating blackish or dark brown fibrils or 
streaks at the center of the cap and the tendency of the gills to show yellow only near the cap 
margin should distinguish it. Other species: T. cheilolamnium is very similar but has a 
dry cap; it is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under conifers. 
Tricholoma portentosum (Streaked Tricholoma) 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex to obtusely umbonate or plane, or with uplifted margin in 
age; surface viscid when moist, smooth but with a streaked or radially fibrillose 
appearance, pale gray to dark gray, brownish-gray, or purplish-gray, the center sometimes 
nearly black and margin often paler; yellow tints occasionally present also, especially in 
age. Flesh white or tinged gray, fairly thick; odor and taste mild to farinaceous. GILLS 
adnexed or notched, at first white, becoming grayish or sometimes pale yellow in age; 
... 
-I! 
. . 
.; 
Tr;choloma portentosum has a dark (purple-gray to blackish) streaked viscid cap, whitish gills, white 
stalk, and white spores. Note how the gills are notched. 
fairly close. STALK 5-10 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, more or less equal, firm, smooth, 
dry, white or sometimes tinged yellow. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores5-7 x 3- 
5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed. In most 
regions it occurs with conifers, particularly pine, but in our area it favors live oak and 
tanoak. It fruits in the late fall and winter and is one of the last Tricholomas to appear. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and excellent, with a strong hearty flavor-but be sure of your 
identification before eating it! 
COMMENTS: The viscid cap separates this species from a multitude of grayish, dry- 
capped Tricholomas, some of which are poisonous (see T. pardinum and T. virgatum). 
The notched gills, fleshy white stalk, white spore print, absence of a veil, and gray to purple- 
gray streaked cap are also important fieldmarks. T. sejunctum is somewhat similar, but 
much yellower as a rule. Entoloma madidum is also similar, but has pinkish spores (and 
mature gills) and usualy has a darker (cap-colored) stalk. T. niveipes is a very similar 
edible pine-loving easterner; it never develops yellow tones and has narrower spores. 
Trich%ma virgatum 
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, conical to broadly conical to nearly plane with a pointed umbo; 
surface dry, grayish to grayish-brown or grayish-purple (the center often darker, margin 
paler), streaked with radiating fibrils or fibrillose scales. Flesh thin, white becoming 
grayish; odor mild or earthy, taste usually sharp or acrid. GILLS adnexed or notched, 
white to grayish, close. STALK 6-12 (15) cm long, (0.5) 1-2 cm thick, more or less equal, 
solid, smooth or fibrillose, white or tinged gray. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 6-7.5 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to gregarious in mixed woods and under conifers, widely 
distributed; occasionally found in our area in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended-it may be poisonous, and it resembles T. pardinum, 
which is definitely poisonous. 
COMMENTS: The dry, fibrillose-streaked grayish cap which is conical when young 
affords a good means of recognizing this species, which is also known as T. subacutum. The 
cap is never viscid as in T. portentosum, and the fibrils and/ or scales are radially arranged, 
in contrast to the T. terreum group. Other species: T. atroviolaceum is a large (cap 5-18 
cm), robust species with a convex to plane (not conical), densely fibrillose-scaly, blackish 
181 
182 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
to dark grayish-brown or violet-tinted cap. It has grayish or pinkish-tinged gills, a thick, 
brownish, sometimes bulbous stalk, and a farinaceous odor; it is not uncommon in 
California and the Pacific Northwest under conifers. A similar robust, unidentified species 
is common in our area under hard woods; it has a slightly paler( olive, dark gray ,or brown) 
cap and paler stalk. T. acre, fairly common under hardwoods in eastern North America 
and the Rocky Mountains, is also similar but slightly smaller (cap 3-9 cm), with a grayish 
fibrillose cap. white to grayish gills, and a distinctly acrid taste. 
Tricholoma terreum group (Mouse Tricholoma) 
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, conical or convex-umbonate becoming more or less plane in age; 
surface dry, hairy or felty from a dense layer of mouse-colored (gray to black) scales; scales 
often sparser and color often paler (silvery-gray or even white) in age and/ or toward 
margin. Flesh thin, fragile, white to gray; odor and taste mild to slightly farinaceous. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, fairly close, white to gray. ST ALK 2-5 (8) cm long, 
0.5-1 cm thick, usually rather slender, equal or slightly thicker below, white or tinged 
gray, smooth( but see comments), dry. VEIL absent or cobwebby and evanescent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-8 )( 3.5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under conifers; widely distributed. 
Fairly common in our area in the late fall and winter under pine and Douglas-fir. The 
largest fruiting I've seen was on a lawn under a huge pine. 
ED IBILITY: Not recommended. The flavor of our local variety is good, but this is a species 
"complex" and is best avoided until better known. There is also the danger of confusing 
larger specimens with T. pardinum or T. virgatum. 
COMMENTS: The small size (for a Tricholoma). fragile flesh, and dry, scaly or "furry" 
mouse-colored cap characterize a complex of confusing, closely related species best left to 
the specialists. It is probable that they are all edible, but we can't be sure until they are better 
known. T he most common North American member of the club is said to be T. myomyces, 
which has an evanescent cortina (cobwebby veil) and smaller spores (the "true" T. terreum 
lacks a cortina). Other species in the group include: T. squarrulosum, also very common in 
our area, but with mouse-colored fibrils or scales on the stalk as well as the cap (see photo 
below), and several slightly larger species, e.g., T. orirubens, with gills that redden in age; 
T. argyraceum (=T. scalpturatum?), which favors hardwoods and has gills that yellow in 
age, and T. acre (see comments under T. virgatum). 
Two small, common, mouse-colored conifer-lovers. Left: Tricholoma squarrulosum (see comments 
above) has a fibrillose-scaly cap and stalk. Right: Close-up ofthe smooth white stalk of T. terreum 
(left hand specimen) and the scaly stalk of T. squarrulosum (on right). 
, ,..\ 
, . 
... 
-f . , 
..., 
l ..,I'> 
 
"....-3:;- !:" 
.. ':", ) 
\ "- .  
TRICHOLOMA 
183 
Tricholoma pardinum (Tiger Tricholoma) 
CAP 5-16 (25) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, whitish with small pale gray to dark 
gray fibrillose or spotlike scales, at least at center. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor farina- 
ceous. GILLS notched or adnexed, close, white (rarely flushed pinkish), not stained or 
spotted gray. STALK 4-15 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, white or 
sometimes tinged gray, smooth, firm, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
7-10 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious cn ground in woods, widely distributed in 
northern North America. I t is sometimes abundant under conifers in the Pacific N orth- 
west and Rocky Mountains, but in our area it grows with tanoak and madrone in the 
winter. It is sporadically common, i.e., abundant once every several years but otherwise 
infrequent to rare. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! It causes severe and persistent gastroenteritis that may require 
hospitilization. 
COMMENTS: Anyone tempted to eat Tricholomas should learn to recognize this 
poisonous species. It is larger and fleshier than other grayish Tricholomas (T. terreum, 
T. virgatum, etc.), and often paler. At times it is nearly white with a few very pale grayish 
scales, and could then be mistaken for one ofthe white Tricholomas (see T. resplendens). 
The stalk is not pinkish-orange in the base as in T. saponaceum. 
Tricholoma resplendens (White Tricholoma) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin uplifted; surface viscid when 
moist, often shiny when dry; smooth, white or with yellowish center, often discoloring 
slightly brownish in age, especially toward center. Flesh firm, white, odor mild. GILLS 
notched or adnexed to occasionally adnate, white, close. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2.5 cm 
thick, equal or narrowed at base, white, smooth, dry, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 5-7.5 x 3.54.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered or in small groups in woods, especially with oaks; of 
questionable occurrence in California, but I have encountered a very similar species under 
live oak in the winter. In eastern North America this species or one very similar is some- 
times common. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended-it is said to be edible, but is easily confused with poorly 
known or poisonous species (see comments below). 
COMMENTS: This species is one of several white or whitish Tricholomas, and can be 
distinguished by the viscid cap when moist (however, see Melanoleuca lewisii in the key to 
that genus, for it also has a viscid cap when moist, but tends to age yellowish and has 
amyloid spores). Tricholomas with a non-viscid, whitish cap include: T. sulphurescens, 
which stains or discolors yellow quite readily; T. venenata, poisonous and common under 
hardwoods in eastern North America, with cap, gills, and stalk that discolor brownish- 
buff in age or where injured, and a bitter taste; T. album, taste also bitter or sharp, but not 
discoloring so much; T. columbetta, edible, cap often spotted with blue, green, or pink 
in age, gills crowded, and odor mild; and T. gambosum(=T. georg;;, Calocybe gambosa), 
edible, large and fleshy, with a white to creamy-buff cap, crowded gills, and strongly 
farinaceous odor, favoring grassy areas and open woods. Whether any of these species 
occur in California is uncertain, but they are to be expected. They might be confused with 
certain Hygrocybe species (e.g., H. subaustralis, H.jornicata), but the latter have hollow 
or stuffed stems and slightly waxy gills, and are most common under redwood in our area. 
Also see T. manzanitae(under the T. pessundatum group), which can be whitish in youth. 
... 
'" 
, 
, .. f 
... 
", 
\ 
If 
..' . 
, 
'J 
.... .. 
'" 
'It 
 
 
\ 
'It 
, 
. 
\ 
Trich%ma saponaceum is an extremely variable species. Cap at top is greenish-gray, while the small 
one at the bottom is brown. In all specimens, howel'er, the flesh in the stalk base is pinkish to orange. 
Tricholoma saponaceum (S oapy Tricholoma) 
CAP 4-12 (18) cm broad. convex to plane or with uplifted. often wavy mar,lZin; surface dry 
or moist but not viscid. smooth or cracking into scales in dry weather; color variable: olive 
to greenish-gray. gray. yellowish-olive. brownish-olive. grayish-brown. coppery. or with 
rusty tints. or sometimes dingy gray at center and pallid toward the margin. Flesh thick, 
white. but may stain slowly yellowish or pinkish when bruised; odor and taste mild to 
farinaceous, soapy. or "of wash rooms." GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, well- 
spaced. rather thick. white or tinged olive or yellowish, sometimes stained reddish. ST ALK 
5-12 (20) cm long. 1-3 cm thick. shape variable but often thickest in the middle and tapered 
below to a somewhat rooting base; solid, smooth or with small scales. white or tinted 
variously with the cap color; base usually with pale pinkish to pinkish-orange interior. 
VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5 x 34 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, tufted, or in groups or troops under both hardwoods and 
conifers, widely distributed. Common under conifers (especially spruce) throughout 
much of the West, but in our area found under live oak, tanoak, and madrone in the late 
fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible-it has an insipid or soapy taste and may actually be poisonous. 
COMMENTS: As evidenced by the lengthy description, this is a vexingly variable species 
and is rather difficult to recognize when greenish shades are not evident on the cap. One 
fairly infallible ( or less unreliable) feature, however, is the pinkish-orange color of the flesh 
at or near the base of the stalk. This feature is normally visible in the majority of specimens 
from any group, and serves to distinguish them from other Tricholomas. The gills are 
rather soft and well-spaced, leadingto confusion with Hygrophorus. but the cap is not truly 
viscid. The cap is most often some shade of grayish-olive or yellowish-green, but may 
develop brown or coppery tones. especially in dry weather. It may crack into scales. but 
lacks the fibrillose scales of T. virgatum. T. pardinum. and others. I n the Pacific Northwest 
and Rocky Mountains T. saponaceum is at times so overwhelmingly abundant that it has 
been called a mushroom ..weed." In our area it is not quite so prevalent and its beauty 
is more readily appreciated. One especially attractive form has a bluish-green cap. 
184 
TRICHOLOMA 
185 
Trich%ma pessundatum group 
Color Plate 35 
CAP 5-14 (18) cm broad, convex then plane or with slightly uplifted margin; surface viscid 
when moist, entirely reddish-brown to reddish-tan, or often with a paler( or even whitish) 
margin; smooth or sometimes finely scaly in age; margin often lobed, at first 
inrolled, sometimes faintly ribbed. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor strongly farinaceous or 
like linseed oil. GILI.S white, but often developing sordid reddish or reddish-brown spots 
and stains; typically notched or adnexed, but at times adnate or even free; close. ST ALK 
4-10 (14) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or swollen or tapered below, solid, firm; whitish or 
developing sordid reddish or brownish stains or fibrils, especially over lower portion. VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4 )( 2.54 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in forests or under trees, widely distributed. It 
is partial to conifers in most areas (including the Pacific Northwest), but is locally common 
in the late fall and winter with live oak, and less commonly pine. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided, as evidenced by the following severely censored excerpt from 
an erstwhile colleague's memoirs: "This common, viscid, red-brown Tricholoma is 
delicious when stewed slowly with zucchini and served steaming hot on rice with chicken 
chow mein and white wine. Suffering from an acute attack of overconfidence, M. Henis 
and C. Cole tried it in this manner one winter evening in order to determine its edibility. 
They subsequently staggered thrugh an all-night ordeal of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, 
in which not only the mushroom, but everything else, was expelled. . :' 
It is probable, then, that this common, viscid, red-brown Tricholoma is poisonous, 
although a violent allergic reaction on the part of M. Henis and C. Cole cannot be ruled out 
entirely. It is suggested that those foolish enough to try it (or any other mushroom of 
unknown edibility) should do so in extremely small amounts-without the rice, chicken 
chow mein, and white wine, and by all means, regardless of one's nutritional needs, culinary 
quirks, or dietary deficiencies, without the zucchini. 
COMMENTS: Several robust, viscid, reddish-brown Tricholomas with reddish-spotted 
gills will more or less fit the above description, and Ilea ve it to licensed tricholomatologists 
to decide whether or not ours is the "true" T. pessundatum. Closely related species include: 
T. albobrunneum, said to have a weaker odor and cap finely streaked with darker lines; 
T. ustalo;des, with a transient cortina (hairy veil) and sharply defined white zone at the 
stalk apex; T.Jlavobrunneum (= T.Julvum), with pale yellow gills when young and yellow- 
tinted flesh in the stem; and T. ustale, which lacks a farinaceous odor. (See also T. popu- 
linum.) All ofthe above have viscid caps when moist, and none have the belted scales on 
the stalk or the veil characteristic of T. aurantium and T. zelleri respectively. Other 
species: T. manzan;tae is a manzanita- and madrone-loving Californian with pale yellow 
granules or dandruffy scales at the stalk apex and a viscid cap that ranges from white( when 
young) to pinkish, orangish, or brown (often with reddish stains). T. acerbum is also said 
to have a yellow-dandruffy stalk, but has a strongly inrolled, ribbed cap margin (at least 
until maturity) and a fragrant odor and/ or sharp taste. N one of the above should be eaten. 
Trich%ma popu/inum (The Sandy; Poplar Tricholoma) 
CAP 5-16 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane or with uplifted 
margin; surface viscid when moist, then dry, often radially streaked or with watery spots; 
smooth, dull reddish-cinnamon to pale dingy reddish-brown, the margin usually paler or 
whitish. Flesh firm, white, thick; odor and taste strongly farinaceous. GILLS typically 
adnexed or notched, close, white, developing reddish-brown spots and stains, especially on 
edges. STALK 2.5-7.5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, solid, firm, dull 
whitish, developing dingy reddish-brown stains in age or after handling. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 5 )( 3.54 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
186 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious, frequently fruiting in large rings or dense 
masses in sandy soil or along rivers, apparently always in association with poplar or 
cottonwood. It fruits in cool weather and is widely distributed in western North America. 
I have found it only once in our area, in December, but it is commoner inland. It is said 
to be abundant in the John Day country of eastern Oregon in the fall and early winter, and 
I have seen very old specimens (perhaps from the previous fall?) in the spring near Pecos, 
New Mexico, while looking for morels and wild asparagus. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and popular in the Pacific Northwest, but be absolutely sure it is 
associated with cottonwood-the similar T. pessundatum group is poisonous! 
COMMENTS: The association with cottonwood and somewhat paler cap distinguish 
this species from other viscid, red-brown Tricholomas (see the T. pessundatum group). 
Its penchant for growing in densely-packed masses or long arcs is also distinctive. 
Tricholoma vaccinum 
CAP 4-7 (10) cm broad, broadly conical to convex, becoming umbonate or plane; surface 
dry, covered with dark reddish-brown to rusty-cinnamon-brown to pale pinkish-brown, 
tan, or flesh-colored fibrils or scales on a buff background; often darker at center; margin 
with hairy veil remnants at least when young, often splitting in age. Flesh white or pallid; 
odor usually farinaceous but sometimes mild. GILLS adnate becoming notched, close, 
whitish or buff when young, but usually tinged flesh-color to pale cinnamon in age; some- 
times also with darker stains. STALK 3-8 cm long, 0.8-1.5 cm thick, equal or thicker at 
either end, dry, smooth or with brownish to reddish-brown fibrils or small scales, usually 
hollow at least in age. VEIL woolly-fibrillose, not forming an annulus (ring) on stalk, but 
usually leaving traces on cap margin. SPORE PRINT white; spores (4) 6-7.5 x 4-5 
microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in small tufts, groups, or large troops under conifers, especially 
pine and spruce; common and very widely distributed, fruiting from late summer through 
early winter. I have seen enormous fruitings under spruce in the Rocky Mountains 
and under pine on the northern California coast. 
EDIBILITY: Listed as mildly poisonous by some authors. Like cheap coffee and frozen 
French fries, it is best avoided. 
COMMENTS: One of the commonest Tricholomas of the coniferous forests of North 
America, this species often fruits with T. imbricatum, but is apparently replaced by that 
species in our local coastal pine forests. The two are quite similar, but T. vaccinum has a 
scalier cap, frequently hollow stalk, and woolly veil which normally leaves hairs on the 
cap margin. Several color forms occur, ranging from dark reddish-brown to pale pinkish- 
brown, and the size is also variable. Usually it is smaller and more slender than T. imbrica- 
tum, but in northern California and Oregon a fairly robust, reddish-brown form occurs. 
Trich%ma imbricatum 
CAP 4-12 (20) cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin, becoming convex-umbonate 
to plane or uplifted; surface dry, dark brown to brown or cinnamon-brown, with flattened 
fibrils that may break up into scales in age, especially toward margin (which may be ob- 
scurely ribbed). Flesh thick, firm, white; odor mild or faintly farinaceous. GILLS adnexed, 
notched, or even adnate; close, white or tinged flesh-color, often discoloring brown in age, 
especially on the edges. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, solid, firm, dry, equal or 
swollen below with a tapered, sometimes rooting base; white or buffbecoming brownish in 
age, especially over lower portion (apex usually pallid); fibrillose or minutely scaly in age. 
VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
 ., 
-- 
,. 
.. 
Trich%ma imbricatum, young specimens. This very common conifer-lover has a dull brown dry cap. 
In age the cap often flattens out or becomes wavy. For close-up of gills, see photo on next page. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious under conifers, particularly pine 
and spruce ( often hidden by needles); widely distributed. Itisa prominentfungalfeature of 
our coastal pine forests in the winter and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Reportedly edible, but not recommended because it is easily confused with 
members of the poisonous T. pessundatum group. It is rather tough anyway. 
COMMENTS: This common Tricholoma can be told from other members ofthe genus by 
its dry, dull brown cap, solid stem, absence of a veil, and generally coarse, robust 
appearance, though slender individuals also occur. The species epithet, which means 
"shingled," is somewhat misleading, since the cap is usually quite smooth in youth and only 
somewhat scaly in age (it is rarely truly"shingled"in the way that the tooth fungus Hydnum 
imbricatum is). Its closest relative, T. vaccinum, has a scalier cap, evanescent veil, and 
hollower stem, while the T. pessundatum group has a viscid cap (at least when moist). It 
looks somewhat like a Russula, but has a tough, fibrous stem. Leucopaxi/lus amarus also 
has a brown cap, but its gills remain white and it has a bitter taste and amyloid spores. 
Trich%ma aurantium 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming obtusely umbonate or plane; surface viscid when 
moist, smooth or breaking into small scales (especially at center); color variable: yellow- 
orange to tawny, bright rusty-orange, orange-brown, orange-tan, or even orange-red, 
sometimes splashed with olive-green or in one form entirely deep olive-green when young; 
margin at first inrolled, sometimes beaded with orange droplets when moist. Flesh thick, 
white; odor and taste strongly farinaceous and disagreeable (like rancid oil or cucumber). 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, whitish, often developing rusty-brown or 
reddish-brown spots and stains. ST ALK 3-8 em long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or thicker at 
either end, solid, firm, belted with rusty-orange scales or scurfy flakes up to a well-defined 
line near apex, pallid above the line; in wet weather sometimes beaded with orange droplets 
near the line. VEIL absent or very rudimentary. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-6 )( 3-5 
microns, elliptical to nearly round. smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed. 
Throughout most ofthe West it is common under conifers or sometimes aspen; in our area 
it can be found under madrone in the winter, but is fairly rare. 
EDIBILITY: Indisputably unpalatable due to the obnoxious odor and taste. 
CO MMENTS: This species strongly resembles T. zelleri but lacks a membranous veil. Its 
sharply defined line near the stalk apex, however, is suggestive of a veil and probably 
represents a rudimentary one. The viscid, orange to orange-brown or olive-splashed cap, 
rusty-spotted gills, and strong odor help distinguish it. Our local form (var. o/;vascenS!) 
 
. 
" 'f 
... , 
 
<1". .. 
. 
Left: Trich%ma imbricatum. close-up of gills. Right: Trich%ma aurantium. showing charac- 
teristic belts of scales or granules on stalk. 
is frequently a deep olive-green when young, and when beaded with orange droplets is 
quite striking. T. aurantio-olivaceum is similar in many respects, but is smaller and odor- 
less, and often has olive-stains on the gills in age; it occurs in the Pacific Northwest. 
Tr;choloma zeller; 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface viscid when 
moist, bright orange to yellow-orange, or orange-brown, or sometimes splashed with 
olive-green; margin at first hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, slowly bruising 
orange-brown; odor and taste strongly rancid-farinaceous. GILLS white, developing 
rusty-orange-brown stains, close, adnate or notched. STALK 4-13 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, 
usually tapered downward, solid, dry, pallid above the ring, usually somewhat scaly or 
with orange or brown stains below. VEIL white, membranous, forming a flaring orragged, 
median to superior ring on stalk which frequently collapses in age. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores4-5.5 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, northern North America. 
Trich%ma (=Armil/aria) zelleri has the stature of a typical Trich%ma. but possesses a well- 
developed membranous veil that usually forms an annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
I 
 
. ., 
.. 
. 
... 
. 
## 
j\ 
TRICHOLOMA 
189 
Extremely abundant under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ( often in the same areas as the 
matsutake, Armillaria ponderosa), but rather rare in our region and fruiting mainly in 
tanoak-madrone woods at higher elevations in the coastal mountains {like A. ponderosa), 
in the late fall and early winter. I have also seen it fruiting in large numbers withArmillaria 
caligata under spruce in the southern Rockies. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible because of the unpleasant taste and smell; however, it is a good 
matsutake-indicator! 
COMMENTS: This is essentially a veiled version of T. aurantium-same color, odor, 
taste, and habitat. It is better known as Armillaria zelleri, but because of the obvious 
affinity with T. aurantium, it is now placed in Tricholoma. The sticky yellow-orange to 
orange, brown, or greenish-splashed cap, plus the attached gills, presence of a mem branous 
veil, and white spores are diagnostic. It might possibly be confused with Limacella glio- 
derma, which has a redder cap, fibrillose veil, and fragile stem. Other species: T. robustum 
and T. locale are very similar if not the same (they are said to be reddish-brown in color). 
ARMILLARIA & Allies 
Medium-sized to very large, fleshy mushrooms found on ground or wood. CAP convex to plane. 
GILLS attached. STALK central,fleshy. VEIL typically present. well-developed. usually forming 
an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white or tinged yellow. S pores smooth, 
amyloid (Catathelasma), to weakly amyloid or not amyloid (Armillaria and Armi/lariella). 
GRaD PED here are three small genera of fleshy, white-spored mushrooms with a cottony 
or membranous veil that usually forms a distinct ring on the stem. There are no warts on 
the cap nor is there a volva on the stalk as in Amanita, the gills are not free as in Lepiota 
and Limacella, nor soft and waxy as in Hygrophorus, and the cap and stalk are not covered 
with mealy granules as in Cystoderma. Tricholoma intergrades somewhat with Armil- 
laria, but as defined here does not usually have a veil (but see T. zelleri.'). 
The principal genus, Armillaria, is comprised of terrestrial forest mushrooms. The 
honey mushrooms, Armillariella, somewhat resemble Armillaria but grow on wood, often 
in large clusters. They were originally placed in Armillaria and some mycologists retain 
them in that genus while transferring the Armillarias of this book to Tricholoma and a 
separate genus, Floccularia. The third genus, Catathelasma, is terrestrial like Armillaria, 
but has a double-layered veil, decurrent gills, amyloid spores, and a hard, often massive 
fruiting body. It seems to be restricted to coniferous forests and is rather rare. 
Several mushrooms in this group are prized edibles. The matsutake of Japan( Armillaria 
matsutake) and its magnificent North American counterpart (A. ponderosa) are highly 
esteemed by Japanese- and Korean-Americans. The honey mushroom (Armillariella 
mellea) is well known and popular among fungophiles, while being well known and 
singularly unpopular among gardeners and farmers. It grows wherever there are trees and 
shrubs (even grape vines) and is almost as common in towns as in the woods. It has been 
called the most serious plant disease in California gardens, because once it has infected a 
bush or tree, there is nocure. One can only hope that it wil1co-existwith-ratherthankill- 
its host, and make the best of a sad situation by harvesting the mushroom bounty when it 
appears! Six species of Armillaria, Armi//ariella, and Catathelasma are depicted here. 
Key to Armillaria & Allies 
I. Growing on wood (may be buried!) or at the bases of trees, sometimes in large clusters .... 2 
I. Growing widely scattered to gregarious on ground (not normally in large clusters) ....... 5 
2. Cap with rusty-brown scales; stalk sheathed with similarly colored fibrils below the veil; gills 
typically not decurrent; found on hardwoods in eastern North America; rare .. A. decoTosa 
2. Not as above; common ......................................................... 3 
190 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
3. Cap some shade of yellow. tan, or brown; taste usually bitter (but not detectable by everyone); 
stalk fibrous, with a stringy white pith inside, often long ........................... 18 
3. Not as above; cap paler in color orthe stalk solid and hard ........................... 4 
4. Cap often scaly; nearly always on or near conifers ..... (see Lentinus & Lentinellus. p. 141) 
4. Not as above; usually found on hardwoods ............... (seePleurotus& Allies, p. 132) 
5. Gills typically decurrent; fruiting body hard and thick-fleshed, often large(cap740 em broad!); 
odor variable but not spicy-fragrant; spores amyloid; found with northern conifers ..... 6 
5. Gills not decurrent, or if decurrent then not as above (not hard and thick-fleshed, etc.) .... 7 
6. Cap dull white to grayish ............. Catathelasma ventrieosa(see C. imperiaUs, p. 195) 
6. Cap dingy yellowish to olive-brown to dark brown. Catathelasma imperialis& others, p. 195 
7. Odor pleasingly spicy-fragrant (somewhat like cinnamon); fruiting body whitish when young. 
but often developing cinnamon-brown or yellowish stains in age ..... A. ponderosa. p. 191 
7. Not as above; not spicy-fragrant, or if so then fruiting body darker when young ......... 8 
8. Lower portion of stalk shaggy or conspicuously scaly and fruiting body showing at least some 
yellow ...................................................................... 9 
8. Not with above combination of characteristics .................................... 10 
9. Cap smooth or with flattened fibrils ................... A. albolanaripes& others, p. 194 
9. Fresh cap with yellow scales, at least near margin A. straminea(see A. albolanaripes, p. 194) 
10. Cap and stalk covered with cinnamon-brown to chestnut-brown or vinaceous-brown threads 
(fibrils) which may break up into scales; veil membranous, usually forming a ring(annulus) 
on stalk; odor sometimes spicy-fragrant; typically found in summer or fall A. ealigata, p.192 
10. Not as above; differently colored or veil not membranous or found in spring and early summer 
(shortly after snow melts); odor not spicy-fragrant ................................ II 
II. Odor typically farinaceous, cucumberlike, fishy, or like raw peanuts, or unpleasantly pungent 
(crush flesh in the cap if unsure) ............................................... 12 
II. Odor typically mild, not distinctive, or merely fungal ............................... 15 
12. Found under mountain conifers shortly after the snow melts; cap becoming ochre-buff to 
grayish, brownish, violet-gray, etc. (occasionally whitish) ............... A. olida, p. 193 
12. Not as above (habitat or season usually different) .................................. 13 
13. Cap bright yellow-orange to orange-brown, reddish-brown, rusty, pinkish-brown, brick-red 
or splashed with green; odor farinaceous or rancid ................................ 14 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
14. Veil fibrillose, often disappearing; stalk up to 1.5 em thick, often fragile (seeLimaeella, p.291) 
14. Veil membranous, forming a ring; stalk not fragile ......... (see Trieholoma zelleri, p. 188) 
15. Fruiting body white and gills usually decurrent orfruiting body developingreddish to vinaceous- 
red stains or streaks and veil fibrillose, evanescent; found with conifers, especially at higher 
elevations ........................................... (see Hygrophoraceae, p. 103) 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Stalk with cottony or shaggy scales below the veil; fruiting body grayish or paler; found under 
mountain conifers, especially in Rockies .. A.fusea & others (see A. albolanaripes, p. 194) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Stalk tough and fibrous, usually with a stringy white pith inside; cap usually with small dark 
hairs or scales, especially toward center; taste usually latently bitter (but not detectable by 
everyone); gills usually decurrent (but sometimes adnate); on wood or ground; common 18 
17. Not as above; on ground ...................................................... 20 
18. Veil absent .............................. Armillariella tabeseens(see A. mellea, p. 196) 
18. Veil present, at least when young. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 19 
19. Stalk usually bulbous or thicker at base; veil cottony, not typically forming a prominent ring; 
often on ground, not in large clusters .. Armillariella bulbosa (see A. mellea group, p. 196) 
19. Not as above; often with a prominent ring, often clustered Armillariella mellea group, p. 196 
20. Stalk viscid; odor alkaline; fruiting body whitish; rare ..................... A. viseidipes 
20. Not as above; stalk not viscid; fruiting body white or variously colored; common ....... 21 
21. Cap 24 (6) em broad, not white; stalk 3-6 mm thick; odor usually farinaceous; usually found 
with willow; spores not amyloid; not common ................. (see Trieholoma, p. 176) 
21. Not with above features; common. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (seeAmanita, p.263) 
-I \ 
.... 
, 
. 
, 
'''' 
.  
11'", 
* 
, 
-1 
T ' 
"',+ ': :  
\ 
.., 
. 
';-., .. 
.,: 
'" 
Armillaria ponderosa, showing the veil that sheathes the stalk. Also see the color plate and the photo 
on p. 49. (The latter photo shows a young specimen with an unbroken veil.) 
Armillaria ponderosa (White Matsutake; Matsutake) Color Plate 37 
CAP 5-20 (35) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid when moist, at first 
white, but in age developing pale cinnamon to pinkish-brown or yellow-brown stains or 
with fibrils that become these colors; margin at first inrolled and cottony. Flesh thick, very 
firm, white; odor distinctly spicy-aromatic (like cinnamon). GILLS white, discoloring 
or spotted rusty-brownish to cinnamon in age; crowded, adnate to adnexed or notched. 
STALK 4-15 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, solid, tough, hard, equal or with a narrowed base; 
white above the ring, usually scaly or fibrillose below and colored more or less like cap. 
VEIL thick, membranous, sheathing the stalk, at first white; forming a prominent cottony 
ring which flares outward at first, then collapses against the stalk in age. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 5-7 )( 4.5-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in forests, thickets, and pine 
barrens; found throughout northern North America, but particularly abundant in the 
Pacific Northwest, where it is harvested commercially. In the mountains of Idaho, 
Washington, and Oregon it is common under mixed conifers and second-growth Douglas- 
fir, while on the coast it favors sandy pine forests. It also likes to lurk in thickets of 
ericaceous shrubs (e.g., rhododendron, huckleberry, manzanita), which makes for very 
difficult collecting. In coastal California, however, it prefers tanoak-madrone stands to 
conifers, though it also fruits in sandy soil under manzanita with a pine canopy. In our 
area "patches" are hard to find but fairly reliable, producing one crop each year, generally 
in November or December. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly prized by Asian-Americans. In San Francisco and San 
Jose it sells fresh for as much as $25 a piece! However, its tough, chewy texture does not 
appeal to everyone. Special techniques are required to render it tender while highlighting 
its unique flavor. (If you bring some to me, I will give you a free demonstration!) 
COMMENTS: The unique spicy odor-a provocative compromise between ""red hots" 
and dirty socks-is the hallmark of this magnificent mushroom. Its robust stature, whitish 
color (at least when young), and prominent veil are also distinctive. It might be mistaken 
for a "JAR" (Just Another Russula) or an Amanita, but the veil and odor distinguish it. 
Old cinnamon-stained specimens may be rather unattractive, but the young, firm, white, 
cottony buttons are undeniably gorgeous. The only other mushrooms with the same odor 
are the fragrant form of A. caligata, the matsutake of Japan, plus some specimens of 
Lentinus ponderosus (which grows on wood), and lnocybe pyriodora (a small poisonous 
species with brown spores). Hygrophorus suba/pinus and Catathe/asma species are 
somewhat similar, but lack the odor. The white matsutake has recently been transferred to 
Trich%ma and given a new name, Trich%ma magnive/are. 
.. 
,:. .. 
. 
 
. .." ';-'' ....... 
.. 
.. 
'I..t 
- 
. 
, 
.. 
Armillaria caJigata, mature specimens. Note the dark fibrils on the cap and stalk, and the prominent 
annulus (veil). 
Armillaria caligata 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or with uplifted margin; surface 
dry, covered with flattened cinnamon-brown to chestnut or vinaceous-brown fibrils 
which typically separate and cluster in age to form small scales or patches, revealing the 
whitish to pinkish flesh beneath. Flesh thick, white; odor variable: distinctly spicy-fragrant 
to fruity, mild, or unpleasant; taste mild to nutty, bitter, or disagreeable. GILLS close, 
adnexed to adnate (rarely slightly decurrent); white, the edges developing brownish 
stains. STALK 4-9 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, more or less equal, solid, firm, white or pallid 
above the ring, fibrillose or scaly below and colored like cap. VEIL membranous, sheath- 
ing the stalk, forming a distinct flaring ring which collapses in age; underside colored like 
cap, upper surface white. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-8 )( 4-5.5 microns, broadly 
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in groups on ground in woods, widely distributed. 
In the West, it fruits mainly under mountain conifers in the summer and fall, but isn't com- 
mono In eastern North America it occurS under oaks and ericaceous shrubs. The largest 
fruiting I've seen was under spruce in the Rocky Mountains. I haven't found it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible-the forms which do not have a disagreeable taste and/ or odor are 
said to be as good as A. ponderosa! 
COMMENTS: Also known as T,icholoma caligatum, this species is easily separated from 
its cousin A. ponderosa by the cinnamon-brown to purple-brown fibrils on the cap and 
stalk. It might be confused with Hygrophorus purpurascens. but the latter has a fibrillose, 
evanescent veil and a redder (not as brown) cap, plus slightly waxy gills. The above 
description encompasses several varieties and forms of A. ca/igala. The western version 
typically has dark fibrils and the spicy-cinnamon odor of A. ponderosa. Eastern material, 
on the other hand, is apt to be more cinnamon-colored with a mild to fruity to pungent 
or downright disgusting odor. Other species: The matsutake of Japan, A. (=Tricholoma) 
matsutake, is very close to the fragrant western variety of A. cali gala and may actually 
be the same species. It is edible, of course, and highly prized. 
192 
.. 
..,; 
II' 
" 
.. 
 ..r 
\.. .- 
:, .. j 
I 
"..:. :: 
I' ... 
, " 
. 
'\ 
1 
Armillaria olida is a prominent ""snowbank" mushroom of the Sierra Nevada and Cascades. These 
specimens are fairly typical, except that the cap is sometimes paler. Note slight annulus formed by 
the veil. The odor is also distinctive (see description). 
Armillaria olida (Cucumber Armillaria) 
CAP 6-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane to broadly umbonate, or in age often de- 
pressed or with an uplifted margin; surface dry to somewhat viscid, color variable: whitish 
(when still under the dufO to gray to bluish-gray, purplish-gray, brown, or developing 
olive, buff, or ochre tones; often overlaid with white cottony or fibrillose veil remnants 
(these sometimes scattered but more often merged to form a central patch). Flesh thick, 
firm, white; odor very distinctive: usually like cucumber, watermelon rind, rotting 
potatoes, or freshly mowed grass, but sometimes like old fish. GILLS close, white or 
tinged gray, typicallyadnexed or notched but sometimes adnate when very young and 
free in old age. STALK 6-14 cm long, 1.84 cm thick, equal or swollen below (or even 
with a bulb), solid, very firm, dry, white or at times pale buff, usually sheathed below the 
ring by veil remnants which are often ochre- or cinnamon-tinged. VEIL cottony or fibril- 
lose, usually forming a slight median to superior ring on the stalk, but sometimes disap- 
pearing. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-12.5 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not 
amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious or in small clumps of 2-3 individuals in duff under 
mountain conifers, often partially buried or forming ""mushrumps"; known only from the 
West, fruiting during the spring or shortly after the snow melts. It is quite common in 
the Sierra Nevada and is sometimes a good morel-indicator. I have seen large fruitings 
in Yosemite National Park in April. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-or at least not commonly eaten. The taste is said to resemble 
the odor, which is not particularly pleasing. 
COMMENTS: When the veil remnants are not obvious, this robust springtime Armillaria 
is likely to be mistaken for a Trich%ma. In fact, as the definition of Armillaria is nar- 
rowed and that of Trich%ma is broadened to include more veiled species, it will probably 
be transferred to that genus. Its distinctive cucumber or fishy odor, grayish cap, and 
growth under mountain conifers in the spring plus the frequent presence of veil remnants 
on the cap and/ or stalk form a distinctive combination of characteristics. The cap color 
can be reminiscent of T. portentosum and T. virgatum, but those species lack a veil and 
are not so strongly scented. 
193 
v 
..;;;: 
-.;;: 
) , 
'- 
<4 
. 
. 
Armillaria albolanaripes. mature specimens. The golden to yellow-brown color (see color plate) 
and the shaggy stalk are distinctive. A. straminea (not illustrated) is similar, but has a scaly cap. 
Armillaria albolanaripes (Sheathed Armillaria) Color Plate 43 
CAP 5-12 em broad, convex or slightly umbonate to plane; surface moist or slightly viscid, 
yellow to golden-yellow or more often brown at the center and yellow at the margin; with 
flattened fibrils or scales which darken in age. Flesh white or tinged yellow; odor mild. 
GILLS adnexed or notched, white to pale yellow, close. STALK 2-8 em long, 1-2.5 em 
thick, equal or thicker below, dry, white above the ring, sheathed with soft cottony scales 
below, the scales white at first, yellow- or brown-tipped in age. VEIL white, cottony, 
fragile, leaving a ragged superior ring on stalk and/ or remnants on cap margin. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5-8 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in scattered groups in woods and along paths; widely distributed. 
I t is common under conifers in the mountains of western North America in spring, summer, 
and early fall, but I find it only rarely in our area, usually under oak. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but insipid-I have fried it. The closely related A. straminea (see 
comments) is said to be a popular edible mushroom in Colorado. 
COMMENTS: This handsome mushroom is easily identified by its yellow-brown cap, 
creamy to pale yellow gills, and soft cottony scales on the stem. The veilcan be seen in young 
specimens but does not always form a distinct ring. The scaly stem might be mistaken for 
a volva, but there are no warts on the cap. Amanita aspera is similarly colored but has white 
gills and a warted cap. I n the montane aspen-conifer forests of the West, A. albolanaripes 
has several close relatives, including: A. pitkinensis, with a grayer cap and stalk and only 
slight yellow tints (but gills yellowish in old age); A.fusca, a grayish version with noyeUow 
at all; and A. stTaminea (=A. luteoviTens), more widely distributed and colored like A. 
albolanaripes, but with conspicuous bright yellow scales on the cap (or at least the cap 
margin) as well as on the stalk. In some regions, whitish or "albino" forms of A. straminea 
and A. albolanaripes can also be found. All of the above species have amyloid spores 
and are given their own genus, Floccularia. by some taxonomists (the same ones who 
retain the honey mushrooms in Armillaria and transfer the matsutakes to the genus 
Tricholoma). 
194 
.... . '" 
, -.... 
." 
.# 
... 
,,' 
.- ,- '\ 
. " . 
. .. ". 
. II II, 
... . 
.:. 
. . 
f 
'r.. 
.. 
'. 
.. 
, 
Cathathelasma ;mper;alis. Note the decurrent gills, scaly or fibrillose cap, and prominent annulus 
(ring) on stalk. C. ventr;cosa (not illustrated) is similar but has a paler cap. 
Catathelasma imperialis (Imperial Mushroom) 
CAP 10-40 em broad, convex to plane; surface slightly viscid when moist but soon dry, 
smooth, fibrillose-scaly, or cracked into scales or plaques( areolate); dark brown to brown, 
dingy yellow-brown, or olive-brown. Flesh very thick( up to 15 em!) and hard, white; odor 
and taste sharply farinaceous. GILLS decurrent, pallid or buff to yellowish or pale grayish- 
olive (in age), close, many forked. ST ALK 12-18 em long, 3-8 em thick, tapered below to a 
bluntly pointed base; dry, dingy brownish to pinkish-buff below the ring; solid, hard. VEIL 
membranous, double-layered, its lower surface often areolate while still covering the gills; 
typically forming a double ring, the upper one thick, striate above, and often flaring; the 
lower one sheathing the stalk as a thin mem brane or gelatinous zone, or indistinct. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 10-15)( 4-5.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers (mainly spruce 
and fir), late summer and fall, northern North America. It is more common in the Rocky 
Mountains than on the west coast. It does not occur in our area, but C. ventricosa (see 
comments) is fairly common under Sitka spruce in northern California. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very tempting because of its size-but tough. Buttons are as 
large as baseballs, and just as hard! 
COMMENTS: This mountain of a mushroom may well qualify as the "Most Humongus 
Gilled Fungus Among Us." Its often gargantuan size, hard flesh, dingy brownish cap, 
growth on the ground, double veil, and white spores set it apart. The cap may be 
smooth, areolate, or fibrillose-scaly. The buttons are smaller, of course, but still distinct 
by virtue of their hardness. Lent in us ponderosus is also gigantic, but grows from stumps 
and lacks a veil. A slightly "smaller" sister species, C. ventr;cosa, also occurs under nor- 
thern conifers. Its stalk may be quite long but its non-viscid cap averages "only" 7-35 em 
across and is dingy whitish to grayish. It looks something like the white matsutake( Armil- 
laria ponderosa) but lacks the spicy odor of that species. It is said to be a good edible in 
spite of its hard, unpleasant-tasting raw flesh. Other species: C. singer; of the Rocky 
Mountains looks like a Hygrophorus with its dingy yellowish viscid cap, but has amyloid 
spores; C. macrospora has broad spores. All of these species grow and decay slowly. 
195 
196 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
A rmillariella mellea group (Honey Mushroom) Color Plates 39,42 
CAP 3-15 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or sometimes broadly umbonate or 
in age uplifted; surface viscid or dry, usually with scattered minute dark brown to blackish 
fibrillose scales or erect hairs, especially toward the center; color variable: yellow, yellow- 
brown, tawny, tan, pinkish-brown, reddish-brown, etc. Flesh thick and white when young, 
sometimes discolored in age; odor mild, taste usually latently bitter. GILLS adnate to 
slightly decurrent or sometimes notched; white to yellowish or sordid flesh-color, often 
spotted darker in age. STALK 5-20 cm long, 0.5-3 (5) cm thick, tough and fibrous with a 
stringy pith inside; usually tapered below if growing in large clusters, or enlarged below if 
unclustered and on the ground; dry, whitish above the ring, soon yellowish to reddish- 
brown below and often cottony-scaly when very young. VEIL cottony-membranous, 
white to yellowish, forming a superior ring on stalk or occasionally disappearing. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: In small or massive clusters on stumps, logs, and living trees, or scattered to 
gregarious (occasionally solitary) on ground-but growing from roots or buried wood; 
common on a wide variety of trees and shrubs, and practically worldwide in distribution. 
In our area it occurs year-round, but is most common in the fall and early winter. I have 
seen truly stupendous fruitings on oak as. well as walnut (in an orchard) and other trees. 
It is a virulent parasite of timber, fruit, and garden trees, but can also be a harmless 
saprophyte on dead trees or on the dead wood (heartwood) ofliving trees. It is called "oak 
root fungus" in California because of its insatiable appetite for oaks, and ..shoe string root 
rot" because of the stringy black mycelial strands (rhizomorphs) by which the mycelium 
spreads. These ..runners" may extend up the host's trunk or infect neighboring trees by 
traversing great distances through the soil. On oak trees the mycelium can frequently be 
seen as whitish fanlike growths between the bark and wood. It generally feeds on the roots 
and lower trunk of its host, reducing it to a pathetic white, spongy pulp. The mycelium is 
also thought to be the culprit responsible for the ..aborted" fruiting bodies of Entoloma 
abortivum. Actively growing mycelium may phosphoresce at night, giving the wood an 
eerie luminous aura called ..foxfire." Inhabitants of subarctic regions are said to mark their 
trails with bits of glowing wood infected by A. mellea. 
EDIBILITY: Eminently edible. Use only firm caps and discard the tough stalks. It is an 
abundant food source, crunchy in texture, and a very passable substitute for the shiitake 
(Lentinus edodes) in stir-fried dishes. The bitter taste cooks out, but some forms are better 
than others, and some (e.g., those that grow on buckeye or hemlock) can cause digestive 
upsets. The common name, incidentally, is a reference to its color (which, like honey, is 
extremely variable), not its taste (which isn't the least bit sweet). 
COMMENTS: There is very little that can or cannot be said about the honey mushroom. 
Also known as Armillaria mellea. it is among the most variable and cosmopolitan of the 
fleshy fungi, and in its innumerable guises will confound you time and time again. Espe- 
cially variable are its color, shape, viscidity, and manner of growth, but there are several 
key, relatively constant features that distinguish it: (1) the presence of a veil (2) the 
tough, fibrous stalk (3) frequent presence of small dark hairs oncap(4) the bitter taste when 
raw (some people, however, are unable to detect it) (5) the growth on wood (though 
it may be buried) (6) the white or faintly yellowish spores(in any mature cluster the lower 
caps will be covered with white spore dust). 
There are at least two distinct, widespread variants (one study recognized 14 different 
..species" in the A. mellea complex). One has a yellow to yellow-brown cap that is viscid or 
dry but becomes slimy in wet weather. It also has a yellow-tinged veil and tapered 
stalk, and usually grows in clusters. The second variety, on the other hand, has a hairier 
- 
# 
This form of the honey mushroom (Armi//arie//a me//ea) usually grows in small tufts on the ground 
rather than in large clusters on wood (as shown in color plates). Also, the stalk is usually swollen at 
the base and the veil is fragile and cottony. It approaches the European form now called A. bulbosa. 
pinkish-brown to reddish-brown Or dingy brown cap with a white cottony veil and 
frequently enlarged stem base. It grows scattered or in small tufts, often on the ground. 
This form, which is close to A. bulbosa (a European species), is especially confounding 
to beginners. Intermediate forms abound also. In view of the extreme variability, be- 
ginners should eat only those clearly growing in clusters on wood. and be certain that the 
spores are whitish. The poisonous Galerina autumnalis grows on wood and has a ring on 
the stalk, but is smaller and more fragile, with a smoother cap and brown spores. Pho/iota 
species also have brown spores, while Gymnopilus has rusty-orange spores. In the eastern 
and southern United States you may encounter A. tabescens, a very similar, clustered, 
wood-inhabiting, white-spored mushroom that lacks a veil (and annulus) and has a dry 
cap. It is also edible. 
SQUAMANITA 
Fairly small to medium-sized terrestrial, mainly woodland mushrooms. CAP usually scaly, 
fibrillose-scaly, or granulose. GILLS usually attached. STALK typically central, arising from a 
conspicuous, cylindrical 10 bulbous, often hollow, underground "Iuber. " VEl L typically present, 
sometimes forming a slight annulus (ring) on stalk. VOLV A absent or present as a collar or scaly 
rings above the "tuber. SPORE PRINT while or pink. Spores smooth, thin- or thick-walled; 
amyloid. dextrinoid. or neither. Hyphae in gill tissue typically parallel or nearly so. 
THIS small, rare, odd ball genus is distinct by virtue of the underground bulb or "tuber" 
from which the stem arises. Many mycologists place it in the Agaricaceae (along with 
Lepiota. Agaricus. and Cystoderma) rather than in the T richolomataceae, but its affinities 
are unclear. Since some Amanita species have a swollen, rooting stem base that could be 
mistaken for a "tuber," Squamanita has been keyed out under that genus. Amanitas, 
however, differ fundamentally in their divergent rather than parallel gill tissue (a micro- 
scopic feature, see p. 19). 
Squamanita is unlikely to be encountered by the average mushroom hunter. One 
odoriferous species is described here and two others are keyed out. 
197 
198 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
Key to Squamanita 
1. Cap and stalk grayish to purple-gray, lilac-gray, or darker, but covered with an ochre-brown 
granulose coating. at least when fresh. .. . . . . . . . . . . S. paradoxum(see S. odorata, below) 
I. Not as above; cap and stalk often scaly, but granulose layer absent .................... 2 
2. Fruiting body purple-gray to purple-brown except for the yellowish to buff tuber; odor dis- 
tinctly fruity (somewhat like grape soda) ........................... S. odorata, below 
2. Purplish tones absent; cap ochre to ochre-brown to buff, with a whitish or grayish tuber (or 
clusters of tubers); found in eastern North America ...................... S. umbonata 
Squaman;ta odorata 
CAP 1-4.5 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped or convex, expanding somewhat in age but 
usually retaining a broad umbo; surface dry, densely and coarsely scaly or fibrillose-scaly, 
the scales often erect; usually more fibrillose toward margin; brownish-purple to purplish- 
gray or lilac-gray, often darker in age. Flesh colored like cap; odor strongly and persistently 
fruity-fragrant (like grape soda or grape juice). GILLS adnate or notched, fairly well- 
spaced, colored more or less like cap. STALK 1-3.5 cmlong,(2)3-10(15)mmthick,arising 
from a swollen, sometimes hollow,juglike underground ""tuber" 1-2.5 cm high and up to 
2 cm thick; colored more or less like cap and covered with conspicuous scales like those on 
the cap, except for the smooth, sometimes silky apex and yellowish to buff-colored 
"tuber"; hollow or partially hollow in age. VEIL not forming a distinct ring on stalk. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish; spores 6.5-9 )( 4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Usually in groups or clumps on ground in woods; widely distributed but 
apparently very rare. I have examined specimens collected under conifers in Washington. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Although too rare to be of value, the odor is certainly intriguing. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Coo/ia odorata, this little mushroom is as bizarre as 
it is rare. The coarsely scaly purplish cap and stalk, similarly colored gills, yellowish-buff 
""tuber," and strong grapelike odor make a most distinctive set offeatures. Other species: 
S. paradoxum(=Dissoderma paradoxum) is gray to lilac- or purplish-tinted inage beneath 
an ochre-brown granulose coating. It also occurs in the Pacific Northwest, but is rare. 
CYSTODERMA 
Small to medium-sized, terrestrial or wood-inhabiting mushrooms. CAP dry, with a coating of 
mealy or powdery granules. at least when fresh. GILLS typically whitish or pallid, usua//yallached. 
STALK central. lower portion sheathed with mealy granules orscales. VEILpresem. oftenforming 
an annulus (ring) on stalk. VaLVA absent. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth, sometimes 
amyloid but not dextrinoid. 
THE outstanding feature of this small genus is the layer of mealy granules that coats the 
cap and lower stem. Rain may wash the granules off the cap, but the stem normally retains 
them. A veil is always present and in several species it forms a prominent ring. Armillaria, 
Armillariella, and Calalhelasma have a veil and attached gills, but are larger and lack the 
granulose coating. Most Cystodermas were originally placed in Lepiota and some myco- 
logists retain them in the same family. Lepiotas, however, typically have free gills, while 
in Cysloderma the gills are usually attached to the stalk. 
Cystodermas are common in northern coniferous forests, especially in beds of moss. 
About 20 species occur in North America. Several are very attractive but little is known of 
their edibility. Two species are described here; both are rare in our area. 
Key to Cystoderma 
1. Stalk generally 8 mm thick or more; fruiting body medium-sized ...................... 2 
I. Stalk generally less than 8 mm thick; fruiting body rather small or sometimes medium-sized 5 
, . '\\\\ .  \\1) 
-, "'", \ ; 
. 
''\, "t-:. 
- 
, 
,.,. 
. , 
, ;J/'lt . l; 
\I/ 
.  . 
 ,;.....,.. ". ..... 
">-:;' /': ' . ,.- 
".i.'<;/ _, : 4$" ..' j 
.Y 
.. .". 
..::, : 
'. 
" 
Cystodermafa//ax, mature specimen. Note the umbonate cap, prominent annulus (ring), and coating 
of granules on the stalk and cap. It grows singly as well as in small groups or clusters. 
2. Spore print pale yellow-brown to orange-buff; large ... (see R oz;tes & Phaeolep;ota, p. 411 ) 
2. Spore print white or whitish; medium-sized ........................................ 3 
3. Cap white when young(but often pale cinnamon or buff in age); rare ......... C. amhros;; 
3. Not as above; cap not white ..................................................... 4 
4. Cap more or less orange; veil forming a persistent, well-developed annulus (ring) on stalk; 
found on rotting hardwoods, mainly in eastern North America ............ C. granosum 
4. Cap cinnabar-red to rusty-orange, etc.; veil evanescent, not usually forming a well-developed 
annulus; widely distributed .............. C. cinnabar;num(see C. amianthinum, p. 200) 
5. Veil typically forming a distinct, well-developed annulus (ring) on stalk ................ 6 
5. Veil evanescent or merely forming a ragged zone at top of granular sheath on stalk ....... 7 
6. Cap white or tinged pinkish or lilac; rare ................................ C. carchar;as 
6. Cap rusty-brown to tawny-brown; widely distributed and common ........ C./al/ax, below 
7. Growing on wood; spores amyloid .......... C. gruber;anum(see C. amianthinum, p. 200) 
7. Growing on ground or in moss; spores amyloid or not amyloid ....................... 8 
8. Cap often (but not always) radially wrinkled, tawny to ochraceous to brown or rarely white; 
spores amyloid ............................................ C. am;anth;num, p. 200 
8. Cap dark reddish-brown to brick-colored to tawny or paler (rarely white), but not wrinkled; 
spores not amyloid ... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. granulosum (see C. amianthinum, p. 200) 
Cystoderma folia x 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex to plane or frequently with an umbo; surface dry, with con- 
spicuous mealy granules which are erect at first but flattened and more powdery in age( or 
often wear away completely); cinnamon-brown to rusty-orange to tawny-ochre; margin 
often hung with remnants from the veil. Flesh thin, whitish or tinged cap color. GILLS 
adnexed to adnate, close, white to pale pinkish-buff or tinged yellow. ST ALK3-7 cm long, 
3-5 (7) mm thick, equal or enlarged below, smooth and pallid above the ring, sheathed with 
cinnamon-brown to rusty-ochre granules or flaky scales below. VEIL forming a large, 
delicate but persistent, often flaring ring on the stalk; ring median to superior, smooth and 
pallid on upper side, colored like the cap underneath. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
3.5-5.5 x 34 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups or tufts on ground under conifers or in 
mixed woods, sometimes also on rotting wood; widely distributed and common in the 
199 
200 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
summer and fall in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains. Fruiting in the fall and 
early winter in our area, but rather rare. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: One of the most attractive and delicately adorned of our woodland fungi, 
this Cystoderma is easily identified by its rusty-orange to cinnamon color, prominent ring 
on the stalk, whitish gills which are attached to the stem, and granulose coating on the cap 
and stem (rain may wash the granules off the cap, but not the stem). The illustration does 
not do it justice, but since when is justice usually done? 
Cystoderma amianthinum 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, bell-shaped or somewhat conical becoming convex or umbonate to 
nearly plane; surface dry, prominently wrinkled (radially) in one form; covered with mealy 
or powdery granules which may wear off in age, tawny-ochre to ochre-brown, ochre-buff, 
or yellowish; margin often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, odor mild or strongly 
pungent. GILLS adnexed to adnate, crowded, white or creamy or tinged yellow-orange. 
ST ALK 2.5-7 cm long, 3-8 mm thick, equal or slightly enlarged below, smooth and whitish 
above the veil, sheathed with granules or granulose scales below and colored like the cap. 
VEIL fragile, forming a slight ring on stalk or often disappearing. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 4-7 )( 34 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. Cap cuticle staining rusty-brown 
to reddish-brown in KOH (potassium hydroxide). 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under or near conifers, especially in moss; 
widely distributed in northern regions and probably the most common member of the 
genus. I have seen it in late summer, fall, and early winter in northern California and the 
Pacific Northwest, but it does not seem to occur south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some sources list it as edible, but it doesn't have much 
substance and can be confused with poisonous species (e.g., Lepiota castanea). 
COMMENTS: This petite mushroom is quite attractive when growing amongst colorful 
lichens or in beds of bright green moss. It is best recognized by its granulose cap and stalk, 
ochre color, and fragile veil which disappears or forms only a slight ring on the stalk (rather 
than a prominent one, as in C.fallax). It is easily mistaken for a small Lepiota, but the gills 
are usually attached to the stem rather than free. In one variety the cap is conspicuously 
wrinkled, in another it is not. Other species: C. granulosum is similar, but has a reddish- 
brown to tawny, non-wrinkled cap and non-amyloid spores; C. gruberianum is a small 
species that grows on rotten wood; C. c;nnabar;num is a larger, farflung species with a 
rusty-orange to beautiful cinnabar-red or vermillion cap and stalk. Whitish-capped 
forms of C. amianthinum and C. granulosum also occur, but are rare. 
ASTEROPHORA 
Small mushrooms parasitic on other mushrooms. CAP often powdery. GILLS thick and well- 
spaced or poorly formed to practically absent. STALK present. VEILand VOL V A absent. SPORE 
PRINT white to brownish when obtainable. Spores mostly produced asexually, smooth or spiny. 
THIS small genus contains a staggering total of two species. Both are outlandish oddballs 
that grow exclusively on other agarics, particularly Russula and Lactarius species. They 
differ from Collybia lUberosa and other mushroom-inhabiting mushrooms in having 
thick and well-spaced or poorly formed gills. They are also unique in that they produce 
very few spores on basidia. Instead the hyphae block off to form asexual spores called 
chlamydospores. Asterophora is listed in some books as Nyctalis. 
ASTEROPHORA 
201 
Key to Asterophora 
I. Cap more or less round and puffball-like, white becoming brownish and powdery as spores 
mature; gills often malformed or practically absent ............. A. Iycoperdoides, below 
I. Not as above; cap not powdery; gills thick, well-spaced, usually decurrent, eventually disinte- 
grating into powdery spores ................. A. parasitica (see A. lycoperdoides. below) 
A sterophora Iycoperdoides 
CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, nearly round; surface dry, whitish becoming brown and powdery 
from spores. Flesh thin, odor farinaceous. GILLS often malformed or barely present; 
well-spaced, thick, whitish. ST ALK 1-3 cm long, 3-8 mm thick, more or less equal, white 
becoming brownish. SPORE PRINT white when obtainable; spores 5-6 x 3.54 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Chlamydospores 12-18 microns, round, bumpy or spiny, thick-walled, 
brownish. 
HABIT AT: In colonies on old mushrooms, particularly species in the Russula densifolia 
group. Widely distributed but not common; very rare in our area. 
EDIBILTY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This oddball might be mistaken for a puffball because of its poorly formed 
gills and powdered round cap. However, no puffballs are known to be parasitic on gilled 
mushrooms! A. parasilica is also widely distributed, but even rarer than A.lycoperdoides. 
It has thick, well-spaced, decurrent gills and a white to grayish, brownish, or lilac-tinged 
cap, plus smooth and elliptical chlamydospores. 
MARASMIUS, COLL YBIA, & Allies 
1: 
Minute to medium-sized mushrooms, some of which shrivel up in dry weather and then revive when 
moistened, others of which do not. CAP usually convex to plane. but sometimes bell-shaped; 
not viscid in most cases; margin usually incurved when young. GILLS usually free. adnexed, or 
notched. but sometimes adnate( or in M arasmius, even decurrent). ST ALK usually thin andpliam. 
tough, cartilaginous, or wiry; usually central. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT white to 
buff or rarely tinged pinkish. Spores smooth, usually not amyloid. Cells in the upper layer of the 
cap cuticle usually forming a palisade (Marasmius), or not forming a palisade (Collybia). 
THESE minute to medium-sized mushrooms typically have adnexed to free gills and a 
cartilaginous or wiry stem. The cap is typically convex to plane or if conical then with an 
incurved margin when young (rather than straight as in Mycena). Two large genera 
(Marasmius and Collybia) plus several smaller ones are treated together here because 
they are difficult to separate in the field. The traditional trademark of M arasmius is its 
astonishing reviving ability. If dried-up specimens are placed in a bowl of water they will 
quickly swell up, magically reassuming their original shape and dimensions. In the wild, 
species of Marasmius often seem to spring up in droves right after or during a rain, when 
in fact they were already there, shrivelled up and inconspicuous. I n addition, they can often 
be told by their tough texture and wiry or hairlike stem. (Xeromphalina is somewhat 
similar, but usually has decurrent and/ or more brightly colored gills.) 
Collybia has traditionally been separated from M arasmius on the basis of its slightly 
fleshier, non-reviving fruiting body. However, some species have been shuttled back and 
forth between Marasmius and Collybia because they revive somewhat when moistened. 
Recognizing the arbitrary nature of this character, taxonomists now differentiate 
Collybia from M arasmius primarily on microscopic features such as the structure of the 
cap cuticle. As a result, Collybia. as currently defined, includes a few species which do 
revive, while Marasmius includes some that do not. The gills in Collybia are usually ad- 
nexed or even free; in some cases they are more broadly attached, leading to confusion 
with Clitocybe. The stalk is usually thin and pliant; if thick, it has a cartilaginous outer 
202 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
rind that helps distinguish it from Tricholoma. 
Both Collybia and Marasmius are "troubled" taxonomically. They have been fertile 
fodder for the "splitters" (see p. 10), who have recently erected a number of "satellite" 
genera. Some of these are easily distinguished in the field (e.g., Caulorhiza and Oudeman- 
siella usually have a "tap root"; Flammu/ina has a viscid cap and velvety stem; Crinipellis 
has dextrinoid hairs on the cap; Strobilurus usually grows on cones; Callistosporium is 
olive-brown and yellow); others differ microscopically (e.g., Micromphale and Maras- 
miellus); still others are not recognized here (e.g., Rhodocollybia and Microcollybia). 
Marasmius is a very large genus centered in the tropics. As might be expected, it is more 
diverse in the humid deciduous forests of eastern North America than in the West. Most 
species are saprophytic on sticks and leaves and many are exquisitely constructed. Colly- 
bias, on the other hand, are by and large a listless lot. They are also saprophytic on humus 
and wood and are among our most common woodland agarics; a few may be mycorrhizal. 
Most of the genera treated here are difficult from a taxonomic standpoint and have 
little to offer the mushroom-eater. Two exceptional exceptions are the fairy ring mush- 
room or "Scotch Bonnet," Marasmius oreades (forgive my promiscuous use of super- 
latives, but it is an exceptionally flavorful fungus!), and the garlic mushrooms (M. cope- 
landi and allies). A representative sampling of "marasmioid" and "collybioid" fungi 
is presented here and several additional species are keyed out but not described. 
Key to Marasmius, Collybia, & Allies 
1. Typically growing on fallen cones (sometimes buried!) or magnolia pods; rarely found on rotten 
wood, and if so then stalk thin, more or less rooting, and hairy over lower portion ...... 2 
I. Typically growing on grolJnd, wood, or other mushrooms ........................... 5 
2. Cap conical or bell-shaped when young, often reddish- or vinaceous-tinged; gills frequently 
with reddish to dark purple edges ............................... (see Mycena, p. 224) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Found on fallen magnolia "cones" ..... Strob;lurus con;geno;des (see S. trullisatus. p. 211) 
3. Found on cones of conifers ..................................................... 4 
4. Gills very crowded; spores amyloid .. Baeospora myosura (see Strobilurus trullisatus, p. 211) 
4. Not as above .................................. Strob;lurus trullisatus & others, p. 211 
5. Stalk with numerous side-branches, at least on lower portion .......... C. racemosa, p. 213 
5. Stalk lacking side-branches ..................................................... 6 
6. Cap minute (typically I cm broad or less) and pale; stalk whitish, very thin; usually (but not 
always) colonizing the blackened remains of other mushrooms C. tuberosa & others, p. 212 
6. Not growing on other mushrooms; if small, then not as above ........................ 7 
7. Fruiting body minute (cap less than I cm broad), stalk short, gills adnate to decurrent; growing 
on bases of madrones M;cromphale arbut;cola (see Marasmius androsaceus group, p. 208) 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Gills violet or lilac when fresh (but they may fade!) .................................. 9 
8. Gills not violet or lilac ......................................................... 10 
9. 
II. 
II. 
12. 
Gills crowded; stalk not white; odor mild; spores amyloid; usually found on rotten wood; 
widely distributed in northern latitudes _.................... Baeospora myr;adophylla 
9. Gills well-spaced; stalk whitish to pale gray; odor usually unpleasant; spores not amyloid; 
usually terrestrial; restricted to eastern North America (?) ... C. ;ocephala(=M. ;ocephalus) 
10. Odor distinctly garlic- or onionlike, at least when flesh is crushed; cap small or minute (usually 
less than 2.5 cm broad); often gregarious but not normally clustered ................. 11 
10. Not as above; odor may be fetid or otherwise distinctive, but if garliclike then cap typically 2 cm 
broad or more or fruiting bodies often clustered .................................. 12 
Stalk smooth (hairless); habitat variable ........ M. scorodon;us (see M. copelandi, p. 207) 
Stalk minutely hairy (use hand lens); found on leaves ........ M. copeland; & others, p. 207 
Cap small or minute, with coarse tawny to brown hairs; stalk thin (less than 2 mm thick), also 
hairy (min utely so), wiry-tough; hairs on cap dextrinoid . Cr;n;pell;s p;ceae & others, p. 210 
Not as above; cap usually without hairs .......................................... 13 
12. 
MARASMIUS, COLL YBIA, & ALLIES 
203 
13. Odor fetid; stalk velvety; gills yellowish to brown or tinged reddish; cap and stalk brown to red- 
brown; found on sticks or bark in eastern U.S. M;cTomphalefoet;dum(=MaTasmiusfoet;dus) 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
14. Odor sweet and heavy (like benzaldehyde); cap brown to reddish-brown, vinaceous-brown, or 
dark brown, at least toward the center; stalk usually at least 5 mm thick .............. 15 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
15. Stalk white (but may develop vinaceous or brownish stains below) '" C. oTegonensis, p. 218 
15. Stalk brown to dark brown or vinaceous-brown C. subsulcatipes(see C. oregonensis, p. 218) 
16. Growing in grass, often in arcs or rings; stalk tough; gills fairly well-spaced (not crowded or 
close); cap white to tan, buff, or brownish but not gray or vinaceous, usually less than 6 cm 
broad; spore print white; very common and widespread .............. M. oTeades, p. 208 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Stalk with a tapered underground "tap root" (dig up carefully!); spore print white; fruiting body 
without reddish or rusty stains; cap opaque (not normally translucent-striate when moist) 18 
17. "T ap root" lacking or not well-developed, or if present thencap translucent-striate when moist or 
fruiting body often reddish-stained and spore print pinkish-buff .................... 19 
18. Cap blackish, dark brown, grayish, whitish, or yellowish-brown (but ifthe latter then usually 
viscid when moist); found from the Rockies eastward Oudemans;ella Tad;cata & others, p. 219 
18. Not as above; cap chestnut-brown to warm tan or yellow-brown, not viscid ............... 
........... ............ ......... .. ......... .. . CauloTh;za umbonata & others, p. 218 
19. Spore print pinkish; growing in grass, straw, or manure ....... (see CI;tocybe taTda, p. 152) 
19. Not with above combination of features .......................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 20 
20. Gills yellow; cap and stalk olive to olive-brown or yellowish (but may develop dark reddish- 
brown tones as it dries); usually on rotten wood .. Call;stospoT;um luteo-ol;vaceum, p. 211 
20. Not as above ................................................................ 21 
21. Stalk dark, stiff, bristle-like, less than I mm thick; cap typically less than I cm broad (rarely 2cm); 
cap not whitish when fresh (but may fade!); substrate (twigs, needles, leaves) usually with black 
horsehair-like rhizomorphs (mycelial threads) .... M. andTosaceus group & others, p. 208 
21. Not with above features (but may have some ofthem) .............................. 22 
22. Gills adnate to decurrent and fairly well-spaced; cap 2-4 cm broad and predominantly whitish 
(may be slightly darker at center), usually wrinkled; stalk becoming brownish from the base 
upward; terrestrial in the forests ofthe Pacific Northwest ............... M. umb;licatus 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
23. Gills adnate to decurrent, white, very widely spaced; cap white or tinged gray to olive-gray or 
even slightly yellowish, translucent-striate when moist; stalk whitish; found under pine in 
coastal California, often in large numbers ..... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . M. sp. (unidentified), p. 206 
23. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
24. Fruiting body small or minute(capusually2 cmbroad or less); cap white or whitish or tinged pale 
yellowish (the center may be tinged brown), but may develop reddish or pinkish stains in age; 
stalk less than 3 mm thick ..................................................... 25 
24. Not as above; either differently colored or larger .................................. 29 
25. Gills free or nearly free; margin of cap usually with veil remnants and/ or the cap and stalk 
minutely powdered; stalk whitish; growing on ground ..... (seeLepiota sem;nuda, p. 307) 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Stalk black beneath a coating of minute white hairs; cap 1-2 cm broad; found on leaves or twigs 
in eastern North America ............... MaTasm;ellus n;gT;pes(see M. candidus, p.206) 
26. Not as above ................................................................ 27 
27. Growing on fallen leaves ....... M. delectans & others (see M aTasm;ellus candid us, p. 206) 
27. Growing on sticks, berry canes, wood, etc. ......... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 28 
28. Gills very widely spaced; stalk relatively short (less than 3 cm long); abundant on the west coast, 
infrequent elsewhere ................................. MaTasm;elluscand;dus, p.206 
28. Not as above; abundant in eastern North America, rare or absent elsewhere on continent ... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. Totula(see Marasmie//us candidus, p. 206) 
29. Growing in compact bundles on rotting conifers (the wood sometimes buried or very decom- 
posed-see Color Plate 49); margin of cap incurved when young .................... 30 
29. Not as above (but may grow tufted on rotting conifers or in dense clusters on ground) ... 31 
204 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
30. Stalk white to grayish .... Clitocybulafamilia& C. abundans(see Collybia acervata. p. 215} 
30. Stalk vinaceous-brown to reddish-brown (or somewhat paler when dry), at least at apex . 55 
31. Stalk solid or firmly stuffed (not hollow), straight and equal except for very base (which may be 
slightly swollen), sometimes scurfy or dandruffy at apex or throughout, or longitudinally lined 
(but without hairs); gills crowded, white (except for one large species with tan to pinkish- 
cinnamon gills); cap typically rather flat (broadly convex to plane, sometimes with a blunt 
umbo); surface of cap usually smooth and dark brown to grayish, sometimes ochre-brown, 
yellowish, or whitish (but not reddish-brown or vinaceous-brown); spores amyloid, usually 
roughened; found in many habitats, but especially in grass or landscaped ground or under 
mountain conifers soon after the snow melts .................. (see Melanoleuca, p. 169) 
31. Not as above; spores typically neither amyloid nor roughened; stalk sometimes hollow, some- 
times clothed with minute hairs but not often scurfy; gills crowded to widely spaced; usually 
found in woods or near trees (but not always) .................................... 32 
32. Cap with gray to black hairs or fibrillose scales ..... (see Tricholoma terreum group, p. 182) 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
33. Stalk very thin (less than 1.5 mm); cap f1esh<olored to light brown, often wrinkled, up to 12 
mm broad; stalk very minutely hairy (pubescent), not shiny; found on needles and twigs of red- 
wood, spruce, fir Micromphale sequoiae & others (see Marasmius androsaceus group, p. 208) 
33. Not as above ................................................................ 34 
34. Cap grayish to dark brown, olive-brown, or black; growing in moss, Sphagnum bogs, or on 
burnt ground, or sometimes simply assoiated with conifers _....................... 59 
34. Not as above; cap differently colored or habitat different _.......................... 35 
35. Stalk smooth (hairless) orfinely powdered, or with hairs only at the base .............. 36 
35. S talk pubescent or velvety (covered with minute hairs) over at least the lower half by maturity 
( use hand lens if unsure) ...................................................... 51 
36. Gills reddish-brown to dark brown or blackish-brown; cap and stalk similarly colored (but cap 
may fade); flesh staining green in KOH; fairly common in eastern North America and the 
Pacific Northwest ................................................. C. alkalivirens 
36. Not as above; gills typically paler ............................................... 37 
37. Base of stalk with a litter-binding mycelial pad; cap yellowish-brown to reddish-brown; stalk 
1-3 mm thick, shining; growing in groups or dense clusters on hardwoods leaves and debris 
in eastern North America .................................... M. cohaerens & others 
37. Not as above ................................................................ 38 
38. Growing in grass; fruiting body small (cap usually less than 2.5 cm broad) and vinaceous- or 
reddish-tinged; stalk not tough and polished; cap not pleated .......................... 
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .... Mycena sp. (unidentified}(see Marasmius oreades, p.208) 
38. Not as above ...................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 39 
39. Cap and stalk pale or whitish (cap may have grayish-brown center); gills fairly well-spaced; 
known from California and South America ....... M. albogriseus (see M. oreades, p.208) 
39. Gills close or crowded, or if well-spaced then cap and stalk differently colored .......... 40 
40. Gills widely spaced; stalk usually polished; cap often (but not always) pleated .......... 41 
40. Not as above; gills typically fairly close or crowded ................................ 42 
41. Cap bay-brown to reddish-brown, brown, or wine-red; stalk 5-13 cm long; common on west 
coast ....................................................... M. plicatulus, p.209 
41. Not as above; either cap differently colored or stalk shorter or found elsewhere ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. siccus & others (see M. plicatulus, p.209) 
42. Cap striate when moist and often translucent; cap typically conical or bell-shaped when young 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (seeMycena, p.224) 
42. Not as above ................................................................ 43 
43. Stalk tough, grooved or twisted, often with a rooting base, tan to brown (not white!}; growing 
on hardwoods; rare (not positively known from North America) .............. C.fusipes 
43. Not as above; common ........................................................ 44 
44. Stalk 0.5-2.5 cm thick, often with a rooting base, white or yellowish (but may develop reddish 
stains below); cap usually over 4 cm broad and whitish, but often becoming reddish, pinkish, or 
vinaceous-brown at the center and sometimes entirely those colors from the beginning; found 
under conifers, usually on decayed wood or lignin-rich humus ........ C. maculata, p. 217 
44. Not as above; either differently colored, smaller, or with a different habitat ............ 45 
MARASMIUS, COLL YBIA, & ALLIES 
205 
45. Stalk dark red except at apex; cap tan to buff, often plane at maturity; growing in tufts or clusters 
in humus and under trees; not common ........ C. marasmioides(see C. acervata, p. 215) 
45. Not as above (if tufted or clustered then stalk differently colored, including reddish-brown) 46 
46. Gill edges coarsely ragged or toothed, even when young; spore print white; spores amyloid; 
widespread (but not reported from California) ....... (see Lentinus& Lentinellus, p. 141) 
46. Gill edges entire or finely serrated (or in age sometimes coarsely serrated); spore print white or 
slightly colored; spores rarely amyloid; very common in California and elsewhere ...... 47 
47. Cap yellowish to light brown, often fading to whitish; stalk whitish or tinged yellow; found under 
eastern hardwoods (or mixed woods) M. stricti pes & M. nigrodiscus(see M. oreades, p.208) 
47. Not as above ................................................................ 48 
48. Usually growing in grass and cap typically pinkish or growing under mountain conifers and cap 
vinaceous-red to purplish-red with ochre-yellow gills .... (see Lyophyllum & Allies, p. 173) 
48. Not as above ................................................................ 49 
49. Spore print white to pale cream; cap averaging 1-5 cm broad (occasionally larger); cap color 
variable but often tawny; gills white or pale yellow, their edges often entire; spores not 
dextrinoid; common under hardwoods and conifers ....... _ . C. dryophila & others, p. 215 
49. Spore print cream to buff or pinkish-buff; cap averaging 3-8 cm broad (sometimes larger), 
various shades of brown but not tawny; gills white or with reddish stains, the edges often finely 
scalloped at maturity; at least some ofthe spores dextrinoid; found mainly(but not exclusively) 
under conifers .............................................................. 50 
50. Cap vinaceous- to reddish-brown, not fading appreciably; gills sometimes reddish-stained .. 
.. .... ... . ... . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . " . C. extuberans& others (see C. bwyracea, p. 216) 
50. Cap reddish-brown, brown, tan, or even grayish; gills not reddish-stained C. butyracea, p. 216 
51. Cap velvety, more or less orange-brown; gills adnate to decurrent; growing on hardwoods in 
eastern North America ...................... (see Omphalina& Xeromphalina, p. 221) 
51. Not as above; stalk may be velvety but cap not velvety and gills not decurrent .......... 52 
52. Cap usually viscid when moist (but may dry out!); lower portion of stalk rusty-brown to 
blackish-brown and velvety when mawre(usually smooth and pallid when young); found on 
wood (sometimes buried!) .............................. Flammulina velutipes, p. 220 
52. Not as above; cap not normally viscid ........................................... 53 
53. Odor garlicky or taste distinctly acrid (burning) ...................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. polyphylla & C. peronata (see C. confluens, p. 213) 
53. Not as above (but taste may be somewhat bitter) .................................. 54 
54. Gills usually crowded (sometimes merely close), white or tinged flesh-color; cap not prominently 
wrinkled; stalk pubescent (covered with minute white hairs) at least over the lower half; usually 
growing in tufts or clusters .................................................... 55 
54. Not as above; gills darker or more widely spaced or hairs on stalk brown to gray or tawny or 
cap distinctly wrinkled, etc. ................................................... 57 
55. Stalk reddish to reddish-brown or vinaceous-brown beneath the pubescence (may fade slightly 
in age), 2-6 mm thick; found on ground or wood but not normally on lawns ........... 56 
55. Stalk buff or whitish (or pale brown toward base), (2) 5-10 mm thick; growing On rotten wood, 
wood chips, or lawns; not common ................ C. luxurians (see M. oreades, p. 208) 
56. Growing in compact bundles on rotting conifers, the wood often buried or decomposed (see 
Color Plate 49) ...................... _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. acervata, p. 215 
56. Found on ground under both hardwoods and conifers, often clustered but not in compact 
bundles; base of stalk often with a litter-binding mycelial mat ........ C. confluens, p. 213 
57. Stalk with an enlarged, spongy base; cap and stalk reddish-brown to tan; restricted to eastern 
North America .................................................... C. spongiosa 
57. Not as above ................................................................ 58 
58. Gills white or pallid ...................... c. spp. (unidentified) (see C. confluens, p. 213) 
58. Gills soon darker (but may be dusted white by spores) ...... C.fuscopurpurea group, p. 214 
59. Gills usually adnate to decurrent; odor usually mild; on burnt ground, moss, etc., but not 
normally in Sphagnum ..................... (see Myxomphalia maura & others, p. 165) 
59. Gills usually adnexed to adnate; often in Sphagnum bogs, or if not then odor often rank or 
rancid ........................................... (see Lyophyllum & Allies, p. 173) 
206 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
M arasm;ellus cand;dus 
Color Plate 36 
CAP 0.6-2.5 cm broad, convex to plane or with slightly depressed center; surface dry, 
shining white or translucent white, but often stained deep pinkish or reddish in old age; 
often striate or grooved at maturity. Flesh very thin, pliant, soft, odor mild. GILLS few and 
far between, usually interspersed with smaller gills or veins; adnexed or adnate to slightly 
decurrent, white like the cap but often pinkish- or reddish-stained in old age. STALK 0.5-3 
cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal or slightly tapered at either end, often rather short, central or 
off-center but not lateral, tough, smooth, often curved, white or with gray to pinkish-gray 
base, darkening gradually to brownish-black from the base upward as it ages. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 10-15 )( 3.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elongated tear-shaped, 
smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: In groups or rows on dead sticks, branches, berry canes, etc.; widely distri- 
buted but most abundant along the Pacific Coast. It fruits in wet weather, mainly in the 
fall and early winter in our area. It is especially abundant along creeks overgrown with 
brambles, and on rotting oak, eucalyptus, bay laurel, cedar, etc. 
EDIBILITY: Utterly inconsequential. 
CO MMENTS: Also known asM arasmius candidus, M. magnisporus, and Marasmie//us 
a/buscorticis, this dainty mushroom is reminiscent of a small shell. Although small, its 
shining white cap stands out vividly in the forest gloom. The exceedingly well-spaced (dis- 
tant) gills are its outstanding feature. The stem, which may be off-center, is tough and dark- 
ens at maturity. The entire fruiting body may develop pinkish or sordid vinaceous tonesas 
it ages, leading one to falsely (but reasonably) assume that the spores are pink. In eastern 
North America it is largely replaced by the equally beautiful "pinwheel Marasmius," 
M arasmius rotu/a. This little gem has a longer (1.5-8 cm), central black stem that is 1-2 mm 
thick and a white cap(I-2 cm broad) with darker center. It grows on decaying hardwoods. 
usually in large groups. Other whitish-capped eastern species include: Marasmius 
de/ectans, growing on leaves, stalk pallid to yellowish above and dark brown below; and 
Marasmie//us nigripes, stalk black beneath a coating of minute white hairs and spores 
triangular or jack-shaped. Another whitish-capped easterner, Marasmius epiphy//us, 
grows on sticks and leaves and has widely spaced, veined gills and a relatively long, hairlike 
stem; it also occurs in the West, as does its oak-leaf-inhabiting look-alike, M. querco- 
phy//us. All of the above species are too small to be of culinary value. 
Marasm;us sp. (unidentified) (Pine Needle Pinwheel) 
CAP 1.5-4.5 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or umbilicate; surface not viscid, smooth 
or wrinkled, translucent-striate when moist, pure white or with a grayish to olive-gray 
tinge, sometimes becoming slightly yellowish in age; margin often wavy. Flesh very thin, 
fragile, soft; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, widely spaced, usually with 
veins in between, white. STALK 3-7 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapered below or 
with a swollen base; often flattened, smooth, colored like cap or slightly yellower, the base 
often with brownish stains; hollow, usually with hairs at the base. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 10-12 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Cap cuticle cellular. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or in troops on pine needles, often abundant 
in our coastal pine forests in the late fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too miniscule to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The widely spaced, adnate to decurrent giIls, pale color, small size, fre- 
quently umbilicate cap, white spores, and growth under pine distinguish this pretty little 
mushroom. It looks like a pint-sized Clitocybe or an Omphalina or Camarophyllus, and 
is keyed out under those genera. Actually, the term" unidentified" is not quite appropriate 
. ..... 
J 
This dainty undescribed Marasmius is a common feature of our coastal pine forests. Note how widely 
spaced the gills are. 
because it has been "identified" by Dennis Desjardin, Rolf Singer, Howard Bigelow, 
and other mycologists as an undescribed species. It is not as tough as most Marasmius 
species and does not revive when moistened, but is assigned here to Marasmius for lack 
of a better alternative. According to Desjardin, it may be the prototype for a ""new" genus. 
M arasmius copelandi (Garlic Mushroom) 
CAPO.5-2 (2.5) cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth or often 
wrinkled or striate, light brown to buff or flesh-colored, sometimes fading to whitish as it 
dries; not viscid. Flesh thin, whitish; odor distinctly garlic- or onionlike; taste garlicky to 
slightly acrid. GILLS pallid to flesh-colored or colored like the cap, attached (usually 
adnate or notched, sometimes seceding), often somewhat crisped. STALK 2-7 cm long, 
1-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end, tough, hollow, minutely hairy; dark 
purple-brown to reddish-brown with a paler apex, the base often blackish-brown (but 
the hairs may appear whitish when dry). SPORE PRINT white; spores 12.5-16 )( 34 
microns, more or less narrowly pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on fallen leaves; common along the west coast. In our 
area it is often abundant on tan oak leaves and chinquapin burrs in the fall and winter. A 
large-spored variant occurs farther north on the leaves of salal and other shrubs. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It can be used as a seasoning or garlic substitute, but should be 
cooked only slightly if at all. It makes up for its small size by fruiting in large numbers. 
COMMENTS: True to its name, this species and its close relatives smell and taste 
like garlic. In fact, they are often smelled before they are seen. Aside from the odor, 
Marasmius cope/and; is one of several small brownish species with a strong garlic- or onionlike odor. 
It has passed under several names, but marasmiologist D. Desjardin says that M. cope/andiiscorrect. 
. 
'.- 
-.. 
.;lAY 
.; 
.'1 
....... 
. '- 
.. 
, 
..... 
-. 
p.'''' '#, 
.. ... 'C .., 
 ".. ,-:-:; w 
" .., . 
A 
 
. . 
':1 t . .0/- J.. 
.. -" 
"-:,, l'...:; 
 #0,. 
.  
. 
.., , 
208 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
there is little else to separate them from other" LBM's." The mycelium must also smell like 
garlic, because in wet weather our tan oak humus will often have a distinct garlic odor- 
even when no fruiting bodies are present! There are several very similar "garlic mush- 
rooms," including: M. o/;dus, found on oak leaves in eastern North America, with slightly 
shorter spores; M. pras;osmus, a European species with whitish gills and even smaller 
spores (of uncertain occurrence in North America); M. scorodon;us, widespread, with a 
reddish-brown to pallid cap and smooth (hairless) stem, found on needles, twigs, grass 
stems, etc.; M. a//;aceus. a European species with a long black, minutely hairy stalk; and 
M. thujinus, with a minute (] -3 mm broad) cap and garlic odor if crushed, found under 
northern conifers. Several of these names have been applied to our local garlic mushroom, 
but marasmiologist Dennis Desjardin says that M. copeland; is the correct name. 
Marasmius androsaceus (Horsehair Fungus) 
CAP 2-10 (20) mm broad, convex to plane, the center often depressed; surface dry, soon 
radially wrinkled or striate, reddish-brown to pale brown or flesh-colored, fading in age. 
Flesh very thin, pliant, reviving when moistened; odor mild. GILLS narrow, well-spaced, 
pallid becoming flesh-colored or brownish, usually adnexed to adnate. STALK 2-7 cm 
long, less than 1 mm thick, equal, hairlike, tough, stiff, entirely black or black with a brown 
to reddish-brown apex; black horsehair-like"rhizomorphs usually emanating from base or 
visible in surroundings. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-9)( 2.5-4.5 microns, elliptical or 
pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. Cystidia present on gill edges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in troops on needles, twigs, or leaves; widespread. In our area 
it is fairly common, along with similar species (see below) in wet weather. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-hardly worth the trouble to find out. 
CO MMENTS: Several dainty marasmioid fungi will more orless fitthe above description. 
They are barely visible when shrivelled up, but rain revives them. They differ from the more 
numerous Mycenas in their dark, hairlike stem and tougher texture. M. androsaceusand 
M. pa//idocepha/us (very similar, but partial to conifer needles and lackingcystidia on the 
gill edges) usually possess black rhizomorphs, and sometimes form stems with no caps. 
Micrompha/e sequoiae is similar but grows only on redwood needles, has a brown stalk, 
and lacks thick rhizomorphs; likewiseMicrompha/eperforans, which grows on spruce and 
fir needles. Micrompha/e arbutico/a, found in swarms at the bases of madrones, is a minute 
brownish bark-inhabitor with a slight garlic-onion odor; Marasmius capi//aris, partial to 
dead leaves in eastern North America, has a black stalk and minute brownish cap with a 
white center. See also M. epiphyl/us and M. quercophyl/us under Marasmiel/us candidus. 
Marasmius oreades (Fairy Ring Mushroom) Color Plates 38, 47 
CAP 1-5 (6) cm broad but usually2-4 cm; at first bell-shaped or umbonate with an incurved 
margin, then convex or plane but often retaining an obtuse umbo, the margin often uplifted 
in old age; surface smooth, dry, color variable: reddish-tan to light brown, tan, buff, oreven 
white; margin faintly striate when moist. Flesh tough, pliant, pallid, reviving when 
moistened; odor agreeable. GILLS ad nate, adnexed, or free, fairly well-spaced, broad, 
white to pale tan, sometimes discoloring brownish in old age. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5 
mm thick, equal or tapering downward, tough and pliant, smooth, colored like the cap or 
paler (whitish). SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical to somewhat 
irregular, apiculate, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious in grass, usually in arcs or rings; widely distributed and very 
common in lawns, parks, cemeteries, etc.; also common in pastures in the Pacific North- 
west, but rarely straying far from suburbia in our area. Found year-round except during 
MARASMIUS 
209 
cold spells, but most abundant in California in late spring, summer (on watered lawns), 
and fall. Several crops are prod uced each year, but its presence can be detected even when it 
isn't fruiting-just look for "fairy rings" (patches of brown grass rimmed by a lush zone of 
darker green grass). The living mycelium on the periphery ofthe ring stimulates the grass to 
grow, while the dried-up mycelial matter within the circle inhibits growth. 
EDIBILITY: Delectably delicious-one of the few "LBM's" worth learning. What it 
lacks in substance it makes up for in abundance. Discard the tough stems and use the caps 
whole. They're superb is just about anything-omelets, soups, sauces, stir-fried dishes, 
even cookies. Or simply saute in butter and serve on toast! What's more, they dry easily, 
don't decay quickly, and are usually free of maggots. Don't pass up shrivelled, sun-dried 
specimens-they are easily resurrected or can be stored in an airtight jar for later use. 
COMMENTS: At first glance this seems like yet another Boring Ubiquitous Mushroom 
("BUM"). However, a closer look reveals that it is really quite attractive, withalean,clean, 
subtle symmetry all its own. Many "BUM's" and "LBM's" grow on lawns, but the fairy 
ring mushroom can be distinguished by the following features: (I) cap obtusely umbonate 
in many specimens (2) white spores (the grass beneath mature caps is often dusted with 
white spore powder) (3) broad (deep) white to buff gills which are fairly well-spaced and 
nol decurrent (4) thin, tough stem (5) growth in grass (6) the ability of dried specimens to 
revive dramatically when moistened. Be especially careful not to confuse it with the 
poisonous Clitocybe dealbata. which is white-spored and grows in grass (often with M. 
oreades), but has thin, crowded, adnate to decurrent gills and a convex to plane( not umbo- 
nate) cap. The growth in rings is not agood means of distinguishing it, as many mushrooms 
are capable of growing in circles, including C. dealbata. Other species: M. albogriseus is 
fairly common in central and southern California under trees, shrubs, and chaparral or 
even in grass. It tends to have a grayer or browner or yellower cap than M. oreades. at least 
at the center, and a hollow stem (the stalk of M. oreades is usually stuffed with a white pith), 
but is otherwise quite similar. M. (=Collybia) strictipes of eastern North America is also 
somewhat similar but grows in the woods and has closer gills and a yellowish cap. Another 
woodland easterner, M. nigrodiscus, is larger (cap up to II cm broad) and often has a 
striate stalk, but is similar in color to M. albogriseus. Collybia luxurians sometimes grows 
ingrass but has close gills and a reddish-brown cap. Finally, there is an unidentified Mycena 
that often grows in grass. However, it is smaller than M. oreades, its stalk is not as tough, 
it is usually reddish- or vinaceous-tinged, and its cap is convex to plane (not umbonate). 
MaTasmius plicatulus (Pleated Marasmius) Color Plate 45 
CAP 14 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical to bell-shaped, often expanding to convex or plane 
or with uplifted margin in age; surface dry, with a velvety orfrosted appearance when fresh, 
furrowed or wrinkled in age or upon drying; bay-brown to reddish-brown, brown, wine- 
red, or maroon. Flesh thin, pliant; odor mild. GILLS adnate to nearly free, well-spaced, 
broad, white to buff to pinkish or tinged cap color. STALK 5-13 cm long, 1.5-3 mm 
thick, equal, tough but brittle, usually long and thin, smooth, polished, reddish-black to 
deep chestnut below, often paler (pinkish or sometimes pallid) above; base often with 
whitish mycelium. SPORE PRINT white; spores 11-15 x 5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, 
not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in humus under trees and shrubs; apparently 
endemic to the west coast. Common in ourareain the late fall and winter(atleastone month 
after the rainy season begins) under eucalyptus, oak, conifers, in brambles, etc. 
EDIBILITY: Like myself, too tough and thin to be edible. 
COMMENTS: One of the most exquisite of all mushrooms-the frosted wine-red to 
brown cap, widely spaced (distant) pallid gills, and long, shining reddish-black stalk are 
/ 
, , 
4 
 
....... ..' . 
\. 
..' 
, 
, 
Left: Marasmius plicalulus is one of our most beautiful mushrooms. See color plate for close-up of 
gills. Right: Marasmius haemalOcephalus, a gorgeous tropical species (see comments below). M. 
siccus of eastern North America (not illustrated) closely resembles it. (Michael Fogden) 
distinctive. The stalk is so brittle that the mushroom must be dug up (rather than plucked) 
to keep it intact. The conical cap may lead to confusion with Mycena, but the tough. 
polished stem is characteristic of Marasmius. There are several similar and equally 
exquisite species with distant gills, including: M. bellipes, with smaller spores and a small 
cap (up to 15 mm broad) and short stalk; M. borealis, whose cap is not pleated or striate; 
M. siccus andM.JulvoJerrugineus of eastern North America, with even more distant gills, 
a shorter (2-7 cm) stalk, an orange-brown to ochre-tawny to rusty-brown, deeply ribbed 
or pleated cap (like a miniature umbrella) and spores 15-21 microns long (I have Seen the 
oranger of the two, M. siccus, preserved nicely in plastic cubes); andM. haematocephalus 
(see photo above), a gorgeous tropicalleaf-inhabitor with a dark red cap. 
Crinipellis piceae 
CAP 3-7 (10) mm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane, the center sometimes 
slightly depressed; surface whitish to buff or tinged tawny except for the dark (tawny- 
brown to brown or blackish) center, which is often surrounded by a dark circle; covered 
with coarse tawny to brownish hairs and sometimes minute scales, not viscid; margin often 
ciliate (fringed with projecting hairs). Flesh very thin, white. GILLS white, close, adnexed 
or free. STALK 2-6 cm or more long, up to I mm thick. more or less equal, very thin and 
tough, brown to blackish-brown beneath a coating of minute hairs. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 7-10 )( 3-4.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth, not amyloid. Hairs on cap dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups on twigs, needles, and debris of 
conifers, especially spruce; known only from the west coast (and Asia). It fruits practically 
year-round in damp weather and is, according to Dennis Desjardin, the most numerous 
"marasmioid" fungus of the coastal forests of northern California. It does not seem to 
occur in our area, but neither does spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Much too miniscule to merit attention. 
COMMENTS: This minute M arasmius-like mushroom is easily told by the coarse dex- 
trinoid hairs on the cap, frequently ciliate ca p margin. and thin, dark stalk. Other species: 
C. campanella is a slightly larger northern species with a rusty-orange to chestnut-brown 
hairy cap and stem and a tendency to grow on conifer twigs (especially cedar) that are 
still on the tree. C. zonata of eastern North America is a "large" (cap 1-2.5 cm) species 
with coarse tawny hairs; it grows on dead wood. C. stipitaria has a minute central nipple 
on the cap. N one of these are worth eating. 
CALLISTOSPORIUM 
211 
Callistosporium luteo-olivaceum 
CAP 1.5-6.5 cm broad, convex or slightly umbonate becoming plane or shallowly 
depressed; surface not viscid, often minutely scurfy at first but becoming smooth; dark 
olive to olive-brown or olive-yellow, often becoming yellower (yellow-brown to oney- 
colored) in age and developing dark reddish-brown tones when dried. Flesh thin, pallid 
or yellow or tinged cap color; odor mild to pungent or slightly fruity; taste mild or slightly 
bitter. GILLS yellow to golden-yellow, tending to redden when dried; close, notched or 
adnexed or at times adnate. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker 
at either end, often flattened, smooth to fibrillose or scurfy (especially over the lower 
portion), sometimes streaked in age; colored like cap or slightly darker, tending to turn 
deep reddish-brown from the base upward as it dries. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
4.5-6.5 )( 3-4.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, apiculate, smooth, not amyloid but 
many ofthem staining vinaceous in KOH (potassium hydroxide). 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups or tufts on rotten wood (often buried!) 
under conifers; widely distributed but not common. I have found it in our coastal pine 
forests in the winter. It is said to occur on hardwoods also, particularly in the tropics. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive mushroom has the stature of a Collybia and was originally 
placed in that genus. However, the olive and yellow coloration plus the tendency to grow 
on rotten wood (sometimes very decomposed!) distinguish it. C. graminicolor is a similar 
but smaller (cap up to 2 cm broad) northwestern species with larger spores. 
Strobilurus trullisatus 
CAP 0.5-1.5 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, often striate or 
wrinkled, minutely granular, white to pinkish-buff or brownish. Flesh very thin. GILLS 
typically adnate to adnexed, close, white or tinged pinkish-buff. STALK 2-5 cm long, 
1-1.5 mm thick, equal, dry, minutely granular; apex white, lower portion yellowish to 
brownish or tawny; base with yellow to tawny-orange hairs and mycelial threads. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 3-6 )( 1.5-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABITAT: In colonies (usually 4-10) on old Douglas-fir cones or rarely cones of other 
conifers; common throughout the range of Douglas-fir. In our area it usually fruits after 
the first fall rains. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? 
COMMENTS: Also known as S. kemptonae and Col/ybia trul/isata, this little mushroom 
is one of several species that grow only on rotting cones. (Some wood-inhabiting mush- 
rooms, such as Mycena purpureofusca, may grow on cones but are not restricted to them.) 
Other Strobilurus species include: S. conigenoides, a whitish species that grows only on 
Strobi/urus tru//isatus is a nondescript mushroom that grows exclusively on cones. Baeospora 
myosura (not illustrated) is rather similar but has very crowded gills. 
'\\ 
,\' 
, 
-: 
... 
212 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
the fallen seed pods (""cones") of magnolias in eastern North America; S. occidenta/is, 
which occurs on the cones of Sitka spruce; S. albipilatus (=Collybia albipilata), with a 
pinkish-buff to brown or dark brown cap, common in the Sierra Nevada and other western 
mountains on pine cones and other coniferous debris; and S. lignitilis, which tends grow 
on buried decaying wood and has a grayish-brown cap. Finally, there is Baeospora 
myosura (=Collybia conigenaj, which is slightly larger than S. trullisatus and has asmooth, 
buff or tan to pinkish-brown cap, very crowded gills, a coarsely hairy stem base, and 
amyloid spores. It grows on the cones of various conifers but favors Douglas-fir, at least 
in California. 
Collybia tuberosa 
CAP 3-10 mm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth, dry, whitish 
to buff, sometimes with a darker (yellowish to brownish or pinkish-buff) center. Flesh very 
thin, white. GILLS white or rarely tinged pinkish, adnate to adnexed, close or crowded. 
ST ALK 1-3 cm long, up to I mm thick, equal, dry, minutely downy, white or tinged brown, 
often arising from a small orange-brown to reddish-brown to blackish, appleseed-like 
body or ""tuber" (sclerotium). SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, 
smooth,. not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: In colonies on the blackened remains of old mushrooms, particularly larger 
Russula and Lactarius species (e.g., R. albonigra), occasionally in humus; widely distri- 
buted. I have found it only once in our area, in December, but the very similar C. cookei 
and C. cirrhata (see comments) are fairly common. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: This dainty little Collybia is one of four widespread species that colonize 
decayed mushrooms. The host may be so deteriorated, however, that it is not recognizable 
as a mushroom. The other three species are: C. cookei, practically identical but with 
rounder, more prominent, tan to yellow or yellow-orange sclerotia (and occasionally 
found on rotten wood or in humus); C. cirrhata, also very similar but with white mycelial 
threads instead of sclerotia, found in humus as well as on old mushrooms(and particularly 
common in the Sierra Nevada); and C. racemosa, which has stubby lateral branches on the 
stem (see description). All of these are placed in Microcollybia by some taxonomists. 
Left Collybia tuberosa and its close relatives grow in colonies on decaying mushrooms and other 
debris. Sclerotia (beadlike bodies from which the mushrooms arise) are not visible in this picture. 
Right Collybia racemosa is easily told by its small size and unique branching stalk. 
 
... 
 
. 
 
.,... 
.. 
.... 
. 
-}t 
COLL YBIA 
213 
Collybia racemosa (Branched Collybia) 
CAP 3-10 mm broad, bluntly conical to convex becoming umbonate to nearly plane; 
surface smooth, not viscid, dark gray to gray or brownish-gray, the margin often paler. 
Flesh very thin. GILLS typically adnexed, close, gray or brownish-gray. STALK 3-8 cm 
long, 0.5-3 mm thick, with numerous short lateral side-branches, especially over the lower 
half or two-thirds; gray to brownish-gray, often entirely buried and sometimes originating 
from a small blackish bead like body (sclerotium). SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-5.5 )( 
2-3 microns, oblong to elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Asexual spores (conidia) often 
produced on the swollen tips of the side-branches. 
HABIT A T: In small groups or colonies on old decayed or blackened mushrooms (e.g., 
Russula albonigra) or occasionally in coniferous duff; widely distributed but seldom 
encountered, perhaps because it is so easily overlooked. I have found it only once in our 
area, in December, but it is said to be fairly common in the Sierra Nevada. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too puny and rare to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This curious Collybia is the only one with side-branches on the stem (see 
photo on p. 212). The stalk may meander somewhat through its substrate, branching 
along the way, and the sclerotium from which it originates is not always evident. Stems 
without caps are sometimes found, implying that the formation of asexual spores on the 
side-branches can be enough to "satisfy" the mycelium's reproductive urges. 
Collybia confluens (Tufted Collybia) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate, the margin sometimes uplifted 
or wavy in age but incurved at first; surface smooth, hygrophanous: reddish-brown to 
pinkish-cinnamon or flesh-colored when moist ( often darker at center and pallid at mar- 
gin), fading to pinkish-buff, grayish-pink, or whitish as it dries. Flesh thin, white. GILLS 
crowded, narrow, adnate soon becoming adnexed or even free, whitish to flesh-colored. 
ST ALK 3-10 cmlong,2-5 mm thick, equal, hollow, pliant, sometimes flattened or grooved, 
tough, usually darker than cap (reddish-brown), but covered with a minute white pubes- 
cence (downy hairs); base often with white mycelial mat attached. SPORE PRINT white 
or tinged yellow; spores 7-9)( 34 microns, narrowly elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious, often in tufts or clusters, on ground in woods; widely distributed. 
In the Pacific Northwest it is quite common under conifers, but in eastern North America it 
favors hardwoods. I have not seen it in our area, but similar species (see comments) occur. 
EDIBILITY: Edible with caution; it is tough and similar species have not been tested. 
COMMENTS: The fine white pubescence on the stalk (use hand lens!) and crowded gills 
help to separate this species from C. dryophila and C. butyracea. It shrivels up in dry 
weather and revives somewhat when moistened, and as a result was originally placed in 
Marasmius. A similar, unidentified species whose gills are adnate to adnexed and not so 
crowded and whose stalk lacks the litter-binding mycelial mat is quite common in our area 
in the fall and winter; it sometimes rivals C. dryophila for abundance but appears later in 
the season and, like C. confluens. it has a minutely downy stem. Another local, downy- 
stemmed species appears to be undescribed. It resembles the C.fuscopurpurea group, but 
has whitish gills and a pallid to brownish-tan cap. It differs from C. confluens in having 
attached gills which are fairly well-spaced, and it usually grows in tufts or clusters on 
decaying wood, wood chips, or in lignin-rich humus. A third species, C. polyphylla, has a 
garlicky to slightly unpleasant odor and taste, while a fourth, C. peronata(=Marasmius 
urens) has an acrid (burning) taste. The latter two species are widely distributed but do 
not seem to occur in California. 
I 
\ 
t I.,,. 
" . 
," t -' ..:.:;. 
....;..,.. 
3"' If 
t: '" .;... 
-  
". , 
., , 1 
.); "  
'1ft 
.... . " 
 
-... ." '""'" 
- .... 
h-' " 
" .... 
, . \ 
, 
, " 
'::, 
... 
" 
c"""'" 
"'- 
to 
.", 
,......  -f- 
. '," <. 
".' ''':." 
 " .. "" ' 
.,' , 
Co//ybiafuscopurpurea group. These ubiquitous "LBM's" have a tough texture and usually grow in 
groups or clusters. 
Col/ybia fuscopurpurea group 
CAP 1-4 cm broad or slightly larger, convex becoming plane, slightly depressed, or with 
the margin uplifted in age; surface dark reddish-brown to brown, purple-brown, or 
chocolate-brown when fresh, usually paler (near tan) when dry, usually radially wrinkled 
or finely striate. Flesh whitish or colored like cap, thin, reviving somewhat when moistened; 
odor mild. GILLS attached (usually notched or adnexed), fairly ell-spaced, pallid or pale 
pinkish-tan becoming more or less cap color, then dusted whitish by spores. STALK 
2-10 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, equal or tapered downward, dry, rather tough and pliant, 
brown with the apex usually paler; clothed with minute grayish to brownish hairs (unless 
very wet) throughout or over the lower two-thirds; often curved near the litter-binding 
base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-8 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Densely gregarious (often in clusters) among leaf litter, humus, and woody 
debris in woods, under trees (especially oak), or in wood chips or landscaped areas; widely 
distributed. Common year-round in our area but particularly abundant in the early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Marasmius Juscopurpureus, this common species 
"complex" often forms dense swarms in leaf litter and woody debris, especially where the 
ground has been recently disturbed. Like most "LBM's," it blends in well with its sur- 
roundings. It can be recognized by the reddish-brown to dar k brown fruiting body, convex 
to plane cap (never bell-shaped as in Mycena!), white spores, pubescent (finely hairy) 
stem, and gregarious disposition. However, separating the numerous species within the 
"complex" is a job for specialists. One such specialist, Dennis Desjardin, says that 
several of California's representatives in this "complex" (including the most common 
one) appear to be undescribed. There are a number of other difficult- to-identify Collybia 
and Marasmius species with a pubescent stalk and litter-binding mycelium. Several of 
these (e.g., M. cohaerens) are described in the key to Marasmius and Collybia; others 
are discussed under C. confluens. 
214 
COLL YBIA 
215 
C ollybia acervata 
(Clustered Collybia) 
Color Plate 49 
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, convex with an incurved margin, becoming broadly convex in age; 
surface smooth, hygrophanous, not viscid; dark reddish-brown when fresh and moist, 
fading to pale reddish-brown, pinkish-buff, or paler (sometimes with darker and lighter 
zones) as it dries. Flesh thin, pallid. GILLS close or crowded, narrow, typically adnexed or 
notched or free, white to dingy pinkish or vinaceous-buff. ST ALK 4-12 cm long, 2-6 mm 
thick, more or less equal, dry, hollow, pliant but brittle, smooth above, with fine whitish 
hairs over lower half or at base; reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown or sometimes paler in 
age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: In compact bundles or clusters on rotting conifers (but often appearing 
terrestrial); widely distributed. It is common in the summer and fall in the Sierra Nevada 
and Rocky Mountains and in the Pacific Northwest, but apparently absent in coastal 
California south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible. It is said to have a bitter taste when cooked and is apparently 
slightly poisonous to some people. 
COMMENTS: The bundled growth habit (see color plate!), white spores, and reddish- 
brown stem make this an easy mushroom to recognize. It always grows on wood, but may 
appear terrestrial if its host is buried or in a very advanced stage of decay. The cap varies 
in color according to the amount of moisture present, but is never translucent-striate as 
in Mycena. Other species: C. marasmioides (=c. erythropus, C. bresadolae) tends to grow 
in tufts or clusters on the ground, but has a pale tan to creamy-buff cap and beautiful 
dark red (paler at apex) stem. A mushroom meeting this description occurs in our area 
but is rare. Clitocybula (=Collybia)familia has the aspect of C. acervata (densely clustered 
growth habit on rotting conifers-see photo on p. 898), but it has a watery white to smoky- 
gray to somewhat brownish or tan (never reddish-brown) cap, white to grayish stem, 
and round, amyloid spores. It is edible and widely distributed, but in California it 
seems to be restricted to the Sierra Nevada. Clitocybula (=Collybia) abundans resembles 
C./amilia. but has a smaller fibrillose cap and elliptical, amyloid spores. 
Collybia dryophila (Common Collybia; Oak-Loving Collybia) 
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, broadly convex with an incurved margin, becoming plane or with 
with an uplifted, often wavy margin in age, sometimes also slightly umbonate; surface 
smooth, hygrophanous: chestnut-brown to reddish-brown, yellow-brown, tawny, or 
ochre when young and moist, but fading to tan, pinkish-tan, yellowish-tan, or buff as it 
dries. Flesh thin, white. GILLS crowded, usually notched oradnexed, white to pale yellow. 
ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or with a swollen base, slender, smooth, hollow, 
rather tough and cartilaginous; pale cream or colored like cap (but often paler); white 
mycelium often visible at base or in surrounding humus. SPORE PRINT white or pale 
cream; spores 5-7 x 2-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, neither amyloid nor dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in small tufts in woods or near trees, often forming 
arcs or rings; widely distributed. It is abundant in our area shortly after the first fall rains, 
but is less common thereafter. As its name implies (dryophila=oak-Ioving), it is fond of 
oak, but is also common under pine and other conifers, as well as around the edges of old 
sawdust piles. At higher elevations it often fruits in the spring as well as in the summer 
and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but some people are apparently sensitive to it. Only the caps are 
tender enough to eat. It is a proficient concentrator of mercury, but occasional con- 
sumption should pose no threat as mercury is a cumulative poison. 
" 
J 
Co//ybia dryophi/a is a cosmopolitan "LBM" with white or yellowish gills that are usually notched, 
adnexed, or even free. Note the relatively slender equal stalk and small size. 
COMMENTS: The appearance of this species in large fairy rings under oaks is a sure sign 
that the coastal California mushroom season is under way. The hygrophanous reddish- 
brown to tawny, rusty, or tan cap, more or less adnexed gills, growth on the ground, and 
smooth (hairless) stalk distinguish it from all but C. butyracea, which has a greasier 
(buttery) cap, buff-colored spores, and ragged gill edges. Both species are reminiscent of the 
fairy ring mushroom (M arasmius oreades), but grow under trees and have crowded gills; 
neither grows in the tight bundles characteristic of C. acervata, and neither hasdowny hairs 
on the stem like C. confluens. In some regions C. dryophila is frequently covered by lumps 
or masses of somewhat jelly- or tumorlike tissue, caused by the fungus Christiansenia 
mycetophila. However, I have not observed this phenomenon in California. The yellow- 
gilled form of C. dryophila is sometimes listed as a separate species, C. subsulphurea. 
Collybia butyracea (Buttery Collybia) 
CAP 3-8 (12) em broad, convex becoming plane or uplifted, often with a broad umbo; 
surface smooth, greasy or slippery when moist but not truly viscid; dark reddish-brown to 
chesnut-brown to dull brown (or grayish-brown in one form), fading as it dries or ages to 
tan, grayish-tan, reddish-tan, or ochre-buff; margin at first incurved. Flesh thin, soft, 
whitish or watery. GILLS close or crowded, free or adnexed, white, the edges usually 
uneven, eroded, or finely scalloped at ma\urity. STALK 2-10 cm long, 4-10 mm thick, 
equal or more often thicker below and/ or pmched at the base; often longitudinally striate 
or twisted; rather tough and cartilaginous, hollow at least in age, smooth; colored like cap 
in age but often buff when young; base usually with white mycelial down. SPORE PRINT 
creamy to yellowish, buff, or pinkish-buff; spores 6-8 )( 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, 
many of them dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or tufted in humus under conifers (especially pine) 
or occasionally hardwoods; widely distributed. It is sometimes common in our coastal 
pine forests in the late fall, winter, and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible; about like C. dryophila. Care must be taken to identify it correctly! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Rhodocollybia butyracea, this handsome and widespread 
species is often confused with C. dryophila. However, its cap is apt to be greasier when 
moist, the gills are more apt to be finely scalloped or eroded, and the spores are slightly 
more colored in deposit and at least somewhat dextrinoid. A grayish-brown version of the 
species Uorm asema) also occurs in North America, especially on the west coast. Other 
species: C. badiialba and C. distorta are two closely related species with round or nearly 
round spores, a reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown cap, and white gills that mayor may 
216 
. 
"i' !r't 
, ' 
t 
... 
I 
.. 
J 
- ...... 
"- 
Collybia butyracea is often confused with C. dryophila, but is slightly different in color and slightly 
larger, and often has a club-shaped stalk (thicker at base). 
not develop reddish stains in age. Both favor conifers and grow in humus or on rotten 
wood. The former occurs in coastal California and the Pacific Northwest while the latter 
is more common in eastern North America. Another species with a vinaceous-brown cap, 
e. extubeTans, has elliptical spores and is widely distributed. 
Collybia maculata (Spotted Collybia) 
CAP (2.5) 4-12 cm broad, convex with an incurved margin at first, becoming broadly 
umbonate to plane or undulating; surface dry or lubricous but not truly viscid, smooth, 
typically white to buff, pale tan, or pinkish-tinged, often darker or redder in age, especially 
at the center and often developing rusty or reddish spots and stains. Flesh thick, white; odor 
mild or somewhat fragrant; taste usually bitter (but mild in var. occidentalis). GILLS 
white to pale pinkish-buff, often developing rusty or reddish stains (like the cap) in age; 
adnate to adnexed or notched to nearly free, crowded. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.5-2 (3) cm 
thick, often tapered below to form a more or less rooting base; solid (at least when young), 
firm, smooth or fibrillose, often striate or grooved and easily splitting longitudinally; 
white to pale buff, usually developing rusty or reddish stains below. SPORE PRINT 
creamy to pale peach or pinkish-buff; spores 5-11 )( 4-6 microns, round or nearly round 
in the typical variety, elliptical in var. occidental is; smooth, at least a few dextrinoid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts on decaying wood or lignin-rich 
humus under conifers; widely distributed. I have not seen it in our area, but it is quite 
common in the Pacific Northwest and Sierra Nevada in the late spring, summer, and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible because of the frequently bitter taste. 
COMMENTS: Also known as R hodocol/ybia maculata, this rather large species is closely 
related to C. oregonensis and has the same stature, but typically has a paler cap and mild 
odor. The pinkish to rusty-reddish spots and stains and tendency to grow on rotten wood 
are good field marks. It could conceivably be mistaken for a Tricholoma, but the stalk is 
longer than in most Tricholomas and it splits more easily. It is a variable species, and a 
number of varieties have been designated based on differences in color, taste, and spore 
shape. The above description embraces several such varieties. Others include: var. 
SCOTzoneTea, a large version with yellowish gills and a frequently yellowish-tinged stalk 
and/ or cap; and two small varieties from the Pacific Northwest with a vinaceous-brown 
to blackish cap. 
217 
: , 
, 
.... 
 
Left: Collybia oregonensis is an amazingl} fragrant mushroom. Right: Oudemansiella radicata 
(p. 219), a common mushroom in eastern North America, is rather variable in color but always has 
broad gills (as shown here) and a deeply rooting stalk (not visible). 
Collybia oregonensis (Fragrant Collybia) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, broadly convex to plane; surface smooth, slightly viscid when moist 
but soon dry; deep chestnut-brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown at the center, 
often paler or pinker or redder toward the margin, and gradually fading overall in age. 
Flesh thin, white or reddish-stained; odor heavy and sweet (like benzaldehyde), taste 
somewhat bitter. GILLS crowded, creamy or pale yellow to buff, often reddish-stained in 
age; adnexed, notched, or seceding; edges sometimes overlapping each other and eroded in 
age. STALK 6-20 (30) cm long, (0.5) 0.-2 cm thick, usually quite long and deeply rooted; 
equal above or swollen slightly near ground level, tapered gradually below to a point; dry, 
whitish, but usually developing reddish to reddish-brown stains especially over the lower 
portion; solid or hollow in age. SPORE PRINT whitish to buff; spores 6-8 )( 3.5-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, at least some of them dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups around old stumps and in lignin-rich humus; 
apparently endemic to the Pacific Coast, not common. I've seen it in the Sierra Nevada, 
and in one local spot (in mixed woods) where it fruits every year, usually in the fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Despite its sweet odor it has a somewhat bitter taste. 
COMMENTS: The strong, heavy benzaldehyde or almond extract odor and vinaceous- 
brown cap are distinctive. The fragrance is reminiscent of Russulafragrantissima, but 
without the fetid component of that species. The stalk often roots deeply but does not form 
a true pseudorhiza ("tap root") as in Caulorhiza umbonata. The gills are not waxyasinthe 
almond-smelling Hygrophorus species (e.g., H. bakerensis) and the odor is usually thicker 
and more pronounced. C. subsulcatipes, known only from Washington, has a similar but 
weaker odor, a brown to dark vinaceous-brown stalk with a "tap root," a brown to vina- 
ceo us-buff cap, and dull vinaceous gills in age. Both of these species are placed in a separate 
genus, Rhodocollybia, by some collybiologists. 
Caulorhiza umbonata (Redwood Rooter) 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, at first conical or umbonate, then expanding but usually retaining 
the umbo; surface smooth, dry, chestnut-brown to warm tan or yellow-brown; margin at 
first incurved. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild. GILLS notched or adnexed to nearly free, 
close, broad, white to yellowish or tinged cap color. STALK 6-50 cm long or more, 0.4-1.5 
218 
Caulorhiza (=Collybia) umbonata is a flagrant fungal feature of our redwood forests. Note the conical 
or umbonate cap and long "tap roof' which may extend as much as three feet into the humus. 
(2) cm thick, most of it underground in the form of a long, tapered "tap root"; smooth, 
twisted-striate, buff to tan or colored like cap but paler; rather tough and cartilaginous. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-8 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups near or under redwood (rarely elsewhere); 
restricted to the range of coastal redwood (Sequoia sempervirens). It is very common in 
our area in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Like myself, not firmly established. However, if it were poisonous we would 
probably know by now. I've sampled small quantities without ill effects. 
COMMENTS: Anchored by its long "tap root:' this distinctive species, like a dandelion, 
resists being uprooted. The "tap root," pallid gills, umbonate cap, and white spore print, 
plus the association with redwood distinguish it. The "tap root" is brittle, however, and 
will break off and stay behind in the ground unless it is dug up very carefully. Collybia 
umbonata is a synonym. Collybia subsulcatipes (see comments under C. oregonensis) is 
somewhat similar but has a sweet odor. Caulorhiza hygrophoroides is a closely related 
hardwood-lover with a smaller (up to 5 cm) cap. None of these have the grayish-brown 
colors and exceptionally broad gills of Oudemansiella radicata and its relatives. 
Oudemansiella radicata (Beech Rooter) 
CAP 2.5-12 cm broad, bell-shaped becoming broadly convex to plane or with a broad 
umbo, the margin sometimes uplifted in old age; surface smooth or radially wrinkled, often 
viscid or tacky when moist, usually dark brown to grayish-brown, but in some variants 
grayish and in others whitish, blackish, or olive- to yellowish-brown; margin at first in- 
curved. Flesh thin, whitish; taste mild. GILLS broad, fairly well-spaced, thickish, usually 
adnexed or notched; white. STALK 5-25 cm long, 0.3-1 (1.5)cm thick, usually thickest at 
or near ground level, with a tapered underground portion or "tap root"; whitish at apex 
or in upper portion, colored more or less like the cap below, dry, rather stiff and brittle, 
longitudinally lined or twisted-striate; smooth or in one form scurfy. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 12-18 )( 9-12 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on or near hardwood stumps and roots 
(often appearing terrestrial) in woods, grassy clearings, etc.; fairly common in eastern 
North America, spring through fall (especially on beech), apparently absent in the West. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but not choice-or so I am told. Only the caps are worth eating. 
219 
220 
TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Col/ybia radicata, this common eastern mushroom 
can be told by its broad white, well-separated gills (see photo on p. 218) and rooting stalk. 
The latter snaps easily, however, so that if it is not dug up carefully the telltale "tap root" 
will remain behind in the ground. The color of the cap is quite variable, but is usually in 
the dark brown to grayish-brown range. The viscidity of the cap is not always evident. 
Tricholomopsis platyphylla is somewhat similar but does not normally have a "tap root," 
while Melanoleuca species are terrestrial and have narrower, crowded gills. Other species: 
O. longipes is a similarly colored but slightly smaller species with a dry cap and much 
smaller spores; it occurs in the Rocky Mountains on hardwoods such as aspen. 
Flammulina velutipes (Velvet Foot; Velvet Stern) Color Plate 26 
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface smooth, slimy or 
viscid when moist, reddish-brown to yellow-brown, yellow-orange, orange-brown, or 
tawny, the margin often paler (yellower); fading in dry weather; margin at first incurved. 
Flesh thin, white or yellowish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, white to pale yellow, 
close. STALK 2-11 cm long, 3-5 (12) mm thick, equal or thicker below, slender, tough, of- 
ten curved, sometimes slightly off-center; smooth and pallid to yellowish to orange-brown 
when young, but developing a rusty-brown to blackish-brown velvety pubescence (tiny 
hairs) from the base upward as it matures. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6.5-9 x 3-5 
microns, elliptical to pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. Gills with cystidia. 
HABIT A T: In tufts or clusters on or near stumps, logs, and roots of hardwoods (but some- 
times appearing terrestrial); very widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area from 
fall through spring on poplar and willow, and in coastal sand dunes on bush lupine. In the 
Rocky Mountains it is abundant in the late summer on aspen; in eastern North America it 
fruits from the late fall through early spring on elm and other hardwoods. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but the sticky skin should be removed before cooking. In colder 
regions it is an important edible and is called the 'winter mushroom" because it fruits very 
late in the season (even during winter thaws) when other fungi are not available. In our 
balmy climate, however, its season coincides with that of other, more flavorful mushrooms, 
so it is not often gathered. A cultivated form of it called the "snow-puff mushroom" or 
enokitake can be bought in many markets. It looks something like a pure white bean sprout 
with its long, smooth (not velvety!) stem and negligible cap. 
COMMENTS: The smooth, sticky, yellow-orange to brownish cap and stalk which is dark 
brown and velvety (at least below) at maturity plus the white spores, absence of a veil, 
and clustered growth habit on dead hardwoods typify this hardy mushroom. It was origi- 
nally placed in Collybia, but is now given a genus of its own due to its viscid cap and the 
prominent sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills. In arid climates, however, the cap may appear 
dry rather than viscid. The fruiting bodies can apparently survive freezing, and after 
thawing out will continue to produce spores! 
Flammu/ina ve/utipes is easily told by velvety brown stalk, sticky cap, cheerful color (see color plate), 
and growth on wood. 
,. . 
::::- 
It 
 
........... - 
221 
OMPHALINA & XEROMPHALINA 
Small to minute, often brightly colored, saprophytic mushrooms. CAP usually plane to depressed 
or umbilicate at maturity. not conical; margin often incurved when young. GILLS often yellow, 
orange, or pinkish, typically adnate to lkcurrent. STALK usually central, thin. cartilaginous. often 
pliant or rather tough. hollow. VEIL and VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT white to pale yellow. 
Spores smooth, amyloid (Xeromphalina) or not amyloid (Omphalina). 
THESE are dainty, brightly colored mushrooms with decurrent gills and a cartilaginous 
stem. They were originally grouped together in the obsolete genus Omphalia, but 
Xeromphalina was created for the species with a dark stem, tougher texture, ability to 
revive somewhat when moistened, and amyloid spores. 
Omphalina is interesting from a botanical stand point because several species grow only 
with lichens. It is now thought that the mushrooms are actually the fruiting bodies of the 
fungal component of the lichen (a lichen is a symbiotic relationship between an alga and a 
fungus). Other Omphalinas grow in grass, moss, or on soggy logs. Theyare easily confused 
with Mycenas(which usually have a conical or bell-shaped cap), while even experts cannot 
agree on the distinction between Omphalina and some of the small, slender Clitocybes. 
Xeromphalinas occur on logs and in humus and are more common than Omphalinas, 
at least in California. Their tough, usually dark stem and ability to revive after being dried 
are reminiscent of M arasmius, but their yellow to orange gills and amyloid spores are 
distinctive. In addition to Xeromphalina and Omphalina, the genus Gerronema is recog- 
nized by some mycologists; it embraces several Omphalinas not specifically associated with 
lichens. None of these mushrooms are large enough to eat. If your mushroom does not key 
out convincingly below, check Mycena, Marasmius, and the Hygrophoraceae. 
Key to Omphalina & Xeromphalina 
I. Stalk tough, wiry, or horny, at least the lower portion dark brown to orange-brown or reddish- 
brown when mature .......................................................... 2 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
2. Typically growing on wood (sometimes buried), often in clusters or dense groups ........ 3 
2. Typically growing on ground or humus, usually scattered to gregarious but not clustered _ 4 
3. Cap less than 2.5 cm broad; growing on conifers ................... X. campanella, p. 222 
3. Cap typically at least 2 cm broad; cap velvety, more or less orange-brown; growing on hard- 
woods in eastern North America and the tropics .......................... .X. tenuipes 
4. Taste bitter; gills adnate ......................... X. fulvipes (see X. caulicinalis. p.222) 
4. Taste more or less mild; gills adnate to decurrent .................. X. cauticinalis, p. 222 
5. Cap and stalk slimy-viscid when moist. more or less yellow .. (seeMycena lilacifolia, p. 236) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Fruiting body orange (or at times pinkish-orange or fading to yellow or orange-buff); gills well- 
spaced and waxy-looking; found in groups or clusters on rotting conifers, especially in the 
Pacific Northwest and California ............... O. luteicolor(see O. ericelorum. p. 223) 
6. Not as above . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
7. Cap and/ or gills greenish-yellow to green, olive, olive-brown, or dark green; growing on rotting 
conifers or on ground, moss, or lichens . O. wynniae & others (see Clitocybe odora. p. 161) 
7. Not as above; green shades absent. . . .. . . . . . . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8 
8. Cap 0.54 cm broad, ochre to grayish-ochre; gills yellow to orange-yellow; growing on rotting 
conifers; spore print often yellow- or salmon-tinged .................... O. chrysophylla 
8. Not as above; cap usually less than 2.5 cm broad ................................... 9 
9. Cap min ute, up to 1.5 cm broad, yellow-orange to orange or orange-red; stalk orange; gills pallid 
or yellowish; growing in moss ...................... O. (=Rickenella or Mycena)fibula 
9. Not as above; differently colored or larger or growing elsewhere ..................... 10 
10. Cap grayish to gray-brown; gills often yellowish (especially in age); found on rotten wood in 
eastern North America ............................................ O. strombodes 
10. Not as above......................................... O. ericetorum & others, p. 223 
..., 
" 
" "": 
\ 
" 
----- 
Xeromphalinafu/Vlpes (see comments under X. cauticina/is) forms carpets of miniature fruiting 
bodies under redwood and other conifers. Gills are typically adnate and taste is bitter. 
X eromphalina cauticinalis 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, convex becoming plane or with a small central depression; surface 
smooth, not viscid, reddish-brown to tawny or ochraceous-tawny, fading to yellowish. 
Flesh very thin, pliant; taste mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, yellow, with veins between. 
ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 1-2.5 mm thick, equal or more often with a small bulb at the base; 
pJiant, tough, tawny or yellowish above, dark brown below; base with tawny mycelium. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 5.5-7)( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on conifer needles and debris; common in 
western North America. In our area it appears (along with X. fulvipes-see comments) in 
the late fall and winter under redwood and other conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several terrestrialXeromphalinas. The decurrent yellow gills 
distinguish it from Mycena, and the stalk is much tougher than in Hygrocybe. Other 
species: X.fulvipes is similar but has a bitter taste, adnate gills, and minute orange hairs on 
the stem. I have found it under redwood several times, but it is not as common as X. 
cauticinalis; X. picta is a minute terrestrial species with a greatly swollen stalk apex. 
Xeromphalina campanella 
Color Plate 44 
CAP 0.3-2.5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex with a depressed center; surface 
smooth, not viscid, yellow-brown to tawny to orange-brown or cinnamon-brown; margin 
striate when moist. Flesh thin, pliant, yellowish. GILLS yellowish to dull orange, fairly 
well-spaced, decurrent with veins in between. STALK 1-5 cm long, 0.5-3 mm thick, equal 
or enlarged at base, pliant, tough, smooth, horny, often polished; yellowish above, brown 
to reddish-brown below; usually curved; base with bright tawny hairs. SPORE PRINT 
white to pale buff; spores 5-8 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: In groups or dense clusters on rotting conifers; widely distributed. It is 
common throughout the West, fruiting in our area in the fall, winter, and early spring. 
EDIBILTY: A miniscule morsel that is hardly worth eating. 
222 
OMPHALINA & XEROMPHALINA 
223 
COMMENTS: The yellow to orange, decurrent gills plus the thin polished stem and small 
size typify this dainty mushroom. Its occurrence on conifers is so dependable that its pre- 
sence can be taken as "proof' that its host is some type of conifer. It might be mistaken 
for a Mycena. but the shape of the mature cap is quite different. Galerina autumnalis 
is also somewhat similar, but has a veil and brown spores. The cluster pictured in the color 
plate is darker (browner) than normal, but shows the shape and growth habit quite well. 
Other species: X. kauffman;; is very similar but occurs with hardwoods in eastern North 
America;X. oT;ck;ana has a dark reddish-brown cap, grayish to brownish gills, and grows 
grows on red wood. 
Omphalina ericetorum (Lichen Agaric) 
CAP 0.5-2.5 (3.5) cm broad, at first plane with an incurved margin, becoming deeply 
depressed or funnel-shaped in age; surface smooth, not viscid, d ullcinnamon to brownish, 
fading to yellowish or stra w color or paler as it ages; margin striate, often wavy. Flesh very 
thin, pliant. GILLS decurrent, well-spaced, sometimes veined, pale yellowish. STALK 
1-3 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal or enlarged at base, often curved, smooth, pliant, pale 
reddish-brown above, yellow-brown to pale brown below; often pale yellowish in age. 
SPORE PRINT white to yellow; spores 7 -9 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABITAT: Usually in groups on old lichen-laden conifer logs or scum-covered soil, 
always associated with the lichen Botrydina vulgaris; widely distributed in the cool tem- 
perate zone, but rare in our area. It is one of the commonest mushrooms of the Arctic. 
EDIBILITY: Much too puny to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The small size, depressed cap, thin stem, decurrent gills, and distinctive 
habitat are the principal fieldmarks. The gills may appear somewhat waxy as in Hygrocybe 
and Camarophyllus. but the latter don't normally grow with lichens. O. umbellifeTa is a 
synonym. There are several similar species, including: O. hudson;ana, similarly colored 
but associated with the lichen C oriscium viride; O. post;;, with a pinkish-red to orange cap, 
found in moss; O. pyx;data(see photo below), fairly common in our area in grassy or open 
places, with pinkish- or vinaceous-tinged gills that fade to yellowish or creamy in age; and 
O. luteicoloT (COLOR PLATE 24), a beautiful waxy-gilled orange to salmon-colored 
species that fades with age and is common in the Pacific Northwest, northern California, 
and the Sierra Nevada on rotting conifers, usually in groups or clusters. 
Two small Omphalinas with different habitats (both are discussed above). Left: Omphalina erice- 
lorum is associated with lichens (which, however, are often very inconspicuous). Right: Omphalina 
pyxidala grows in moss, grass, and soiL Note how both species have decurrent gills. Similar greenish 
species are discussed under C/ilocybe odora (p. 162). 
' 
,", ' 
.. 
" <oM 
,,"" 
, 
 
.. . . 
. 
. 
, 
w-, 
224 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
MYCENA 
Small to minute saprophytic mushrooms that do not revive when moistened (after being dried). 
CAP typically conical to bell-shaped when young. but often expanding in age; often translucent- 
striate; margin usually straight when young. rarely incurved. GILLS usually attached. STALK 
central. thin. usually hollow;fragile or cartilaginous. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT 
white. Spores smooth, amyloid or not amyloid. Cystidia usually present on gills. 
THIS is a very large group of very small mushrooms with a thin, fragile or cartilaginous 
stem and bell-shaped to conical cap (at least when young). The gills are not waxy as in the 
H ygrophoraceae; the dried fruiting body does not revive when moistened as in M arasmius. 
and is not particularly tough; Collybia and Omphalina are similar but usually have a 
convex to plane or umbilicate cap. Other small mushrooms with conical to bell-shaped 
caps (Coprinus. Conocybe. Nolanea. etc.) do not have white spores. 
In sheer numbers Mycenas are more abundant than any other mushrooms, but because 
of their diminutive dimensions, most people are oblivious to their presence. In the wake 
of heavy rains they fruit in untold quantity in the woods, especially on needle beds under 
conifers, where they form thick carpets of delicate domes. They are strictly saprophytic- 
on logs, stumps, sticks, leaves, soil, and humus. They turn up occasionally in lawns, 
gardens, and flower pots, but do not grow in dung like Coprinus and Bolbitius. 
The most common forms are gray or brown, but a few, such as M. acicula. are brightly 
colored. Alexander Smith's monumental monograph lists 218 North American species, 
but dozens more occur. The overwhelming majority cannot be identified positively without 
a microscope (some are so small they can barely be seen with the naked eye!). The size and 
shape of the sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills plays a particularly important role in their 
identification. However, Mycena can be divided into manageable groups based on gross 
features such as size, color, odor, habitat, and viscidity. In addition, a few species exude a 
juice or latex when the base of the stem is broken and squeezed. Lactarius species also 
possess a latex, but are much larger and fleshier with thicker stems. 
"In every mixed bag of individuals I take mushroom hunting, there's always one or two 
with a keen eye for detail. In the normal course of events, I begin with a briefspiel about the 
marvels of the mushroom world before dispatching the group to rush about madly in 
search of the elusive 25-lb. Boletus edulis (trampling myriad Mycenas with every step), 
while I make a sly beeline for my secret Boletus patch. These one or two keen-eyed 
individuals, however, are content to remain where they are, meticulously examining every 
leaf, twig, and cone, and uncovering in the process not only a multitude of marvelously 
minute Mycenas, but an astonishing assortment of other clandestine creatures-slugs, 
centipedes, spiders, snakes, salamanders, etc. 
As I am rather small myself, I harbor a profound respect for these exceptional indivi- 
duals. In a society where we are taught from birth to think big, it is encouraging to find 
some who are still able to make the distinction between quality and quantity, who appre- 
ciate the fact that size alone is not a measure of intrinsic worth. 
My lust satiated and my basket laden with Boletus. I return later to find these patient 
and perceptive souls sprawled out on their bellies in the exact spot where I left them-for 
they consider the day well spent if they discover fifty M ycenas whose combined mass is no 
bigger than their thumb! Finding myself in good company, I bring out the cheese and bread 
-and if I'm lucky they bring out the wine-and we proceed to have an impromptu picnic, 
sharing our discoveries, then savoring the silence around us while awaiting the riotous 
return of the rest of the group. 
For the benefit of these discerning individuals I have included nineteen species of 
Mycena in this chapter, which is nineteen more species than the average individual cares 
to know. Of course, they constitute only a fraction of the "Y AM's" ("Yet Another My- 
MYCENA 
225 
cena") that can be found. They are much too small to eat, and some may actually be 
poisonous, but they deserve to be better known. They are exquisite in their daintiness and 
are among the most attractive of the fleshy (fleshless?) fungi. If your" M ycena" does not 
key out convincingly, check Marasm;us & Collyb;a. Omphalina & Xerompha/ina. and 
the waxy caps (Hygrophoraceae). 
Key to Mycena 
I. Base of stalk exuding a red to blackish-red juice when cut or squeezed ................. 2 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
2. Growing on wood ........................................... M. haematopus, p. 231 
2. Growing on ground or humus ................................................... 3 
3. Flesh in cap exuding a reddish juice when cut and squeezed ...... M. sanguinolenta, p. 232 
3. Flesh in cap exuding a watery orange-yellow juice when cut and squeezed ................ 
.............. ... ...... ... .. . . . . .. M. subsanguinolenta(see M. sanguino/enta, p.232) 
4. Fruiting body bright orange to yellow; gills yellow with orange margins; found on hardwoods 
in eastern North America (usually clustered) ........ M. leaiana (see M. /i/acifo/ia. p. 236) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Stalk (and often the cap) viscid or slimy when fresh and moist ........................ 6 
5. Stalk not viscid or slimy; cap not normally viscid either ............................. 10 
6. Stalk yellow, orange, greenish-gray, or lilac-tinged when fresh, at least at the apex ....... 7 
6. Stalk white, gray, or brown (not brightly colored) .................................. 9 
7. Gills usually decurrent; found on rotting conifers ................... M. lilaciJolw, p.236 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Cap olive-brown to blackish; stalk discoloring brown from the base upward; 
common under mountain conifers when or shortly after the snow melts ................. 
.. . . . .. . .. . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. griseoviridis(see M. epipterygia. p.237) 
8. Not as above .... _........ ..... ... ..... .. . ....... .... M. epipterygia& others, p. 237 
9. Cap dry (not viscid) ............................................... 1. rorida, p.237 
9. Cap viscid or slimy, at least when moist ....... M. vulgaris & others (see M. rorida. p.237) 
10. Fruiting body minute( cap typically less than I cm broad and stalk less than I (2) mm thick), orif 
slightly larger then growing on bark (often mossy) of living trees .................... II 
10. Fruiting body small but not minute(stalkgenerally at least I mm thick; cap at least 5 mm broad 
and often larger); growing in a variety of habitats but not usually on bark of living trees . 14 
II. Cap brightly colored (red, pink, orange, or yellow) ............ M. acicula & others, p. 228 
11. Not as above (cap white, gray, brown, vinaceous, etc.) .............................. 12 
12. Typically growing on the bark of trees ........................................... 13 
12. Typically growing on leaves, twigs, humus, stems, or occasionally on bark ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. capillaris & others, p. 227 
13. Cap brownish to vinaceous-brown or vinaceous-buff .................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. corticola & M. madronicola (see M. c/avu/aris group, p 227) 
13. Cap white to grayish or grayish-brown ............... M. clavularis group & others, p. 227 
14. Gills marginate (the edges of at least the larger ones significantly darker and differently colored 
than the faces-use hand lens if unsure!) ........................................ 15 
14. Gills not marginate (edges same color or paler than the faces) ........................ 22 
15. Gill edges scarlet to bright orange ............................................... 16 
15. Gill edges pink, dark reddish, purple, yellowish, etc., but not scarlet to bright orange .... 17 
16. Gill edges scarlet; hairs at base of stalk orange ................. M. strobilinoides, p. 228 
16. Gill edges orange; hairs at base of stalk yellow-orange ................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. aurantiomarginata(see M. strobi/inoides, p.228) 
17. Gill edges greenish-yellow to yellow to yellow-brown .................................. 
......................... .... M. citrinomarginata& others (see M. capi//aripes, p. 229) 
17. G ill edges pink to reddish, purplish-red, reddish-brown, etc. .............. _ . . . . . . . . .. 18 
18. Edges of at least the larger gills pink to rosy; growing on ground .... M. capillaripes, p.229 
18. Gill edges darker than above (but faces may be pink or rosy); growing on ground or wood 19 
226 TRICHOLOMATACEAE 
19. Gills pink to rosy with sordid reddish edges; growing on ground under conifers ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. rosella(see M. capillaripes, p. 229) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Odor radishlike; typically growing on ground . M. pelianthina& others (see M. pura, p.230) 
20. Odor not radishlike; growing on wood, cones, wood chips, or in lignin-rich humus ...... 21 
21. Gill edges very dark purple or grayish-purple .................. M. purpureoJusca, p. 229 
21. Gill edges rosy to vinaceous-brown .. M. elegantula & others (see M. purpureofusca, p.229) 
22. Lilac, purplish, blue, or bluish-green tints usually present somewhere on fruiting body '" 23 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
23. Lilac or bluish tints often present; odor radishlike ...................... M. pura, p.230 
23. Blue or bluish-green tints usually present when fresh; odor more or less mild .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. amicta& M. subcaerulea(see M. pura, p. 230) 
24. Cap brightly colored (bright coral-pink to orange or yellow) when fresh (may fade in age) 25 
24. Cap typically some shade of gray, white, brown, dull vinaceous, etc. (not brightly colored) 26 
25. Growing on walnut or hickory nut shells .... M.luteopallens(see M. strobi/inoides, p. 228) 
25. Growing on ground or in humus ... M. amabilissima & others (see M. strobilinoides, p.228) 
26. Typically growing on ground, needles, twigs, leaves, etc. ............................ 27 
26. Typically growing on logs, stumps, branches, etc. .................................. 35 
27. Found in grass or disturbed soil; cap brick-red to vinaceous-tinged, soon convex or plane, less 
than 2 cm broad. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mycena sp. (unidentified)(see Marasmius oreades, p. 208) 
27. Not as above ................................................................ 28 
28. Found in grass; stalk tough; cap white to brown, never grayish (seeMarasmius oreades, p. 208) 
28. Not as above ................................................................ 29 
29. Extreme base of stalk exuding a droplet of milky fluid when squeezed (fresh specimens only!) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. galopus, p. 232 
29. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
30. Odor of crushed flesh distinctly alkaline, bleachlike, antiseptic, or at least sharp ........... 
. .. . ...... ....... . . . ................ M.leptocephala& others (see M. alealina, p.234) 
30. Odor mild or farinaceous, but not as above ....................................... 31 
31. Stalk with whitish fibrils or particles; cap olive-brown when fresh ..... M. scabripes, p.233 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Cap margin not often incurved at first; cap often translucent-striate when moist, up t04 (5) cm 
broad, grayish to buffy-brown; stalk usually less than 4 (6) mm thick; spores often amyloid 33 
32. Not as above; margin of cap usually incurved when young and/ or cap opaque or differently 
colored; spores typically not amyloid ......... (seeMarasmius, Collybia, & Allies, p. 201) 
33. Stalk often with a tapered underground rooting portion; cap sordid tan to buffy-brown; usually 
growing near hardwood stumps ...................... M. galericulata & others, p. 235 
33. Not as above ................................................................ 34 
34. Stalk base typically exuding a droplet of clear liquid when squeezed; gills often reddish-stained 
in age ..................................... M. atroalboides(see M. galopus, p.232) 
34. Not as above ". M. murina group & sundry assorted YAMS (see M. murina group, p. 234) 
35. Gills (and often cap) developing sordid pink to reddish spots or stains in age .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. M. maculata & others, p. 235 
35. Not as above(but gills may be tinged evenly pinkish in age) ......................... 36 
36. Growing solitary or in rows, pairs, or groups, but not normally clustered M. subcana, p.233 
36. Not as above ................................................................ 37 
37. Usually growing on hardwood stumps; stalk often rooting in substrate M. galericulata, p.235 
37. Not as above; usually on conifers ............................................... 38 
38. Fruiting body relatively large (cap 2-5 cm broad), grayish; usually growing near melting snow 
(or shortly after snow melts) in mountains ........ M. overholtsii(see M. subcana. p. 233) 
38. Not as above ................................................................ 39 
39. Cap translucent-striate at maturity (when moist), gray to brownish-gray or paler; flesh very 
thin .......................... M. occidentalis& many others (see M. subcana, p.233) 
39. Notasabove .............................. (seeMarasmius, Collybia,& Allies,p.201) 
MYCENA 
227 
Mycena capillaris (Miniscule M ycena) 
CAP 2-6 (8) mm broad, bluntly conical or bell-shaped to convex, sometimes plane in age; 
surface smooth, gray, soonfadingto white, translucent-striate when moist. Flesh very thin, 
odor mild. GILLS adnate to nearly free, well-spaced, grayish then white. ST ALK 3-7 cm 
long, about 1 mm thick, threadlike, equal, very fragile, smooth, dark gray when young 
becoming whitish in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-10 )( 4-5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small grou ps on fallen oak (and beech) leaves; widely distributed. 
Fairly common in our area in wet weather, but difficult to distinguish from similar species. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: The mycelium of this miniscule whitish Mycena is usually confined to a 
single leaf, so that you can pick up the leaf and carry it home, mushroom and mycelium 
intact. There are multitudes of other minute white to grayish or brownish Mycenas. They 
are especially abundant after long periods of wet weather, but are extremely difficult to 
separate (Iet alone see!) without a microscope. Their ranks include: M. tenerrima andM. 
osmundicola, even smaller, with well-spaced, nearly free gills, growing on bark, twigs, and 
wood y debris ( the former with a very short, usually curved stem);M. delicatella, with close 
gills, gregarious on needles and twigs under conifers; M. albidula, with well-spaced, 
decurrent gills and a convex cap, on leaves and bark of hardwoods; M. stylobates, with a 
flat circular disc at base of stalk; M. paucilamellata, cap only 1-2 mm broad and gills very 
few and foldlike to practically absent; M. ignobilis, growing in mud; and M. juncicola, 
vinaceous-tinged, growing on the culms (stems) of sedges. These Mycenas are among the 
tiniest of all gilled mushrooms. M arasmius species can also be very tiny but tend to have a 
convex to plane cap and dark, wiry or hairlike stem. See also the M. clavularis group. 
Mycena clavularis group 
(Bark Mycena) 
CAP 4-7 mm broad, rounded to convex or somewhat bell-shaped; surface smooth, striate 
and often grooved or fluted toward margin; white or translucent, the center and striations 
frequently grayish or grayish-brown. Flesh very thin, pallid. GILLS few and widely 
spaced, white or tinged gray, attached to the stalk or separating to form a collar around 
it. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-2 mm thick, equal except for a small basal bulb or disc; 
white or translucent, smooth, fragile; base often with long white hairs, inserted in bark. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-10.5 microns, round or nearly round to broadly ellip- 
tical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on mossy bark oftrees(both living and dead); widely 
distributed but not often noticed. In our area it is common in wet weather, especially on the 
lower trunks of living oak and madrone trees. 
EDIBILITY: Academic-a tremendous number would be needed for a meal! 
COMMENTS: The above description will apply to a number of small Mycenas that 
typically grow in groups or troops (but not clusters) on the bark oftrees( see photograph on 
p. 229). Whether the common form in our area is the "true" M. clavularis or a very similar 
species is for the Mycena-experts (of which there are few) to decide. There are several 
species with a similar growth habit, including: M. tenerrima, a minute (cap up to 4 mm 
broad) whitish species; M. madronicola, a brownish to vinaceous-buff or grayish species 
with adnate to slightly decurrent gills; and M. corticola, which has a dark purplish to 
vinaceous-brown cap that finally fades to pale grayish-brown, and grows abundantly on 
the bark of both hardwoods and conifers in eastern North America, often by the hundreds. 
228 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
Mycena acicula 
CAP 3-7 (10) mm broad, convex or bell-shaped, but sometimes expanding in age; surface 
not viscid, coral-red when young, soon fading( often from margin inward) to bright orange- 
yellow or yellow. Flesh very thin, yellow, odor mild. GILLS attached ( usuallyadnate), pale 
orange to yellow or whitish. STALK 1-7 cm long, less than I mm thick, threadlike, equal, 
brittle, orange-yellow to yellow, smooth except for hairy base. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 9-11 )( 3.5-4.5 microns, elongated-elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, orin small groups on leaves and debris in woods,especially 
along streams and in other wet places; widely distributed. Common throughout the 
mushroom season in our area, but easily overlooked. I have seen it in large numbers in a 
thicket of oak saplings and blackberries along a stream. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but a great many would be needed for a mouthful! 
COMMENTS: This minute Mycena is a delight to behold, its coral-red to yellow cap 
contrasting vividly with the dim backdrop of decaying leaves and humus. One usually has 
to get down on hands and knees to find it! M. oregonensis is a similar miniature species 
whose cap is yellow to yellow-orange from infancy; it grows on needle carpets as well as oak 
leaves. For larger brightly colored Mycenas, see M. strobilinoides. 
Mycena strobilinoides (Flame Mycena) 
CAP 1-2 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped; surface smooth, not viscid, striate when moist; 
red, soon fading to scarlet, then slowly to orange and finally yellow or even whitish; margin 
often scalloped. Flesh thin, yellowish; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, well- 
spaced, yellow to pale pinkish-orange, the edges scarlet (at least when young). STALK 
3-6 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, thin, fragile, orange to yellow; base with orange hairs. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in needle beds underconifers( especially pine); 
widely distributed, but most abundant in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest and 
northern California. It fruits in mild, moist weather. I have not seen it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This little mushroom is likely to attract attention because of its beautiful 
color. The scarlet to yellow cap and stalk, scarlet-edged gills, and orange hairs at the stem 
base make a most distinctive combination of characters such that even beginners should 
have no trouble identifying it. It is one of the more prominent Mycenas in the Pacific 
Northwest, sometimes forming colorful "carpets" so thick that it is difficult to examine 
them closely without stepping on some. M. aurantiomarginata is a closely related species 
with an olive-brown to orange-tinted cap, brilliant orange gill edges, and yellow-orange 
hairs at the stalk base. It is commoner at lower elevations in the Pacific Northwest and I 
find it fairly frequently in our area as well. Brilliantly colored Mycenas without differently 
colored gills edges include: M. montico/a, cap coral-red to pink, stalk coral-pink when 
fresh; M. amabi/issima, cap bright pinkish-red fading to whitish and stalk soon fading to 
whitish; and M. adonis, with a smaller (5-12 mm broad), scarlet cap that becomes orange 
or yellow-orange and then fades to orange-buff, plus a pale yellow to whitish stalk. All 
three of these occur mainly on needle carpets under conifers. M. /uteopa//ens, on the other 
hand, grows on old walnuts and hickory nuts in eastern North America. It is bright orange 
to yellow before fading. All ofthe above have stalks which are typically at least 1 mmthick. 
For minute, brightly colored species with thinner or threadlike stalks, see M. acicu/a. 
Left Mycena c/avu/aris group (p. 227) typically grows on bark of standing trees. Right Mycena 
capi//aripes is one of many species that form dense carpets of delicate domes on duff under conifers. 
Mycena capillaripes 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, oval becoming bell-shaped or conical, often with a blunt umbo, 
sometimes nearly plane in age; surface smooth, not viscid, usually some shade of vina- 
reous-gray or gray, the center often browner; translucent-striate when moist, usually 
wrinkled or furrowed when dry. Flesh thin; odor typically nitrous or bleachlike( especially 
when crushed), but sometimes radishlike. GILLS attached (usually adnate), well-spaced, 
typically pallid or vinaceous-gray, at least the longer ones with pale pink or rosy edges ( use 
hand lens!). STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end, 
hollow, smooth, fragile, colored more or less like cap or paler above, sometimes slightly 
yellower in age; base with coarse white hairs. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-12 )( 4 
microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on conifer duff (but occasionally also under 
hardwoods); widely distributed. In our area it often occurs in droves under Monterey pine 
in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several M ycenas that carpet our pine forests with a miniature 
"fungal jungle" of petite parasols. The faint reddish or vinaceous tints on the cap plus 
the pink-margined gills are distinctive. M. rose/fa is a widely distributed pink to grayish- 
rose species with pale to bright rosy gills that have darker (pale to dark reddish) edges. It 
is uncommon in our area but often abundant under pine and other conifers farther north. 
Other terrestrial species with colored gill margins include: M. citrinomarginata, with pale 
yellow to yellow-brown gill edges and spores 8-11 microns 10ng;M. o/ivaceobrunnea, with 
smaller spores, a smaller cap, and yellowish gill edges; andM. e/egans, with pale greenish- 
yellow gill edges. In these species the cap is typically some shade or mixture of olive-brown, 
gray, and/ or yellow. 
Mycena purpureofusca 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad or occasionally larger, obtusely conical with a slightly incurved 
margin, becoming broadly conical or bell-shaped or sometimes expanding to nearly plane 
in old age; surface smooth, not viscid, dark purplish witha paler(lilac) margin when young, 
fading to purplish-gray orvinaceous-Iavender; translucent-striate when moist and mature. 
Flesh thin, pliant, odor mild. GILLS attached (usually adnate), fairly close, pallid to 
229 
'" 
". 
II 
"" . 
" 
\'. 
," 
.; 
t ......, 
' 
" ' 
'" 
Mycena purpureofusca commonly grows on pine cones and other woody debris. 
grayish with dark grayish-purple edges. ST ALK 3 -10 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, eq ual, hollow, 
cartilaginous, colored more or less like cap or paler above; base with white hairs and Some- 
times rooting. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-14 )( 6-8.5 microns, broadly elliptical, 
smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups or tufts on conifer wood and debris; widely 
distributed and frequent in our area in the fall and winter. I find it often on old pine cones. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like myself, likely to remain so. 
COMMENTS: The purplish conical cap, dark purplish gill edges, and growth on wood 
or cones typify this species. The stalk does not exude a red latex like M. haematvpus. The 
color and stature are reminiscent of Marasmius plicatulus. which has a very tough, brittle 
stalk and pallid gill edges and grows on the ground. Collybiafuscopurpurea has a similar 
name but has a convex to plane cap and is also terrestrial. Other species: Mycena elegantula 
is closely related, but has a vinaceous-brown to pinkish cap and pale pink to vinaceous gill 
edges; it also grows on coniferous wood and debris, including cones. M. rubromarginata 
grows on spruce and fir and has a browner cap and reddish-brown gill edges. 
Mycena pura 
(Lilac Mycena) 
CAP 2-5 (6.5) cm broad, obtusely umbonate orconvex becoming broadly convex or plane, 
sometimes with an uplifted margin; surface smooth, hygrophanous, color variable: various 
shades or mixtures ofIilac, pink, gray, and blue-gray, but varying also to blue-green with a 
yellowish center, or sometimes even whitish tinged purple or blue at the center; translucent- 
striate when moist, otherwise opaque. Flesh thin, soft; odor and taste radishlike. GILLS 
adnate or adnexed, usually tinged cap color (lilac, etc.), but sometimes grayish or white; 
edges pallid. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-7 mm thick, equal or thicker below, hollow, 
smooth, pallid or colored like the cap or paler. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-9 )( 3-4 
microns, elliptical to cylindrical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or small tufts on ground in woods, widely distributed. 
Common in our area from fall through early spring, but rarely in large numbers. I find it 
most often with oak, Douglas-fir, and pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible according to some sources, but one study revealed traces ofthe toxin 
muscarine. Definitely not recommended-it is too small to be of value anyway. 
230 
. " . 
.. 
" 
." 
"-' . 
Mycena pura is a terrestrial species that sometimes resembles a miniature blewit. Note how the cap 
becomes convex or plane in age 
COMMENTS: This is one of the larger M ycenas as well as one of the more beautiful. The 
color is exceedingly variable, but there is usually a trace ofIilac somewhere on the fruiting 
body, especially the stem. The convex rather than conical cap is atypical for a Mycena, 
and for this reason it is keyed out under Collybia. The radishlike odor is another important 
fieldmark. The gill edges are not purple or pink as in M. capillaripes and M. purpureofusca, 
and it is strictly terrestrial. It never grows in huge clusters and does not normally fruit in 
dense troops either. I have seen fairly robust specimens which could ha ve been mistaken for 
blewits (Clitocybe nuda). lnocybe lilacina is similarly colored, but has brown spores. 
M. pelianthina and M. TutilantijoTmis are two very similar species with a radishlike odor. 
They differ in having dark reddish to purple gill edges, and the latter typically shows yellow 
at the apex of the stalk. They are not as highly colored as M. pura and both grow on the 
ground under hardwoods. M. amicta is a western species whose cap and stalk are blue to 
blue-green or tinged those colors. It grows on coniferous debris, while M. subcaeTulea is 
its eastern, deciduous- woodland counterpart. 
Mycena haematopus 
(Bleeding Mycena) 
Color Plate 46 
CAP 1-3.5 (5) cm broad, oval to bell-shaped when young, with the margin often extending 
beyond the gills; in age sometimes convex or plane with an umbo and uplifted margin; 
surface smooth, not viscid, reddish to vinaceous-brown to reddish-brown or pinkish- 
brown, margin often paler (vinaceous-gray); striate at maturity when moist; margin often 
scalloped in age. Flesh thin, exuding a dark red juice when cut. GILLS attached (usually 
adnate or adnexed), fairly close, pallid, often developing reddish stains; edges white or in 
one form reddish. ST ALK 3-8 (14) cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal, dull reddish or reddish- 
brown, or sometimes pallid; smooth, fragile; base with coarse hairs, exuding a dark red 
juice when cut or squeezed. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 5-7 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more commonly tufted or in groups on decaying logs and stumps 
(mostly hardwoods). Very widely distributed and common, fruiting in our area from fall 
through spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible according to some sources, but too small to be of value. 
COMMENTS: One of the most distinctive and common Mycenas, this species resembles 
several others in color, but if the base of the stalk is squeezed a dark red blood like fluid will 
emerge. Its growth on wood separates it from other "bleeding" Mycenas(see M. sanguino- 
lema). Also distinctive is the frequent presence of a sterile band of tissue around the cap 
margin of young specimens. It is suggestive of a veil but breaks up in age or forms a 
scalloped rim around the cap. 
231 
 
! 
."" 
\ 
,\ 
\... 
Left: Mycena sanguino/enla is a common terrestrial species that "bleeds" when broken. Right: 
M ycena g%pus looks like numerous other grayish or brownish M ycenas, but its base exudes a milky 
droplet when squeezed. 
Mycena sanguinolenta (Terrestrial Bleeding Mycena) 
CAP 0.3-1.5 (2.5) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or sometimes convex in age; surface 
smooth, not viscid, color variable: some shade of pale reddish-brown to bright reddish- 
brown to orange-brown, etc; margin often vinaceous and furrowed at maturity. Flesh thin, 
reddish, exuding a dark red juice when cut; odor mild. GILLS attached (typically adnate), 
well-spaced, pallid or tinged flesh-color or reddish, edges dark reddish-brown. STALK 2- 
7.5 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile, colored more or less like cap, smooth; base 
with white hairs and exuding a dark red juice when broken or squeezed. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 8-11 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid. Cystidia present on 
gill faces and edges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or widely scattered to gregarious or tufted on leaf mold and needles 
in woods or at their edges; widely distributed. Common in our area in fall and winter, 
usually scattered under oak. In northern California and the Pacific Northwest it sometimes 
fruits in large numbers under conifers, especially spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like most of us, destined to remain so. 
COMMENTS: True to their names, this species and its close cousin, M. haematopus, 
"bleed" when broken. As such they are the easiest Mycenas to recognize and among the 
most common as well. M. sanguinolenta is easily distinguished from M. haematopus byits 
growth on the ground, absence of a sterile band of marginal tissue on the cap, and some- 
what different color. The striate or furrowed cap is reminiscent of Marasmius plicalulus, 
but that species has a tough, polished stem and does not "bleed." Other species: M. subsan- 
guinolenta is closely related but has dark red to orange juice, is slightly yellower overall, 
and lacks cystidia on the 'gill faces. It often fruits in large numbers under conifers in 
northern California. 
Mycena galopus (Milky Mycena) 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or umbonate, the margin sometimes curling 
up in age; surface smooth, not viscid, at first grayish-black (at least at center), but soon 
fading to gray or grayish-brown, then pale gray or even whitish; translucent-striate when 
moist. Flesh thin, soft, odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, attached (usually adnate), white 
to grayish. STALK 4-8 (12) cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, dark 
grayish-brown to gray below, paler above; base with white hairs, exuding a droplet of milky 
juice when squeezed. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, not amyloid or sometimes weakly amyloid. 
232 
MYCENA 
233 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground and humus in woods, widely distributed. 
Common in our area during wet weather, especially under redwood and pine, but tending 
to fruit widely scattered over a large area rather than in dense troops or"carpets" like some 
of our other pine-loving species (e.g., M. murina. M. capillaripes). 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? 
COMMENTS: This ubiquitous Mycena will be encountered by anyone who takes their 
"LBM's" seriously. At first glance there is little to distinguish it from the myriad of other 
anonymous brown or grayish Mycenas. However, if you break the very base ofthe stalk 
and squeeze gently, a drop of milky or cloudy fluid will emerge. This is best observed in 
the field, while the fruiting body is fresh. A similar species, M. atroalho;des, exudes liquid 
that is clear rather than milky, and often has reddish spots on the gills in old age. It is not 
common in our area but is often abundant farther north under conifers. 
Mycena scabripes (Rough-Stemmed Mycena) 
CAP 1.5-3 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical becoming convex, umbonate, or plane; surface 
not viscid, blackish-brown or dark brown at the center, olive-brown toward the margin, 
but fading somewhat in age to olive-gray or gray; not distinctly striate. Flesh thin, 
brownish-gray, odor mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free in age, pallid or tinged cap 
color, sometimes spotted reddish-brown in age. STALK 3-9 cm long, 2-4 mm thick, equal, 
hollow, grayish or colored like cap, with a thin but distinct coating of silky white to grayish 
fibrils and particles. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, 
amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in small tufts in humus and debris in woods; widely 
distributed but not common, or at least seldom noticed. I have found it in our area in the 
fall and winter under redwood and oak. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? 
COMMENTS: The distinguishing feature of this undistinguished Mycena is the presence 
of silky white fibrils and particles on the stem. The olive-brown, more or less umbonate 
cap is also distinctive. 
Mycena subcana (Neutral Gray Mycena) 
CAP 0.5-2.5 (3) cm broad, oval or obtusely conical to bell-shaped, becoming convex in 
age; surface smooth or with a hoary sheen, grayish to pale gray, usually darker at the center, 
Left: Mycena scabripes is a nondescript species with a minutely scaly or dandruffy stalk. Right: 
Mycena subcana typically grows singly or in pairs or groups (but not clusters) on sticks and branches. 
 
,. 
\ 
, 
234 
TRICHOLOMA T ACEAE 
sometimes fading to whitish; not viscid, translucent-striate nearly to center when moist. 
Flesh thin, grayish, odor mild. GILLS attached (usually adnate), well-spaced, whitish to 
pale gray. ST ALK 1.5 cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick, equal or enlarged at base, smooth, same 
color as cap or paler, with downy white hairs at base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
8-10 )( 5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups (not large clusters!) on dead sticks and branches, 
sometimes on living trees; fairly common on the west coast. In our area it fruits in the fall 
and winter on conifers (especially redwood); I have also found it on tan oak. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? I don't. 
COMMENTS: This grayish species is representative of a multitude of indifferent grayish, 
wood-inhabiting "YAM's." The salient macroscopic features of M. subcana are its 
color, its translucent-striate cap, and its preference for dead sticks and branches 
rather than stumps or logs (a completely different niche!). Unlike many of its kin, it does 
not grow in clusters, but instead fruits alone or in attractive rows of solitary or sometimes 
paired specimens. Typifying those that grow in clusters on stumps or logs isM. occiden- 
talis, a grayish species found throughout the West on conifers. Also clustered on conifers 
is M. laevigata, a whitish species with grayish-black to bluish-gray tints on cap and stalk 
when very young and yellowish discolorations in age; and M. overholtsii, a large grayish 
species found in clumps near melting snow in the spring. Another species,M. parabolica, 
has a growth habit in between that of M. subcana and M. occidentalis-it grows in groups 
or small clusters on rotting wood and has a sooty black cap that fades to gray in age. 
Mycena alcalina (Alkaline Mycena) 
CAP 14 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or convex-umbonate, expanding somewhat in 
age; surface smooth, dark brownish-black to grayish-black when very young, soon fading 
to gray, grayish-brown, or yellow-brown; striate when moist. Flesh thin, fragile, odor 
faintly to strongly alkaline (like bleach). GILLS rather close, adnate to slightly decurrent, 
whitish to grayish, sometimes stained reddish-brown in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1.5-3 
mm thick, equal, pallid to grayish or often sordid yellowish-brown in age; fragile, hollow. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 )( 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: In groups or tufts on decaying conifer logs, or sometimes densely gregarious 
on needles under conifers; common and widespread throughout North America. In some 
regions it is most abundant in the spring, but in our area it fruits in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you? 
COMMENTS: The sharp, bleachlike odor is usually quite distinct in this species, and 
helps distinguish it from the throngs of other grayish Mycenas that grow on wood. The 
odor is best detected by crushing the cap. Another common species with an alkaline odor, 
M. leptocephala, is terrestrial, growing on sticks, needles, or even in grass. It is only rarely 
umbonate, and slightly smaller than M. a/calina. Other species: M. metata is terrestrial, 
with a slightly browner cap and faint but sharp odor;M. iodiolens has an antiseptic odor. 
For similar species without a distinctive odor, see M. subcana and the M. murina group. 
Mycena murina group (Yet Another Mycena) Color Plate 48 
CAP 0.7 -3 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped, striate nearly to the center when moist; surface 
smooth, not viscid, dark gray to gray when moist, paler (gray to whitish) when faded, 
darker when young. Flesh thin, odor mild. GILLS grayish with pallid edges, attached, 
fairly well-spaced. STALK 3-8 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal, fragile, smooth, pale to dark 
gray with pallid apex; base with white hairs. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 )( 5-7 
microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
MYCENA 
235 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious by the hundreds on needle duff under conifers, 
widely distributed. This species and its look-alikes are often abundant in our coastal pine 
forests in the late fall and early winter. They also appear under hardwoods, in grass, even 
in planter boxes and flower pots-i.e., wherever there is organic matter to nourish them. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you? Do you care if I do? 
COMMENTS: This species, which has passed under the nameM. stannea, is one of a slew 
of nondescript, odorless, gray to brownish, terrestrial Mycenas that are very prevalent 
under conifers. They are differentiated from each other largely on the basis of microscopic 
characteristics such as the size and shape of spores and sterile cells (cystidia). The one pic- 
tured in the color photograph is not quite as gray as typical M. murina and may well be a 
distinct species, but to the average mushroom hunter it is a "YAM" ("Yet Another My- 
cena"), and thus hardly worth the time and trouble to distinguish. Other"Y AM's" include 
M./atifo/;a,M.f;/opes,M. abrams;;,M.pseudotenax,M. atroa/bo;des, ad infinitum. For 
those species with a sharp or bleachlike odor, see comments under M. alcalina, and for 
those with colored gill margins, see M. capillaripes. 
Mycena maculata (Reddish-Spotted Mycena) 
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped expanding to broadly convex or plane with a 
broad umbo, the margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface smooth, blackish-brown soon 
fading to brown or brownish-gray, but usually spotted with reddish-brown and sometimes 
entirely watery gray; striate when moist. Flesh thin, firm, grayish, slowly bruising reddish- 
brown. GILLS adnate to adnexed, whitish to pale gray, soon stained with reddish spots, 
sometimes entirely sordid reddish in old age; edges pallid. STALK 4-8 (12) cm long, 2-5 
mm thick, nearly equal, smooth, hollow, cartilaginous, pallid above, colored like cap or 
paler below; base with dense white hairs and soon stained reddish-brown, sometimes 
rooting. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: In small tufts or large clusters on logs and stumps, especially of conifers; widely 
distributed. It is common in our area in cool, wet weather on redwood, Douglas-fir, etc., 
occasionally also on hardwoods. "The most abundant Mycena on conifer wood in the 
Pacific Northwest," says Alexander Smith, author of a monograph on the genus. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you? Do you care if I do? I won't if 
you don't. 
COMMENTS: This rather unattractive species can be recognized by the sordid reddish 
stains that develop in age and its growth in clusters on rotten wood. The stalk sometimes 
has a "tap root" as in M. galericulata. It doesn't "bleed" like M. haematopus, and the gill 
edges aren't purple as in M. purpureofusca. M. occidenralis(see comments under M. sub- 
cana) is also common in clusters on conifers, but does not develop reddish stains. Another 
reddish-staining species, M. rugu/os;ceps, has larger spores and grows on hardwoods 
(alder, rhododendron, etc.) as well as on conifers. M. ;ncl;nata is a closely related species 
that is especially common in eastern North America. I t often develops reddish or pinkish 
tones as it ages but favors hardwoods and has fibrillose flecks on the lower half ofthe stalk. 
See top of next page for a photograph of M. maculata. 
Mycena galericulata 
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, conical when young becoming broadly bell-shaped to umbonate 
to plane or with an uplifted margin in age; surface moist but not viscid, often radially 
wrinkled nearly to center; buffy-brown to grayish, dingy tan, cinnamon-brown, or grayish- 
brown. Flesh watery gray; odor faintly to distinctly farinaceous or radishlike. GILLS 
adnate to adnexed, often with cross-veins between, white to grayish or in age flushed pale 
.' 
,. 
-" 
Left: Mycena maculata (see p. 235) is one of many Mycenas that grow in clumps on rotten wood. 
Center: Mycena galericulata. young specimens with broadly conical caps; note how stalk roots deeply. 
Right: Mycena galericulata. mature specimens which have opened up so as to resemble Collybias. 
pinkish, but not spotted or stained. STALK 5-10 (14) cm long, 24 (6) mm thick, equal, 
cartilaginous, hollow, smooth, often rooting; grayish-white or colored more or less like 
cap, often darker below. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 )( 5.5-7 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered, gregarious, or in small clusters on decaying hardwood 
stumps, logs, and de bris; widely distributed and not uncommon in our area in the fall and 
winter. One form-possibly a distinct species-grows on manzanita burls. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended-it is one of the few Mycenas large enough 
to eat, but many of its difficult-to-distinguish relatives have not been tested. 
COMMENTS: This widespread species can be mistaken for a Collybia because the cap 
is convex to plane in age. The telltale traits are its pale color, frequently long, rooting stem, 
and penchant for growing scattered or in small, loose clusters. The gills are often tinged 
pinkish in age, but do not become reddish-spotted as in M. macula/a. Other species: 
M. viti/is has a long stem that often has a rooting base that is covered with white hairs 
below the ground. It grows in humus under hardwoods, especially alder. 
Mycena lilacijolia 
CAP 0.8-2.5 cm broad, convex to helmet-shaped, the center slightly depressed in age; 
surface viscid to slimy and translucent-striate when moist, smooth, lilac when very young, 
but soon bright to pale yellow. Flesh thin; odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, usually 
decurrent, pale lilac becoming whitish to pale yellow or pinkish. ST ALK 14 cm long, 1-2 
mm thick, equal or enlarged at the base, smooth, slimy-viscid when moist, same color as 
gills but soon yellow; base often with lilac mycelium. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
6-7 )( 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on rotting conifers, widely distributed. 
It usually fruits in cool weather and is fairly common in our coastal pine forests. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too slippery to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This species is best distinguished from other viscid Mycenas by its yellow 
color and growth on conifers. The gills will sometimes retain their lilac tint longer than 
the cap and stalk, but I have found specimens which showed absolutely no trace of their 
original lilac color. It might be looked for in Omphalina because of the decurrent gills 
(see photo on p. 237), but the slimy stem and cap distinguish it. Viscid, brightly colored 
wood-inhabiting species with non-decurrent gills include: M. /eaiana, bright orange to 
yellow, growing in clusters on hard woods in eastern North America, and certain varieties 
of M. epipterygia(see description on next page), which grow on conifers. 
236 
 
. 
I 
.. 
'.. 
----- 
M)'cena lilacifolia (p. 236) is one of several Mycenas with a slimy cap and stem. Note decurrent gills. 
Mycena epipterygia (Yellow-Stemmed Mycena) 
CAP 0.8-2 (2.5) cm broad, oval becoming umbonate, bell-shaped, or convex; surface 
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, color variable: mostly yellow with olive or grayish 
tones, sometimes fading in age. Flesh thin, yellowish; .odor mild or faintly fragrant. 
GILLS attached, whitish or tinged yellow, fairly well-spaced. STALK 5-9 cm long, 
1-2 mm thick, equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, yellow, but some- 
timeS' fading to whitish in old age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-10 )( 5-6 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in needle duff under conifers, widely distributed. It 
is partial to cold weather, fruiting in northern regions in the late fall until frosts set in, and in 
the winter in our coastal pine forests. One variety with a rank odor occurs on decaying 
conifers. The related M. griseoviridis (see comments) frequently fruits nearly melting 
snow in the spring and summer. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several attractive Mycenas with a viscid cap and viscid, 
yellow to greenish-gray stem. The viscid layers may dry out in age, but the colors are dis- 
tinctive. Similar terrestrial species include: M. viscosa, with a strong rancid odor and taste; 
M. epipterygioides, with a dark olive-gray cap that does not fade to white; andM. griseo- 
viridis, with a deep olive to olive-brown to blackish cap, a yellow stem that becomes brown 
or deep vinaceous-brown from the base upward, a cucumberlike odor, and thorny cystidia 
on the gill edges. The latter species is often common under mountain conifers soon after 
the snow melts, but is not restricted to that habitat. Any of these species can be mistaken 
for a waxy cap (e.g., Hygrocybe psittacina), but their gills are not noticeably waxy. 
Mycena rorida (Slippery Mycena) 
CAP (2) 5-10 (15) mm broad, at first rounded or bell-shaped, then expanding to plane or 
nearly so; surface dry, pale brown or brownish-gray to tan, fading to white or yellowish- 
white. Flesh thin, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, well-spaced, white. STALK 2-3 
(5) cm long, about 1 mm thick, equal, whitish, covered with a sheath of slime when fresh and 
moist. SPORE PRINT. white; spores 8-12)( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or scattered to gregarious on ground and debris under conifers and in 
mixed woods; widely distributed, but not common in our area. I have found it under 
redwood in November. 
EDIBILITY: Too small and slippery to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This little mushroom is easily identified by its pale color, dry cap, and 
sheath of slime on the stem. Plucking it can be a difficult proposition if you try to grasp it by 
the stalk. Other Mycenas with a pallid to grayish, viscid stem include: M. telUJx, with a 
gray-brown to pale gray cap and strong disagreeable odor; M. vulgaris, similar but with an 
extremely viscid cap and slight odor; and M. clavicularis, with a dry grayish cap and mild 
odor. All of these occur in groups or troops under conifers. 
237 
238 
ENTOLOMATACEAE 
@ ... 
a 
'" 
/%1 
spores V 
THIS is the largest family of pinkish-spored mushrooms and also the most difficult. It 
is unusual among agarics in having spores which are distinctly angular (several-sided) in 
side and/ or end view. The gills are typically attached to the stalk (in contrast to the other 
major pinkish-spored family, the Pluteaceae), and the stalk is not cleanly separable from 
the cap. The spore color, though characterized as "pinkish," actually ranges from deep 
flesh-color to salmon- or rosy-pink to dull reddish or sordid pinkish-cinnamon, whereas 
the pinkish-spored members of the Tricholomataceae (e.g., Clitocybe) have pale or dull 
pinkish, non-angular spores. 
The Entolomataceae have a very confusing nomenclatural history. Four principal 
genera have traditionally been recognized-Clitopilus. Entoloma. Nolanea. and Leptonia 
-but the presence of intermediate forms has led some mycologists to consolidate all but 
Clitopilus in a single giant genus, Entoloma. while recognizing a few smaller genera (e.g., 
Rhodocybe) that differ microscopically . To muddle matters more, the name Rhodophyllus 
is often used instead of Ent%ma. and Rhodophyllaceae instead of Entolomataceae. 
The result is that each species has a surfeit of superfluous synonyms-for instance, 
Leptonia sericella. Alboleptonia sericella. Entoloma sericellum. and Rhodophyllus 
sericellus are all names for the same fungus! (H uman beings are certainly a confusing-and 
confused-lot!) 
The mushrooms do little to ameliorate matters, for they are exasperatingly difficult to 
demystify. Some Entoloma-experts have resorted to such abstruse activities as measuring 
the urea concentration of the fruiting body or determining the type of symmetry exhibited 
by the spores in their efforts to delineate the various genera and species! 
In North America the Entolomataceae are largely woodland fungi, but some species 
grow in open or grassy areas. The vast majority are terrestrial (in contrast to the wood- 
inhabiting genus Pluteus), but a few occur on rotting wood. Several species are poisonous, 
and in view ofthe difficulty in identifying them, beginners should avoid the entire group. 
Particularly dangerous are some of the large fleshy Entolomas-a fact which clearly 
invalidates the old adage that "any mushroom with pink gills is edible" (a reference, no 
doubt, to Agaricus). 
From two to nine genera are recognized, depending on whether a "lumper" or "splitter" 
is doing the recognizing. Several of the genera are small and rare (e.g., C/audopus and 
Pouzarella); these are included in the following key but not treated beyond it. 
Key to the Entolomataceae 
I. Growing on dung or on other mushrooms; widely distributed but rare ................ 21 
I. Growing on wood, humus, or ground ............................................. 2 
2. Stalk lateral to absent; fruiting body small, usually on wood (rarely on ground) ......... 3 
2. Stalk present, usually central or slightly off-center; on ground or sometimes on wood .... 7 
3. Gills pale orange, orange, or yellow or gill edges split lengthwise (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Odor strongly unpleasant (skunklike) ........................... C/audopus graveo/ens 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap feIty or hairy, white, 4-20 mm broad; spores not angular ...... (see Crepidotus, p.405) 
5. Not as above; spores angular under the microscope ................................. 6 
6. Cap brownish-orange to grayish-brown beneath a dense layer of whitish fibrils; odor usually 
farinaceous; stalk silky-hairy, base often with white mycelial threads . C/audopus byssisedus 
6. Cap whitish to gray or pinkish-gray, not as hairy as above, 3-7 mm broad; odor mild ....... 
............................................................. C/audopusdep/uens 
7. Gills purple or purple-tinged; spores not angular ........... (see C/itocybe & Allies, p. 148) 
7. Not with above features; gills rarely purple, and if so then spores angular. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8 
ENTOLOMA T ACEAE 
239 
8. Gills often decurrent (but sometimes adnate or even notched); cap and stalk never bluish, violet, 
or black; spores warted or longitudinally lined in side view, angular only in end view ...... 
................ ........ . . . ..... ........ . .... _." ., Clitopilus& Rhodocybe, below 
8. Not as above; spores usually angular in side view or not angular at all .................. 9 
9. Cap and/ or stalk blue, blue-black, blue-gray, violet, steel-gray, or black, at least when young 
and fresh ................................................................... 10 
9. Notasabove ................................................................ 12 
10. Stalk usually 5 mm thick or more; usually growing on ground ....................... II 
10. S talk slender, usually hollow and fragile or cartilaginous, typically 1.5-5 mm thick at apex, or if 
thicker then growing on wood ................................ Leptonia& Allies,248 
II. Stalk fibrillose-scaly, often with a metallic luster or iridescence; cap usually fibrillose-scaly 
also .................................................... Leptonia & Allies, p. 248 
II. S talk smooth to finely fibrillose, or if fibrillose-scaly then cap smooth ..... Entoloma, p. 242 
12. Fruiting body small and white (or in age tinged yellowish or pinkish) Leptonia& Allies, p. 248 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Cap hairy and/ or scaly and base of stalk with coarse, stiff hairs; not common '" Pouza,ella 
13. Not as above .............................................................. _. 14 
14. Stalk fleshy, 4 mm thick or more ................................................ 15 
14. Stalk slender, usually hollow and fragile or cartilaginous, usually less than 5 mm thick ... 17 
15. Spore print pale to dull pinkish; spores not angular ........ (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
15. Spore print deep flesh-color to salmon-pink to pinkish-cinnamon or darker; spores angular 
under the microscope ........................................................ 16 
16. Cap conical to bell-shaped or with a pointed umbo (but may expand with age) Nolanea, p.245 
16. Not as above (but cap may be bluntly conical when young) .,. _ . . . . . . . . . . Entoloma, p.242 
17. Growing on or near wood; spores smooth or at least not angular ..................... 18 
17. Usually terrestrial (but occasionally on wood); spores angular under microscope ....... 19 
18. Gills usually free (or nearly free) and close together ................. (seePluteus, p.254) 
18. Notasabove ........................................ (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
19. Stalk yellow-green or gills pale with pink edges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leptonia& Allies, p. 248 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Cap conical to bell-shaped or umbonate, or if convex to plane then smooth or silky; cap not 
umbilicate ...................................................... N olanea, p. 245 
20. Cap convex to plane or umbilicate and usually finely fibrillose, scurfy, scaly, or fibrillose-scaly, 
at least at the center (and particularly in age) .................. Leptonia & Allies, p. 248 
21. Parasitic on other mushrooms (mostly chanterelles and polypores); fruiting body minute, 
grayish to white; small stalk usually present ..................... Claudopus pa,asiticus 
21. Not as above; growing on dung ........................ Clitopilus& Rhodocybe, p. 239 
CLITOPILUS & RHODOCYBE 
Small to medium-sized, mostly terrestrial mushrooms. CAP convex to plane or depressed. GILLS 
usually adnate to decurrent. STALK thick or slender, fleshy or rather fragile, central or off- 
center. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT pinkish to salmon,flesh-colored, or pink ish- 
cinnamon. Spores angular in end view only; in side view longitudinally ridged (C/itopilus) or 
bumpy to warty (Rhodocybe). 
THESE two small genera of pinkish-spored mushrooms typically haveadnate to decurrent 
gills and spores which are angular only in end view. They are a rather lackluster lot, most 
likely to be confused with species of Entoloma, which usually have notched gills, and 
Clitocybe, which have paler, non-angular spores. Several small species of Leptonia and 
Eccilia have decurrent gills, but their spores are angular in both side and end view. There 
are also several Rhodocybes with notched gills; these are likely to be confused with Colly- 
bia or Entoloma unless their spores are examined under the microscope. 
Both Clitopilus and Rhodocybe are small genera, but some of their species are quite 
common. Two are described here (one from each genus) and several others are keyed out. 
240 
ENTOLOMA T ACEAE 
Key to Clitopilus & Rhodocybe 
1. OdorIike a candy store or bubble gum (break open cap if unsure) ..... (seeNolanea, p. 245) 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Cap reddish-brown to orange-brown, cinnamon, pinkish, yellowish-ochre, or tan ........ 3 
2. Cap white or grayish to grayish-brown, olive-brown, etc. ............................ 4 
3. Cap 2-12 cm broad, opaque; stalk usually at least 5 mm thick; fairly common in California, 
but more widely distributed .... _ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. nuc;olens& others, p. 241 
3. Cap usually less than 5 cm broad and translucent-striate when moist; stalk 1-7 mm thick; 
widespread ........... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. n;tell;na (see R. nuciolens. p. 241) 
4. Found on dung or compost; cap small, stalk often poorly developed ..... C. passecker;anus 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap gray to grayish-brown; "aborted" fruiting bodies often found that are somewhat puffball- 
like: whitish to pinkish-tan and bumpy on the outside, marbled within; common in eastern 
North America; spores angular in side view. ..... .. . ........ .. .. (see Entoloma, p. 242) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Gills decurrent; cap white to grayish and typically 3 cm or more broad ................. 7 
6. Not as above; cap smaller and/ or dark brown to olive-brown, etc. ..................... 9 
7. Taste bitter; cap often cracked concentrically ....... R. mundula (see R. nuciolens. p. 241) 
7. Not as above ................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8 
8. Stalk often somewhat off-center and fairly slender (4-12 mm thick); odor pleasant; typically 
not growing in clusters; spores longitudinally lined under microscope .. C. prunulus, below 
8. Stalk often quite thick; sometimes clustered; spores nOllined (see CI;tocybe& Allies, p. 148) 
9. Spores finely warted in side view, angular only in end view R. caelata(see R. nuciolens, p.241) 
9. S pores angular in side and end views ..................... (see Lepton;a & Allies, p. 248) 
Clitopilus prunulus (Sweetbread Mushroom) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry and 
slightly felty or in one form slightly viscid when moist, smooth, white to gray; margin often 
lobed or wavy. Flesh rather thin, white; odor strongly but pleasantly farinaceous (like 
sweetbread). GILLS decurrent or occasionally adnate, fairly close, narrow, whitish to 
gray, then dusted pinkish by spores. STALK 2-8 cm long, O.4-1.2cm thick, central or off- 
center, solid, equal or tapering downward, white or grayish. SPORE PRINT flesh-colored 
or salmon; spores 9-12 )( 5-7 microns, elliptical, longitudinally ridged, angular only in end 
view. 
ClilOpilus prunulus looks like a Clilocybe with its decurrent gills and white to gray color, but its 
spores are pinkish and show ridges under the microscope. The tree frog shown here is very tiny! 
....... 
. . 
CLITOPILUS 
241 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in small groups on ground in open woods and grassy 
places near trees; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the fall and winter, 
usually under oak or pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, but not recommended. It is rated highly in Europe but is 
easily confused with poisonous mushrooms such as Clitocybe dealbata. 
COMMENTS: The pinkish spores, decurrent gills, white to grayish cap, and strong odor 
of meal are the fallible field marks of this unremarkable fungus. The poisonous Clitocybe 
dealbata closely mimics it but is somewhat smaller and has white spores. Clitocybe sub- 
connexa and its close relatives have pinkish spores, but grow in clusters and are more 
robust. The name Clitcopilus orcellus has been given to forms of C. prunulus with a white, 
slightly sticky cap, but it is no longer regarded as a distinct species by most mycologists. 
R hodocybe nuciolens 
CAP 2-7 (II) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or slightly depressed or some- 
times slightly umbonate; surface smooth, not viscid, dull pinkish to pinkish-brown, 
pinkish-tan, or sometimes cinnamon-brown to brick-colored, fading as it dries( especially 
toward margin), sometimes with watery spots or bands. Flesh white or pale ochre; odor 
usually rather spicy. GILLS whitish becoming pinkish as spores mature; close, adnate or 
notched or sometimes slightly decurrent. STALK 2-8 (15) cm long, 0.4-1.5 (4) cm thick, 
equal or occasionally thicker at base, whitish or colored like cap (but usually paler). 
SPORE PRINT rosy-buff; spores 5.5-7.5 x 3.54.5 microns, elliptical and warty in side 
view, angular in end view. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in humus or on rotten wood; common 
in central and southern California in the fall and winter, but more widely distributed. It 
occurs under both hardwoods and conifers; I find it most often with redwood. 
EDIBILITY: Uncertain. Greg Wright of Los Angeles says it has an excellent flavor, but 
that one collection caused sweating, chills. and other symptoms of muscarine poisoning. 
COMMENTS: The dull pinkish to brick-colored cap and pinkish spores are the distin- 
guishing features of this eminently undistinguished fungus. The gill attachment is quite 
variable, leading to confusion with Clitocybe inversa (which has white or buff spores), 
candy caps (Lactarius fragilis and L. rufulus>., and various Collybias, but the pinkish 
spores and pinkish gills at maturity are distinctive. There are several other Rhodocybes 
that are difficult to key to genus without examining the spores. These include: R. nitellina, 
cap up to 5 cm broad and orange-brown to reddish-brown to pinkish-cinnamon or ochre 
with a translucent-striate margin when moist;R. roseiavellanea, one of several uncommon 
wood-inhabiting species with a more or less tan cap; R. mundula, cap 3-7 cm broad, 
grayish, and bitter-tasting; R. caelata, with a small( 1-3 cm) grayish ca p and decurrent gills; 
andR. aureicystidiata, also small, but with a darker ca p that bruises dark or dingy reddish. 
Rhodocybe nucio/ens is variable in size, shape, and color, but always has pinkish spores. These are 
rather small specimens. 
. . 
, '\,1 
-4 
, . 
;; " 
" 
f" 
 '\ 
242 
ENTOLOMA T ACEAE 
ENTOLOMA 
Medium-sized to fairly large terrestrial mushrooms. CAP typically convex to plane or uplifted, 
usually not scaly.GILLS typically attached (usually notched), fairly close to well-spaced, usually 
pinkish or flesh-colored in old age. ST ALKfleshy, smooth or slightly scaly, central. VEIL and 
VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT pinkish to flesh-colored or cinnamon-pinkish. Spores angular. 
ENTOLOMA is easily the most conspicuous genus in the Entolomataceae. As defined 
here it is comprised of fleshy, pinkish-spored, terrestrial mushrooms that correspond in 
shape and stature to the white-spored genus Tricholoma. The cap and stalk are smooth to 
only slightly scaly; the gills are usually notched but vary in their attachment (however, they 
are not truly free as in Pluteus, and only rarely decurrent as in Clitopilus). In contrast to 
Nolanea and Leptonia, the stalk is typically fleshy, but there are numerous nondescript 
forms with a "somewhat fleshy" stalk, giving the "lumpers" (see p. 10) a good excuse to 
broaden the definition of Entoloma to include both N olanea and Leptonia. 
Because of their larger size Entolomas are much easier to see than Nolaneas and 
Leptonias-but they are just as difficult to differentiate, if not more so. Most species are a 
forgettable shade of brown, gray, dingy olive, or dull yellow, but a few feature the blue and 
violet hues so typical of Leptonia. 
Entolomas are almost exclusively terrestrial-a good means of distinguishing them from 
deer mushrooms (Pluteusand grow mostly in the woods. Some are probably 
mycorrhizal (in Europe several are associated exclusively with trees and shrubs of the rose 
family-an unusual habitat for mushrooms). In our area they are particularly common 
under hardwoods (oak, tanoak, madrone) in the late fall and winter, and are often most 
abundant when other mushrooms are rather scarce. 
Entolomas should not be eaten. Several species are quite poisonous-e.g., E. lividum 
and E. rhodopolium-and the few that are definitely known to be edible are not easy to 
recognize, with the possible exception of E. aborlivum, an eastern species that frequently 
produces aborted or misshapen fruiting bodies. 
Entoloma is a fairly large genus even in its strictest sense. Three representative species or 
species "complexes" are described here, but according to Entoloma-expert David Largent, 
several of our local species are endemic and undescribed. 
Key to Entoloma 
1. Cap red-brown to orange-brown, cinnamon, or pinkish (see Clitopilus& R hodocybe, p. 239) 
1. Not as above; cap blue, gray, black, grayish-brown, grayish-yellow, olive-brown, whitish, etc. 
(but may be dusted pinkish by spores) ........................................... 2 
2. Cap gray to grayish-brown and gills usually decurrent; "aborted" fruiting bodies often found 
(infected by mycelium of Armi//arie//a me//ea) that are whitish to pinkish-tan and bumpy on 
the outside, marbled within; common in eastern North America ........... E. abort;vum 
2. Not as above; gills typically not decurrent; "aborted" fruiting bodies absent ............. 3 
3. Cap and/ or stalk bluish-gray to steel-gray to dark blue, violet-tinged, indigo-blue, or black 
when fresh .................................................................. 4 
3. Not as above ......................................... _................ ... .... 6 
4. Only the stalk bluish or violet; cap brown to dark brown and smooth; stalk rather slender; found 
on wood or ground E. trachysporum var. purpureoviolaceum (see Leptonia carnea, p. 250) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap at least slightly viscid when moist; stalk (0.5) 1-3 cm thick; cap blue-gray to steel-gray to 
violet-gray to black; common ................................... E. madidum, p. 243 
5. Cap and/ or stalk deep indigo-blue; cap not viscid, stalk usually more slender than above; not 
common ................................... E. nitidum (see Leptonia carnea, p. 250) 
6. Odor nitrous or bleachlike when fresh (crush flesh if unsure) ... E. n;dorosum group, p. 244 
6. Odor mild or at least not as above ................................................ 7 
ENTOLOMA 
243 
7. Cap white or whitish when fresh ................................................. 8 
7. Cap not white ................................................................ 9 
8. Spores not angular; rare ...................................... (seeHebeloma. p.463) 
8. Spores angular under microscope; not uncommon .................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E. prunulo;des& E. speculum (see E. rhodopolium group, below) 
9. Gills tinged yellow when young; stalk 1-3 cm thick; mainly found in eastern North America 
. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. E. liv;dum(see E. rhodopoJium group, below) 
9. Not as above; widely distributed ................. E. rhodopo/;umgroup& others, below 
Entoloma madidum 
(Midnight Blue Entoloma) 
Color Plate 51 
CAP (3.5) 5-15 (20) cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane or remaining broadly 
umbonate, the margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface viscid to slightly lubricous when 
moist, smooth or wrinkled, often with a fibrillose or streaked appearance; blue-gray to 
nearly black to violet-gray or steel-gray, sometimes fading inage to fuscous or occasionally 
with ochraceous stains or paler areas. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor usually farinaceous. 
GILLS notched or adnexed or at times appearing free, close, white or tinged cap color, 
becoming pinkish or flesh-colored as the spores ripen. ST ALK4-13 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm 
thick, solid, firm, fleshy, fibrillose, equal or with a tapered base or often thicker in middle; 
upper portion blue-gray or colored like cap, base whitish to slightly yellowish (but occa- 
sionally white throughout). SPORE PRINT flesh-color to pinkish-cinnamon; spores 6.5- 
8.5 (10) x 6-8 microns, nearly round to broadly elliptical but angular (5-6 sided). 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed but 
especially common along the west coast in the fall and winter. In our area two slightly 
different forms occur-one with conifers (especially redwood), the other with hardwoods 
such as tanoak and madrone. The European version is said to grow in grass! 
EDIBILITY: Edible, with meaty flesh and a good flavor. However, many fleshy 
Entolomas are toxic, so be certain of your identification! 
COMMENTS: One of the few Entolomas that can be recognized easily in the field- 
the black to bluish-gray or violet-tinged cap, pinkish spores, notched or adnexed gills that 
are whitish when young, and firm, fleshy stem render it distinct. It has the aspect of a 
Russula, but is not as brittle and does not have white or yellow spores. It is much larger and 
fleshier than the small bluish-black Leptonias (L. parva, etc.) and is not nearly as purple 
as the blewit (Clitocybe nuda}. The viscid or lubricous cap (when moist) separates it from 
E. nitidum and Leptonia carnea, which are also more vividly colored. Tricholoma porten- 
tosum is quite similar, but has white spores and a white stem. 
Entoloma rhodopolium group 
CAP 3-12 (15) cm broad, convex or broadly umbonate becoming plane or slightly de- 
pressed; surface smooth, not viscid or only slightly so, gray to grayish-brown to yellowish- 
gray, usually paler as it dries; margin often wavy or splitting in age. Flesh firm, white; odor 
mild to slightly farinaceous, but not bleachlike. GILLS adnate or notched, whitish or 
tinged cap color, becoming pinkish as the spores ripen; fairly close to rather well-spaced. 
STALK 4-13 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, fleshy, equal or tapered below, dry, white or 
tinged gray. SPORE PRINT pinkish-salmon to deep flesh-color; spores 8-11 x 7-9 
microns, nearly round but angular. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters on ground in woods, mainly under 
hardwoods; widely distributed. In' California it is quite common in the fall and winter 
under alder, but has many look-alikes that occur with oak, tanoak, and madrone. 
244 
ENTOLOMATACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous-causing vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps that may 
require hospitalization! All fleshy Entolomas should be strictly avoided, although some 
are said to be edible-they are difficult to differentiate and not well known. 
COMMENTS: The above description will fit a number of medium-sized to large, showy 
woodland Entolomas with a smooth, grayish to yellowish or tan cap, fleshy stem, attached 
(usually notched) gills, and pinkish spores. They are the most common and conspicuous 
of our Entolomas (along with the E. nidorosum group) as well as the most dangerous. As 
a group they can be recognized by their color and Trich%ma-like stature (i.e., they are 
never as slender as the similarly-colored Nolaneas). Distinguishing between the various 
Entolomas within the group (as loosely defined here) is strictly a matter for specialists. 
The largest and most infamous of the lot, E. lividum, (also called E. sinuatum), has a tan 
to grayish or pallid cap that is 6-20 cm broad or more, pale yellowish gills when young, and 
a thick (1-3 cm) stalk; it is common in eastern North America, but has not yet been reported 
from California. Other species include: E. grayanum, a common fleshy eastern species; 
E. clypeatum, whose cap is grayish-brown to olive-buff and streaked with darker fibrils; 
E. prunuloides, with a large white viscid cap; and E. speculum, slender, with a dry white 
or whitish, often umbonate cap. The latter species occurs in California, but the others 
may not. (According to Ent%ma-expert David Largent, many of California's large, 
fleshy Entolomas are undescribed and probably endemic.) 
Entoloma nidorosum group (Nitrous Entoloma) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed or occasionally broadly umbo- 
nate; surface smooth, not viscid or slightly so when moist; olive-brown to brownish to 
grayish-brown or pale yellowish-brown when moist (but see comments), paler (grayish to 
grayish-yellow or even whitish) as it dries; margin often wavy in age. Flesh pallid; o<l;or 
distinctly nitrous (bleachlike) when fresh, but fading after sitting awhile; taste rather 
rancid-oily. GILLS white or pallid, becoming pinkish as the spores mature; usually 
adnexed or notched, sometimes adnate; fairly well-spaced to fairly close. STALK 4-12 
cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, more or less equal or narrowed at base, whitish or faintly yellow, 
fibrillose-striate, firm, fleshy, solid. SPORE PRINT pinkish-salmon to deep flesh-color; 
spores 7-9)( 6-8 microns, nearly round but angular. 
Ent%ma nidorosum group. The larger Entolomas are notoriously difficult to identify, but this 
species ..complex" has a distinctive bleachlike odor. Some are stouter than the specimens shown 
here, others are more slender. The gills are usually adnexed or notched. 
" 
ENTOLOMA 
245 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious (sometimes tufted) on ground in woods, 
widely distributed. Common in our area under hardwoods in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. The very similar E.ferruginans(see comments) is apparently 
edible, as it has been mistaken inexplicably (but harmlessly) for the blewit (Clitocybe 
nuda), in spite of its unpleasant taste and unpurple color. Several similar Entolomas are 
quite poisonous, however (see the E. rhodopolium group). 
COMMENTS: The bleachlike odor of fresh specimens is usually quite pronounced, and 
serves to separate this species complex from other gray to brown, fleshy Entolomas. The 
stature of E. nidorosum is typically rather erect and slender, but the stalk is distinctly 
fleshy, in contrast to species of No/anea. Other Entolomas with a bleachlike odor include: 
E. pernitrosum, with a persistem odor (i.e., one that doesn't fade); and E. ferrug;nans, 
which is one of the commonest gilled mushrooms in the live oak woodlands of southern 
California, and the most common Em%ma there(it also occurs in our area and probably 
throughout the state). It differs from E. nidorosum in its more variable cap color (hazel 
to buff, pale yellow, olive-brown, dark brown, or nearly black), thicker stalk (up to 2.5 or 
even 3 cm thick) which is often tinged with the cap color, and slightly larger spores. Whether 
it is indeed a distinct species endemic to California, or merely a robust version of E. nido- 
rosum, is for the Em%ma-experts to decide. 
NOLANEA 
Smallish, mostly sa prophytic, terrestrial mushrooms. CAP usually smooth, often silky when dry, 
typically conical. bell-shaped, or distinctly umbonate, at least when young, but sometimes convex. 
GILLS typically attached (adnate to adnexed or sometimes decurrent), but sometimes appearing 
free. STALK typically slender and fragile or cartilaginous; usually hollow and easily splitting; 
central. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT pinkish to flesh-colored to salmon- or 
cinnamon-pinkish. Spores angular (sometimes shaped like jacks or ice cubes!), not amyloid. 
THESE are small, drab, gray to brownish mushrooms with a thin, cartilaginous or fragile 
stem and a conical to bell-shaped or distinctly umbonate ("nippled") cap. The shape and 
stature of the fruiting body are reminiscent of the white-spored genus Mycena, but the 
spore color, of course, is pinkish. The cap is convex to plane in a few species, but never 
(or only rarely) umbilicate as in Leptonia. Em%ma differs by its fleshy stem, but this is a 
somewhat ambiguous character, and the two. genera intergrade. 
No/anea species are differentiated largely on microscopic characteristics such as the 
presence or absence of cystidia (sterile cells) on the edges of the gills. They are especially 
common under conifers, but also occur with hardwoods and in lawns and pastures. 
Most are of unknown edibility but some, such as N. verna, are said to be poisonous. 
Three widely distributed species are described here. They are similar to one another in 
appearance but differ in habitat and season. Two colorful and distinctive eastern species 
are also included in the key, plus the infrequently encountered genus Eccilia. 
Key to N olanea 
I. Odor sweet, like a candy store or bubble gum (break open the cap if unsure) ...... _ . . . .. 2 
I. Odor mild or distinctive, but not as above ......................................... 3 
2. Stalk(and usually the cap) yellowish ............. N. ;cterina(see N. verna group, p. 247) 
2. Cap and stalk more or less grayish-brown ... .N.JructuJragrans(see N. verna group, p. 247) 
3. Cap pink to yellow or orange and conical or bell-shaped ( or if expanding in age then retaining 
a distinct umbo); found in eastern North America ... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4 
3. Not as above; cap not usually brightly colored ..................................... 5 
4. Cap yellow to yellow-orange ............................................ N. murra;; 
4. Cap more or less salmon-colored ....................................... N. sa/monea 
246 
ENTOLOMA T ACEAE 
5. Stalk minutely velvety; cap reddish-brown to blackish (at least at center); odor usually strong, 
like cucumber or fish ...... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
5. Not as above ................................................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6 
6. Fruiting mainly in the spring, especially in areas with snowfall ...... N. verna group. p. 247 
6. Not as above ................................................................ 7 
7. Usually growing in grass or open areas; odor of crushed flesh farinaceous (like raw meal or 
cucumber) ............................................. N. sericea & others, below 
7. Usually growing in woods or under trees; odor mild or various, sometimes farinaceous ... 8 
8. Cap conical to bell-shaped, or if expanding somewhat then usually retaining a distinct umbo 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . N. staurospora & others (see N. sericea. below & N. verna group, p. 247) 
8. Cap broadly conical to convex or plane ........................................... 9 
9. Gills decurrent ........................................................... Eccilia 
9. Gills not decurrent ....................................... N. stricta& others, below 
Nolanea str;cta (Strict Nolanea) 
CAP 2.5-7 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped expanding to broadly convex or even plane, 
but usually with a distinct, sometimes pointed umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous, 
watery cinnamon to grayish-brown when moist, paler and often somewhat streaked when 
dry. Flesh thin, fragile, odor mild. GILLS broad, adnate to deeply notched, adnexed, or 
free; pallid becoming flesh-colored in age, fairly close. STALK 5-15 cm long, 2-5 (10) mm 
thick, typically long and straight (strict), hollow, fragile, splitting easily, equal or tapered 
slightly upward, longitudinally striate; whitish or colored like cap (but usually paler); base 
whitish and often downy. SPORE PRINT salmon-pink or pinkish-cinnamon; spores 
9-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical but angular. Cystidia absent on gill edges. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or very rotten wood, under 
both hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed. I have found it-or a very similar 
species-in our area in the late fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-to be avoided. 
COMMENTS: Also known as R hodophy//us str;ct;or and Ent%ma str;ct;us, this is one 
of a number of attractive but difficult-to-identify, pinkish-spored, woodland mushrooms 
with a long, straight ("strict"), slender stalk that splits or breaks easily, and a gray to brown 
cap. Similar species include: N. h;rt;pes, with a grayish-brown cap, farinaceous odor, and 
cystidia on the gill edges; and Lepton;ajubata, with a convex to plane or uplifted, minutely 
hairy or velvety cap. For smaller species with a conical or "nippled" cap, see comments 
under N. verna. 
Nolanea ser;cea (Silky Nolanea) 
CAP 2-4 (6.5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with a slight umbo; surface smooth 
but not viscid, hygrophanous: dark brown (umber) to dark olive-brown to grayish-brown 
or hazel-brown when moist, paler or grayer with a silky, often streaked appearance when 
dry. Flesh thin, watery; odor usually farinaceous, at least when crushed. GILLS adnate to 
adnexed, notched, or nearly free, pallid to grayish or tinged cap color, then dusted pinkish 
with spores. STALK 2.5-5 (10) cm long, (2) 3-8 mm thick, equal or with a slightly enlarged 
base, often short, fragile, longitudinally fibrillose-striate and silky when dry; grayish- 
brown or colored like cap, the base whitish. SPORE PRINT deep salmon-pinkish or 
cinnamon-pinkish; spores 8-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical but angular-nodulose. Cystidia 
absent on gill edges. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in pastures, on lawns or hillsides, in waste places, 
sometimes also in woods or under willows; widely distributed and common in our area 
from the fall through early spring. Unlike many mushrooms, it tends to fruit during rainy 
spells rather than following them. 
- 
. 
? 
;,.. 
._  
"' 
\,. 
'\' ' 
\ " ' 
.\ 
. >.. 
" 
. 
" 
No/anea sericea is common in pastures and other grassy places and occasionally turns up in the 
woods as well. The cap usually has a silky sheen in dry weather. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Only when this species is found in grassy places can the beginner hope to 
distinguish it from the throngs of other brown to grayish Nolaneas, Entolomas, and 
Leptonias. Be sure to look for the characteristic silky sheen that develops indry weather or 
as the cap loses moisture. The cap is not normally conical or bell-shaped as in many N ola- 
neas (see N. verna), but may have a slight umbo (the very similar N. hirtipes has a more 
prominent umbo or "nipple" and features cystidia on the gill edges). The pinkish spores and 
gray-brown to brown color help separate N. sericea from our other common grass- 
inhabiting mushrooms. Other species: N. edulis is a very similar but smaller species that is 
common in open places in southern California; N. staurospora grows in grassy as well as 
shaded or wooded areas and has a conical to bell..:-shaped cap that may become convex or 
umbonate as it matures, and ranges in color from dark brown to date-brown, 
grayish-cinnamon, or grayish-brown, but fades as it dries to tan or paler. Furthermore, it 
has "cruciate-nodulose" spores (shaped like stars orjacks). I mention this feature because it 
is impossible to appreciate the relief they (the spores) provide unless you've spent many 
long, tedious hours scrutinizing the round to elliptical spores sported by the overwhelming 
majority of fleshy fungi. Apart from the spores, however, it is just another "LBM" that is 
easily confused with dozens of other "LBM's." Enough said. 
N olanea verna group (S pringtime N olanea) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, often with a pointed umbo or "nipple," or 
expanding sometimes to convex or plane (but often retaining the umbo); surface dry, 
usually smooth, finely fibrillose and often silky or glossy; color variable: dark to light 
brown, yellow-brown, olive-brown, tan, grayish, or yellowish. Flesh thin, odor mild. 
GILLS fairly close, adnate to adnexed but often seceding, pale grayish or buff or colored 
like cap, becoming salmon or reddish as spores mature. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-7 (10) 
mm thick, equal, straight, often flattened or twisted-striate, hollow, fragile and easily 
splitting; pallid or more often colored like the ca p ( or paler). SPORE PRINT rosy-salmon 
to flesh-colored; spores 8-] ] )( 7-8 microns, elliptical but angular. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered or in groups on ground in woods, mainly under conifers; 
widely distributed and very common in the spring and early summer shortly after the snow 
melts (about the same time as morels!). I have seen large fruitings in the Cascades and 
Sierra Nevada, but have not yet found it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be poisonous, causing moderate to severe gastrointestinal distress. 
247 
, . 
''\ 
" 
' 
I 
 
:..... 
.;J. 
.. 
. 
;r-- 
No/anea verna group is common during the spring, especially under mountain conifers (often when 
the morels are out). Note the conical cap when young. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Entoloma vernum, this species or species "complex" has 
many look-alikes in the genus Nolanea; but fruits almost exclusively in the spring. 
The pinkish spores distinguish it from Myeena, and the slender, cartilaginous stem 
separates it from Enroloma. The yellowish form that is common in the Sierra Nevada may 
actually beN. cuneata(according to David Largent). Similar Nolaneas include: N. holo- 
coniota, also common in western mountains, with a brown to yellow-brown ca p and pale 
yellow to pale orangish stalk that is minutely powdered above; theN. mammosa-N. papil- 
lata group, with a small (1-4 cm) nippled, bell-shaped to conical cap and long thin stalk, 
usually fruiting in the late summer, fall, or winter; andN. staurospora, with star-shaped 
spores (see comments under N. serieea). Also worth mentioning are two small species that 
smell like a candy store or "tooty-fruity gum" (Largent): N.fructufragrans, with a more 
or less grayish-brown cap and stalk; andN. icterina, with a yellowish to olive-yellow cap 
and stalk and adnexed to slightly decurrent gills. None of these are worth eating. 
LEPTONIA & Allies 
Small to medium-sized, saprophytic mushrooms growing on ground or sometimes on wood. CAP 
typically convex to plane. depressed. or umbilicate; oftenfibrilloseor with small scales. and often 
blue, black, or violet. GILLS typically attached (adnexed to adnate or slightly decurrent), but 
sometimes appearing free. STALK typically slender and fragile or cartilaginous, but sometimes 
fleshy; smooth or scaly; often blue to gray, black, or violet. SPORE PRINT pinkish to rosy-pinkish. 
flesh-colored. pinkish-cinnamon, etc. Spores angular, not amyloid. 
IN stature Leptonia corresponds roughly to the white-spored genera Collybia and 
Omphalina. The cap is typically convex to plane or umbilicate, rather than conical as in 
Nolanea, and the stalk-with a few exceptions-is thin and fragile rather than fleshy as in 
Enroloma. Leptonias can sometimes be recognized by their color alone: many species are 
breathtakingly blue, vividly violet, or beautifully black, and some, such as L. earnea, have 
an iridescent quality that makes them among the most striking of all mushrooms. Others, 
however, are gray or brownish like umpteen Entoloma and Nolanea species. 
Leptonias fruit throughout the mushroom season, but tend to be most abundant when 
or where other mushrooms are scarce. Fairly few fleshy fungi, for instance, are fond of 
fruiting under fern fronds in red wood duff, but that is precisely the niche in which Leptonia 
thrives in California. In the Pacific Northwest, on the other hand, it is frequent under 
alder and western red cedar (also rather unfruitful foraging grounds for fleshy fungi), and 
248 
LEPTONIA & ALLIES 
249 
in England and Scotland it is said to favor heaths. Most of the species are terrestrial; a few 
grow on rotten wood, but can be separated from small species of Pluteus by their attached, 
more widely spaced gills. 
Though Leptonias are among our most beautiful mushrooms, little is known of their 
edibility. David Largent recognizes over 100 species in his monograph on Leptonia. but 
even the distinctively colored ones are rather difficult to identify. A mere four species 
are described here, plus one species of A Iboleptonia, a small genus of whitish mushrooms 
often included in Leptonia. 
Key to Leptonia& Allies 
I. Cap and/ or stalk blue, blue-black, blue-gray, steel-gray, violet, or black, at least when young 
and fresh .................................................................... 2 
l. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
2. Cap smooth(not scaly!) and brown to dark brown; stalk blue or violet-blue and often iridescent, 
usually at least 4-5 mmthick ................................. (seeEntoloma, p.242) 
2. Not with above features ........................................................ 3 
3. Growing on wood; cap usually fibrillose-scaly; rare L. cyanea & others (see L. carnea. p. 250) 
3. Growing on ground and/ or cap smooth. . . . . . " ...................... .. ... ...... .. 4 
4. Stalk slender, hollow, and either fragile or cartilaginous, usually 1-5 mm thick at apex .... 5 
4. Stalk usually 5 mm thick or more ............................................... II 
5. Fresh stalk fibrillose-scaly and iridescent or metallic .. L. occidentalis(see L. carnea. p. 250) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Gills pallid or grayish with distinctly darker (blue-gray to black) edges ................... 
.. . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . . . . . .. L. seTTulata (see L. parva. p. 251) 
6. Not as above (but gills may be entirely blue-gray) ................................... 7 
7. Cap and/ or stalk with distinct violet or purple tints when fresh ....................... 8 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
8. Gills pale yellow when young ............... L. zanthophylla (see L. nigrovio/acea. p. 250) 
8. Not as above ...................................... L. nigToviolacea & others, p. 250 
9. Cap bluish-black to black when fresh (but may fade to brownish or gray in age) ........ 10 
9. Cap yellow-brown to reddish-brown to grayish-brown when fresh L. gTacilipes& others, p.252 
10. Gills blue-gray to blue.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. nigTa(see L. parva. p. 251) 
10. Gills whitish or tinged gray ................................. L. paTva & others, p. 251 
II. Cap and stalk deep indigo-blue (or stalk apex sometimes with violet tints); known only from 
the west coast. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L: carnea, p.250 
II. Cap grayish-brown to deep violet; stalk usually paler; found mainly in eastern North America 
.......................................... L.poTphYTophaea(=Entoloma violaceum} 
12. Fruiting body entirely white when fresh (but may develop yellowish, ochraceous, or pinkish 
tones in age) .................................. A Iboleptonia seTicelia & others, p. 252 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Gills whitish with brown to gray-brown edges L.JuligineomaTginata (see L. graci/ipes. p.252) 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
14. Edges of gills pink; cap rose-tinted when fresh; rare ........................... L. Tosea 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Stalk yellow-green, usually staining blue-green when bruised; cap greenish-yellow to yellow- 
brown to olive-brown; rare ............................................. L. incana 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Stalk white; cap umbilicate in age .................. L. exalbida(see L. graci/ipes. p. 252) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Gills decurrent ........................................................... Eccilia 
17. Gills adnexed to adnate or with a very slight decurrent tooth ........................ 18 
18. Cap striate and usually umbilicate in age .......... L. undulatella(see L. graci/ipes. p. 252) 
18. Not as above; cap not umbilicate................................. (seeNolanea, p.245) 
250 
ENTOLOMA T ACEAE 
Lepton;a earnea (Indigo Leptonia) Color Plate 52 
CAP 2.5-7 em broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, the margin sometimes 
uplifted in old age; surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, deep indigo-blue, at 
times almost iridescent, scarcely fading. Flesh yellowish or whitish, but tinged violet under 
the cuticle; odor typically farinaceous. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, pallid or 
bluish-gray, slowly becoming pinkish as spores mature. STALK 5-10 em long, 0.5-1 (1.5) 
em thick, equal or thicker below, dry, densely fibrillose or minutely scaly, deep indigo-blue, 
the apex sometimes violet-tinted; base often whitish, or in age yellow-orange within. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish; spores 9-13 x 6.5-10.5 microns, elliptical but angular. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in woods; known only from California, and ap- 
parently rare. I have found it several times near or under redwood in late fall and winter, 
during otherwise uneventful mushroom hunts. Its deep color camouflages it well. 
EDIBILITY: Undetermined, but too rare to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The stunning indigo-blue color and fibrillose-scaly cap and stem render 
this breathtakingly beautiful mushroom distinct (the color plate does not do it justice). Its 
rareness makes it all the more pleasurable to find. Its only rival for intensity of color is 
Cortinarius vio/aceus, which has rust-brown spores and is deep violet. The stem is thicker 
than that ofthe numerous blue-black or violet-black Leptonias(see L. parva and L. nigro- 
vio/acea), but thinner than that of Ent%ma madidum. The gills are not purple as in the 
blewit (C/itocybe nuda) and the stalk and cap are much scalier. There are several similarly 
colored species, including: Ento!oma nitidum, with a smoother (less scaly) cap and stalk 
and smaller spores (7-9 microns long), not common; Entoloma traehysporum var. 
purpureoviolaeeum, with a smooth dark brownish cap and metallic blue stalk; L. 
oeeidentalis var. metalliea, smaller, with an iridescent or metallic blue, densely scaly- 
fibrillose stalk (up to 5 mm thick at apex), mild to slightly fragrant odor, and white to blue- 
gray flesh, also not common; and three rare wood-inhabiting species with fibrillose-scaly 
stalks: L. eyaneonita, bluish-black, with an iridescent stalk; and L. eyanea and L. 
violaeeonigra, both violet-tinted, the former with pallid gills and the latter with bluish- or 
violet-tinged gills when young. 
Lepton;a n;grov;olaeea (Violet-Black Leptonia) 
CAP 1-3.5 em broad, convex or obscurely umbonate becoming plane to slightly umbili- 
cate; surface dry, fibrillose, usually with small scales at least at the center; entirely violet- 
black or deep violet, or sometimes bluish-black or fading to violet-gray. Flesh thin, whitish 
or tinged violet. GILLS fairly well-spaced, white or pale buff or sometimes tinged gray, 
becoming pinkish in age as spores mature; attachment variable but usually adnexed to 
adnate. STALK 3-8 em long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapered slightly, smooth or fibrillose, 
often with a few small scales, violet-black to violet-gray, the extreme apex usually pallid; 
hollow; usually with white mycelial down at base. SPORE PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores 
9.5-11.5 (13) x 7-8.5 microns, elliptical but angular. Cystidia absent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts on ground in woods; widely dis- 
tributed. In our area it is fairly common in the late fall and winter under redwood, but is 
not restricted to that habitat. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several dainty, violet-tinged Leptonias. They are not as 
numerous as the blue-black models (see L. parva), but are just as attractive. L. occidenta/is 
var. metal/ica (see L. carnea) is similar but has a more iridescent. densely fibrillose-scaly 
stalk. Other species which characteristically exhibit violet tints include: L. eonvexa, whose 
LEPTONIA 
251 
cap has erect scales on a bluish-gray, reddish-brown, or grayish-brown background; 
L. zanthophylla. with pale yellow gills when young; andL. d;veTsa. whose cap is frequently 
umbilicate in age and has purple-blue scales on a paler background, and whose gills are 
often tinged bluish-gray. For violet-tinted, wood-inhabiting species, see comments under 
L. carnea. 
Lepton;a parva (Blue-Black Leptonia) 
CAP 0.7-4 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane to shallowly depressed or umbili- 
cate; surface dry, finely fibrillose when young, often breaking up into small scales in age; 
blue-black to black when fresh, often somewhat paler or grayer in age; margin often finely 
striate or fibrillose-striate. Flesh thin, white or tinged cap color. GILLS very slightly 
decurrent to adnate or adnexed, but sometimes seceding; whitish or with a slight tinge of 
blue-gray, becoming pinkish in old age from spores. STALK 1.5-8 cm long, 2-4 (7) mm 
thick, more or less equal, smooth or in one form with minute bluish-black scales over 
upper half; blackish-blue to bluish-gray, often becoming paler gray in age; base often with 
whitish mycelial down. SPORE PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores 8-12 )( 6-8 microns, elliptical 
but angular. Cystidia typically absent on gill edges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in small groups in forest .humus, widely distributed. This species 
and its numerous look-alikes (see below) are especially common in coastal California in 
redwood duff (often under ferns), and in the Pacific Northwest under western red cedar. 
They occur throughout the mushroom season in our area, but are easily overlooked 
because of their dark color. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too small to be of value. 
COMMENTS: There are a number of petite blue to black or violet-tinted Leptonias that 
will more or less fit the above description (David Largent recognizes over 100 Leptonia 
species in his monograph). They are quite diffiCult to distinguish in the field, but you 
needn't know their exact identities to appreciate their bea uty. Ent%ma madidum. E. niti- 
dum. and Leptonia carnea are similar in color but are larger and have thicker, fleshier 
stems. L. parva is characterized by its whitish gills in youth and nearly smooth cap that 
becomes minutely scaly (especially toward the center) in age. Some of its more common or 
distinctive cousins include: L. decolorans, very similar and common, gills often bluish- 
gray with cystidia on their edges; L. corv;na. also similar and common, but with a cap that 
fades to brown in age, except at the center; L. rectangula, with a black cap that is nearly 
Left: Lepton;a n;grov;o/acea. a dainty violet-tinged species. Right: Lepton;a parva, a common black 
or steel-gray species. 
'- 
.... 
''- \ 
)\\' . 
f \:---... 
,. 
. 
. 
/>. 
"" 
--..t 
.", 
...... - 
., 
. 
Left Leplonia parva, or a very similar species. Right Gill detail in LeplOnia serrulala, showing the 
finely scalloped black edges characteristic of that species. 
rectangular in profile when young and deeply depressed (but not umbilicate) in age, and 
gray gills; L. nigra, a beautiful species with evenly blue-gray gills and minutely hairy blue- 
black cap that is convex to plane but never umbilicate, fairly common; L. seTTulata, gills 
white to gray with dark blue to blue-black, minutely serrated edges (see above photo- 
graph), common and widely distributed; and L. cupressa, cap blackish but gills and 
stalk brownish-gray, found mainly under <;ypress, not common. All of these are typically 
terrestrial. For similar wood-inhabiting species or those with iridescent, fibrillose-scaly 
stalks, see comments under L. carnea, and for small terrestrial species with a distinct violet 
tinge, see L. nigroviolacea. 
Lepton;a grac;lipes 
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex becoming plane to shallowly depressed or umbilicate; sur- 
face dry, minutely scaly toward the center, the margin finely fibrillose or smooth; dark 
yellow-brown to grayish-brown or dark brown, often fading in age to paler brown or even 
orange-brown, the center usually darker. Flesh thin, fragile, grayish- or olive-tinted. 
GILLS adnexed to adnate or with a slight decurrent tooth, white or pallid when young, 
becoming pinkish in age from maturing spores, or sometimes brownish. ST ALK 2-8 cm 
long, 1-5 mm thick, equal, often flattened or grooved, smooth, dark blue-gray fading to 
blue-gray or gray in age. SPORE PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores 8-12 )( 6.5-8 microns, 
elli ptical-angular. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in small groups in humus under ferns, alder, and conifers; widely 
distributed. I have found it several times in our area under redwood, in the fall and winter, 
when few other mushrooms were out and about. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The slender blue-gray stalk and yellow-brown to grayish-brown cap 
characterize this rather forgettable species. Its stature is similar to that of L. parva, but the 
cap is never bluish-black. Other species: L. asprella is similar, but has grayer gills and a 
grayer cap; L. vinaceobrunnea has a blue-gray stalk and reddish-brown to vinaceous- 
brown cap; L.Juligineo-marginata has a violet-brown to dark reddish-brown to grayish- 
brown cap and stalk, but its gills are white with dark reddish-brown to grayish-brown 
edges; L. undulatella is brown to yellow-brown with a striate cap; and L. exalbida has an 
umbilicate, dark yellow-brown cap and white stalk. 
A lbolepton;a ser;cella (Little White Leptonia) 
CAP 1-3 (5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth, 
dry, often silky or finely fibrillose; pure white to translucent white or tinged yellow (espe- 
cially in age), or sometimes even pinkish. Flesh very thin, whitish, fragile. GILLSadnate 
252 
.  
Alboleptonia sericella is a nondescript fragile whitish mushroom with pinkish gills at maturity. 
to slightly decurrent or notched, well-spaced, white, becoming rosy-pinkish in age. 
STALK 1.5-5 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, equal, smooth, fragile, white or discoloring like the 
cap. SPORE PRINT bright flesh-color; spores 9-13 )( 6-8 microns, elliptical but angular 
(nodulose). 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in damp soil in woods, thickets, along trails, etc.; 
widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Lepton;a ser;cella and R hodophyllus ser;cellus, this is the 
only common small white mushroom with pinkish spores, a thin stem, and attached gills. 
Its fragility makes it difficult to get specimens home in one piece. Camarophyllus species 
and Inocybe geophylla are somewhat similar, but have white and brown spores, 
respectively. Other species: A. adnatifolia is pure white with slightly smaller spores; A. 
ochracea ages or bruises ochraceous. 
PLUTEACEAE 
101 
.;.  
@ spores 
FORMERLY called the Volvariaceae, these are small to medium-sized mushrooms with 
a central stem, free gills at maturity, and smooth, pinkish to sordid reddish spores. In 
the other major pinkish-spored family, the Entolomataceae, the gills are usually attached 
to the stem and the spores are angular or longitudinally ridged under the microscope. 
There are two principal genera in the Pluteaceae: Volvariella has a vol va; Pluteus does 
not. A third genus, Chamaeota, is extremely rare and not treated in this book. It lacks a 
volva, but has a partial veil that usually forms an annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
Because of the free gills and volva in Volvariella, the Pluteaceae are thought to be related 
to the white-spored Amanitaceae. Besides the disparity in spore color, however, there is 
a fundamental anatomical difference: the gill tissue is convergent in the Pluteaceae, 
divergent in the Amanitas (see p. 19). 
Key to the Pluteaceae 
I. Universal veil and volva absent .................................................. 2 
I. Universal veil present, typically forming a volva (sack) at base of stalk ................. 4 
2. Partial veil present, usually forming an annulus (ring) on the stalk .......... _ . . . . . . . . .. 3 
2. Veil and annulus absent ............................................. Pluteus, p. 254 
3. Spore print white or with only a slight pinkish tinge ...... _ . . . . .. (see Lepiotaceae, p. 293) 
3. Spore print distinctly pinkish or deep flesh-color; mainly tropical; rare ........ Chamaeota 
253 
254 
PLUTEACEAE 
4. Spore print pale, with only a slight pinkish tinge; volva whitish ...... (see Amanita, p. 263) 
4. S pore print distinctly pinkish to reddish-cinnamon; volva variously colored J1 olvariella, p.258 
PLUTEUS 
Small to medium-sized, wood-inhabiting mushrooms. CAP convex to plane. Flesh usually soft. 
GILLS typically close or crowded andfree (at least at maturity), usually pinkish in old age. ST ALK 
typically central and cleanly separable from the cap. VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT 
flesh-colored to deep pinkish. pinkish-cinnamon. or sordid reddish. Spores smooth, usually 
elliptical. Gill tissue convergent. 
THESE pinkish-spored mushrooms have a central stalk and free, close gills and grow 
almost exclusively on wood. The wood, however, may be buried or decomposed, making 
the mushrooms appear terrestrial. They are most often confused with the pinkish, angular- 
spored Entolomataceae, which are usually terrestrial with gills attached to the stem. 
Pluteus is frequently encountered but rarely abundant. Most species have soft flesh and 
decay rapidly. However, the larger types such as P. pelasalus and P. cervinus are good 
edibles when fresh and firm. P. salicinus and P. cyanopus may contain traces of psilocybin 
and/ or psilocin; the edibility of many of the smaller species is unknown. 
It is a fairly sizable genus, with over 50 species in North America and more than 20 in 
California. As they are segregated primarily on microscopic features such as the structure 
of the cap cuticle and the shape of sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills, only five species are 
described here. 
Key to Pluteus 
1. Cap red to orange, fading to yellow .......... P. aurantiorugosus(see P. /wescens. p.257) 
1. Not as above (cap may be yellow but never red or orange) ............................ 2 
2. Stalk yellow .................................................................. 3 
2. Stalk not yellow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . ... . .. 5 
3. Cap velvety or granulose; stalk white or pinkish when young, yellowish only in age ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. JlavoJuligineus, p. 258 
3. Not as above; stalk yellow even when young ....................................... 4 
4. Cap brown or olive-brown ....................................... P. lutescens, p. 257 
4. Cap yellow or ochre ........................... P. admirabilis(see P. /wescens. p.257) 
5. Cap white ........................................ P. pellitus (see P. cervinus. p. 255) 
5. Cap not white (but may have colored fibrils or scales on a whitish background) .......... 6 
6. Gill edges dark brown to nearly black; usually found on conifers ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. atromarginatus(see P. cervinus. p.255) 
6. Not as above; gill edges same color as gills or paler (whitish, pinkish, etc.) .............. 7 
7. Base of stalk blue- or greenish-stained in age or when bruised . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
................................ P. salicinus&P. cyanopus(seeP./ongislrialus. p.257) 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Cap plushlike, velvety, or granulose but not conspicuously striate ....................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. JlavoJuligineus & others, p. 258 
8. Cap not velvety or granulose, or if so, then also conspicuously striate .................. 9 
9. Cap 3-12 cm broad or more, not striate; stalk 4 mm thick or more .................... 10 
9. Cap 5 cm broad or less, sometimes striate; stalk 5 mm thick or less ................... 11 
10. Cap whitish or pallid with brownish fibrils or scales; often growing in clusters (and often 
appearing terrestrial) .......................................... P. petasatus, p. 255 
10. Cap dark brown to pale brown, grayish-brown, etc., sometimes with a fibrillose-streaked 
appearance ............................................ P. cervinus& others, p. 255 
II. Cap yellow or yellowish ........................... P. leoninus(see P. /ulescens. p.257) 
11. Cap not yellow ................................. P. longistriatus & many others, p. 257 
. 
'lit" 
,. 
PJuleus pelosolus is a robust species with small scales or fibrils on the cap. It often grows in clusters, 
and like other species of PJUleus, has free crowded gills. 
Pluteus petasatus 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex, or becoming broadly umbonate to plane in age; surface 
usually not viscid, whitish with a brownish to grayish center or with darker (brown to 
grayish-brown) fibrils or scales; margin usually whitish. Flesh fairly thick and firm, white; 
odor mild or radishlike. G ILLS crowded, broad, free at least in age, whitish for a long time, 
then eventually pinkish. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.7-3 cm thick, equal or swollen above orin 
the middle; firm, whitish or discoloring below in age; sometimes streaked with fibrils. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Cystidia on faces of gills with long necks and "horns." 
HABIT A T: Gregarious or clustered on sawdust or wood chips in gardens, along roads, 
etc. (often appearing terrestrial); widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area 
during the mushroom season and sometimes even fruits in the summer. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very good-the best ofthe genus for the table. It is much firmer 
and meatier than the better known P. cervinus. 
COMMENTS: The robust stature, pale cap with darker fibrils or scales (or a darker 
center), and tendency to grow in clusters distinguish this species from P. cervinus. Because 
the gills remain white for so long it is liable to be mistaken for a white-spored mushroom, 
but the free crowded gills and absence of a veil point to Pluteus. P. magnus (see P. cer- 
vinus) can also be robust, but has a dark brown to nearly black cap. 
Pluteus cerv;nus (Deer Mushroom; Fawn Mushroom) 
CAP 3-12(15) cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly convex to broadly umbonate 
or plane; surface smooth or radially streaked with fibrils, slightly viscid when moist and 
often somewhat wrinkled when young; dark brown to pale brown to grayish-brown or 
dingy fawn, the margin sometimes paler. Flesh soft, white; odor usually radishlike. GILLS 
close or crowded, broad, soft, white becoming pinkish, finally dingy reddish or flesh- 
colored; free at maturity. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2 (2.5) cm thick, equal or thicker at 
base, dry, white or with grayish to brownish longitudinal fibrils. SPORE PRINT flesh- 
colored to pinkish-brown; spores 5-8 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on faces of 
gills with long necks and 2-4 "horns." 
255 
i# 
 
'- 
 " 
" 
Pluleus cervinus, often called the deer mushroom, is a common species with a brown cap and free 
crowded gills that turn pinkish in old age. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on decaying wood, debris, sawdust piles, or humus rich 
in lignin; widely distributed and common. In our area it usually appears with Pleurotus 
oSlreatus after the very first fall rains, then continues to fruit sporadically through the 
remainder of the mushroom season. It is partial to (but not restricted to) hardwoods, 
but P. alromarginatus (see comments) is Cbmmon in our area on conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good when fresh and firm, but the flaccid or waterlogged 
specimens one usually finds are apt to be insipid. 
COMMENTS: Also known as P. atricapi//us, the deer mushroom is our most common 
and conspicuous Pluteus. It is rather nondescript, but can be safely identified by its brown 
cap, pinkish spores, close free gills, absence of a veil, and growth on wood. The cap color 
is quite variable, but typically some shade of brown. Special care should be taken not to 
confuse it with poisonous Emoloma species, which typically have attached ( often notched) 
gills and grow on the ground. P. cervinus, however, may appear terrestrial and have gills 
which are slightly attached when young, so it's a good precaution to eat only those that 
are clearly growing on wood. There are several similar Pluteus species, all apparently 
edible, including: P. magnus, more robust (stalk 1-3 cm thick) and with a dark, frequently 
wrinkled cap, often growing in clusters on sawdust piles, etc.;P. atromarginatus, common 
throughout much of the West on wood and debris of conifers, with a brown to dark brown 
cap and dark brown to black gill edges (see photograph!); and P. pe//itus, which has a 
white cap (sometimes brown at center) and grows on dead hardwoods. The latter looks 
like a destroying angel (Amanita ocreala, A. virosa, etc.) from a distance, but lacks a volva 
and has pinkish gills in age (and pinkish spores). It occurs in our area, but is rare. 
Gill detail in Pluteus alromarginalus. This species resembles P. cervinus, but has dark-edged gills, 
as shown here. 
,_.......""" .... 
........""..:. ..  "'c,',- :..... . . 
..-. 
\\  
 
r 
Left: P/uleus /ulescens, a yellow-stemmed species. Right: P/uleus /ong;slr;arus, one of several 
small and nondescript, infrequentlyncountered species. 
Pluteus lutescens 
(Yellow-Stemmed Pluteus) 
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface sometimes 
wrinkled at the center, not viscid, dark brown to olive-brown to yellowish-brown or 
yellowish-olive. Flesh thin, white or pale yellow; odor mild. GILLS free at maturity, fairly 
close, broad, whitish to pale yellow, but finally pinkish from ripening spores. ST ALK 2-7 
cm long, 2-6 mm thick, more or less equal, straight or curved, fragile; pale yellow, the base 
usually brighter yellow. SPORE PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7 x 5 
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on faces of gills club-shaped to flask-shaped. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on rotting hardwood logs, sticks, and debris; 
widely distributed. Occasional in our area in the late fall and winter, especially on dead oak. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but too small and infrequent to bother with. 
COMMENTS: A fragile but beautiful Pluteus, easily identified by its yellow stem and 
brownish to olive cap plus the free gills and pinkishspores.P. nanusvar.lutescensisa passe 
pseudonym. Other colorful species include: P. admirabilis, very similar but with a yellow to 
ochre cap and yellow stalk, especially common in eastern North America; P. leoninus, 
similar to P. admirabilis, but with a white stalk when young; and P. aurantiorugosus 
(=P. coccineus), a beautiful but rare species with a bright red to orange-red cap that fades 
to bright yellow as it ages, plus a white to yellow or orange-yellow stalk. 
Pluteus longistriatus (Pleated Pluteus) 
AP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex to plane or with a slightly depressed center; surface sometimes 
minutely scaly or granulose, at least at the center, not viscid; gray to brownish-gray, 
conspicuously striate in age. Flesh very thin, soft, pallid; odor mild. GILLS close, soft, 
whitish becoming pinkish in age; free at maturity. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick, 
finely fibrillose-striate, pallid or tinged cap color, equal or with an enlarged base, straight 
or curved, hollow. SPORE PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7.5 x 5-5.5 
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on gills club-shaped or flask-shaped. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on decaying branches and sticks of 
hardwoods; widely distributed but not common. I have found it several times in our area 
on oak debris, and also on wet wood in a bathroom! 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
257 
258 
PLUTEACEAE 
COMMENTS: This is one of many small, nondescript P/uteus species that are unlikely 
to catch the eye of the average mushroom hunter except when they are sharing a log with 
more spectacular fare (such as P/eurotus ostreatus). The conspicuously striate cap is the 
principal field mark of this species. Others include: P. ca/iforn;cus, cap hazel to hazel- 
brown or greenish-gray, with a striate margin when moist and a reddish-brown spore 
print; P. set;ceps, with a brown striate cap; P. cyanopus, with a chestnut- to cinnamon- 
brown, faintly striate cap and hazel to grayish-olive stalk; andP. sa/;dnus, with a grayish- 
brown to greenish- or bluish-gray, non-striate cap and whitish stalk that stains blue at the 
base. N one of these are worth eating. P. chrysophaeus should also be mentioned. 
Pluteus flavofuligineus 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or broadly convex to plane; 
surface not viscid, appearing velvety to minutely granulose; dark brown or olive-brown 
when young, developing yellow tones in age from the margin inward (eventually often 
entirely yellow or ochre-yellow or yellowish with a brownish center). Flesh thin, pallid; 
odor mild. GILLS free but sometimes appearing adnexed; close, whitish or tinged yellow 
when young, becoming pinkish as spores mature. STALK 4-11 cm long, 4-6 (8) mm 
thick, equal or tapering upward, smooth; whitish or pinkish when young, usually becoming 
yellowish in old age. SPORE PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7 x 4.5-6 
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on gills flask-shaped. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on rotting hardwood logs, branches, etc.; widely 
distributed, but not common in the West. I find it every winter in our oak woodlands. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The velvety to granulose, brown or yellow cap combined with the free gills, 
pinkish spores, and growth on dead wood are good field marks. The stalk is oftenrathertall 
for a P/uteus-as much as three times as long as the diameter of the cap! P. /utescens is 
somewhat similar, but has a clear yellow stalk even when young, and does not have a velvety 
cap. Other species: P. granu/ar;s is also similar, but has a velvety brown cap and stem. 
VOLVARIELLA 
Small to medium-large, saprophytic or parasitic mushrooms found on wood, soil, humus, or other 
mushrooms. CAP oval to convex or plane, sometimes viscid. GILLSfreeal maturity. close, pallid 
becoming pinkish to flesh-colored or sordid reddish at maturity. STALK central, usually hollow, 
cleanly separable from cap. VEIL universal, membranous, forming a saclike volva at base of stalk. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color or sordid reddish. Spores smooth, usually elliptical. 
Gill tissue convergent. 
THE pinkish to reddish spores and presence of a volva separate Vo/variella (formerly 
Vo/varia) from all other mushrooms. The volva is always saclike and there is no partial 
veil or annulus. But forthe spore colorthis genus resembles Amanita, and young specimens 
with pallid gills are often mistaken for that genus. Confusion with P/uteus is also possible 
if the volva is overlooked or destroyed. 
Several V olvariellas are edible. In fact, the paddy straw mushroom, V. vo/vacea, is tothe 
tropics what Agaricus bisporus is to the temperate zone-the principal mushroom of 
commerce. It is cultivated widely in southern Asia-usually on straw in rice paddies-and 
shipped abroad so you can pay exhorbitant prices for it in exotic food stores. I was 
presented a can of it ten years ago, on some unforgettable occasion I can no longer 
remember. I am sorry to say it has languished in the back of my cupboard ever since- 
there are always so many fresh mushrooms in my refrigerator! 
VOLVARIELLA 
259 
Vo/variel/a is principally a tropical genus, and fewer than a dozen species occur in 
temperate North America. They frequent forests, cultivated fields, gardens, straw heaps, 
and greenhouses; a few grow on wood and one is parasitic on other mushrooms. Only 
one species, V. speciosa, is truly common; several others are encountered infrequently. 
Key to V olvariella 
I. Growing on other mushrooms................ .... Y. surrecta(see V. bombycina. p. 261) 
I. Growing on ground, wood, compost, in greenhouses, etc. ............................ 2 
2. Cap typically 5-20 cm broad when mature ......................................... 3 
2. Cap typically 2-5 (6) cm broad when mature ....................................... 5 
3. Growing on wood; cap covered with silky fibrils; rare _............. v. bombycina, p. 261 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. V olva brown or grayish-brown (at least the upper portion or edge); cap not normally viscid; 
found in tropics, subtropics, and warm environments v. volvacea (see V. bombycina. p. 261) 
4. V olva white to pale gray; cap viscid when moist; very common in temperate zone in cultivated 
fields, gardens, roadsides, manure, etc. ............................. Y. speciosa, below 
5. Volva white, with long hairs; cap gray to grayish-brown Y. v;llosavolva(see V. smithii. p. 261) 
5. Not as above; volva without long hairs ............................................ 6 
6. Cap gray to pinkish-gray; volva brown to grayish ......... Y. taylor;(see V. smithii. p. 261) 
6. Cap whitish when fresh, but may discolor overall in age and center often tinged another color 7 
7. Volva ochre-stained to brownish .................................... Y. smith;;, p. 261 
7. Volva white to grayish _........................................................ 8 
8. Stalk minutely hairy (pubescent); cap margin not striate ............ Y. hypop;thys, p. 260 
8. Stalk not pubescent; cap margin often striate in age ... v. pus;lla (see V. hypopithys, p. 260) 
V olvariella speciosa (Common V.olvariella) Color Plate 68 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, at first oval, then convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface 
smooth or occasionally with patches of universal veil tissue, viscid when moist; dull white to 
gray or grayish-brown (rarely fulvous), or often whitish with a darker center; often with a 
metallic luster when dry; margin sometimes striate. Flesh soft, white. GILLS crowded, 
broad, free, white becoming flesh-colored and finally sordid reddish. ST ALK 5-20 cm long, 
1-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker at base, dry, whitish, more or less smooth. UNIVERSAL 
VEIL membranous, forming a white to pale grayish saclike volva at base of stalk; volva 
often buried in soil, sometimes inconspicuous. SPORE PRINT deep flesh-color to 
pinkish-brown; spores 11.5-21 )( 7-12 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in cultivated soil-gardens, vacant lots, 
roadsides, manure, compost, straw heaps, fallow and planted fields, etc.-occasionally 
also in the woods; widely distributed. It occurs year-round in our area, but is especially 
common in the spring; I've seen enormous fruitings in Brussels sprouts fields. In the San 
Joaquin Valley I've seen fallow fields littered with thousands of V olvariellas. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but mediocre. It was once thought to be poisonous, perhaps due to 
confusion with Amanita. Should you try it, be sure to take a spore print-some 
Amanitas can have pinkish gills in old age! 
COMMENTS: This mushroom can cause quite a stir when it appears, bold and uninvited, 
in the middle of your cabbage patch. It is our only common V o/variel/a, and is recognized 
as such by its saclike volva, absence of a ring (annulus), and deep pinkish spores. It is quite 
attractive when it first emerges, but quickly becomes flaccid and waterlogged. V. speciosa 
var. glo;cephala is said to differ from the typical variety in its darker (pearl-gray to fulvous) 
pileus (ca p) wi th a striate margin, and smaller spores. One dismal day of illegal trespassing 
..... 
, , 
-, 
.". 
" 
J 
""" 
Left: A young specimen of Vo/varie//a speciosa (see color plate for older ones). Right: Vo/varie//a 
hypopilhys is a slender white species with silky hairs on the cap. 
in a smelly old Brussels sprouts field yielded the following: twenty soggy specimens with 
pale pileus and non-striate margin; six soggy specimens with dark pileus and striate 
margin; five soggy specimens with dark pileus and non-striate margin; and eleven soggy 
specimens with pale pileus and striate margin. If you can detect a meaningful mycelial 
thread running through all of this, then you are a better mycologist than I . . . * 
V olvariella hypopithys (Petite White V olvariella) 
CAP 2-6 cm broad, at first somewhat bell-shaped, then convex to nearly plane; surface 
dry, fibrillose (with fine silky hairs that sometimes form small scales), pure white or tinged 
yellowish at the center, but sometimes discoloring overall in old age; margin usually 
fringed with long, silky white hairs ad not striate or only faintly so. Flesh thin, soft, white. 
GILLS fairly close, free (at least at maturity), white becoming dingy pinkish or flesh- 
colored. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, fragile, white 
or pallid; densely pubescent (clothed with short or long silky hairs) at least over the middle 
and upper portion. UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, forming a small, often incon- 
spicuous or barely visible volva at base of stalk; volva white, saclike, usually lobed. 
SPORE PRINT pinkish or flesh-colored; spores 6-8.5 (10) )( 3.5-6 microns, broadly 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in woodland humus; widely distributed but rare. 
I have found it only once in our area, under live oak, in February. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but much too small to be worth eating. 
COMMENTS: This rare and beautiful V o/variella is easily recognized by its petite 
dimensions, white color, silky-fibrillose cap, and white pubescent stalk. The inconspi- 
cuous white volva and slender stature (see photograph) are also distinctive, and help to 
separate it from V. smithii. which is slightly stockier and has a more prominent, brownish- 
stained volva. Another widely distributed but rare white species, V. pus;//a (= V. parvu/a), 
is even more petite than V. hypopithys. It has a slightly larger white or grayish volva, a 
non-pubescent stalk, and a striate cap margin in age, and is more frequent in gardens, 
greenhouses, lawns, and roadsides than in the woods. See also the species under V. smith;;. 
* Just be thankful, as I am, that I didn't measure the spores! 
260 
.. 
......... 
.... 
/ 
\ 
I' 
" 
... 
.. 
... 
<f 
.. t :. 
.,. 
. 
. 
 : 
" 
, 
Volvariella smithii is a small rare species with a prominent volva. Note size in relation to cypress 
cone at upper right. 
V o/varie//a smithii 
(Smith's V olvariella) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, broadly conical to convex or plane; surface not viscid, usually some- 
what fibrillose at the margin; white, but often tinged buff to pinkish-buff at center. Flesh 
rather soft, white. GILLS white becoming pinkish, broad, close, free (at least in age). 
STALK 3-5 cm long, 3-7 mmthick, equal or enlarged at base, white, covered with fine white 
hairs (pubescent). UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, forming a large, prominent, saclike 
volva at base of stalk; volva brownish to ochre or ochre-stained, usually lobed. SPORE 
PRINT pinkish to sordid flesh-color; spores 4.5-7 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in soil or humus in woods; known only from the 
west coast, rare. The specimens in the photograph were growing under pine at New 
Brighton Beach State Park near Aptos, California, in February. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too small and too rare for anyone to care. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several small, uncommon, white to grayish V olvariellas. It is 
also one of several mushrooms to be named after Alexander Smith, the foremost authority 
on North American mushrooms. The brownish to ochraceous-stained volva, whitish cap, 
and small size distinguish it. Other small species include: V. tay/or;, widely distributed but 
rare, with a gray to pinkish-gray cap and a brown to grayish volva; and V. v;//osavo/va 
of eastern North America, with a gray to grayish-brown cap and a white volva that has 
long mycelial hairs. For small, pure white Volvariellas, see V. hypopithys. 
V o/varie//a bombycina (Silky V olvariella) 
CAP 5-20 cm broad, oval becoming pell-shaped or convex and in old age sometimes 
nearly plane; surface dry and covered with long silky fibrils (usually more coarsely fibril- 
lose at margin), white to yellowish (often palest at margin). Flesh thin and rather soft or 
flaccid, white. GILLS crowded, free, broad, white when young becoming flesh-colored or 
pinkish as the spores mature. ST ALK 6-20 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually tapered upward 
or enlarged below, often curved, smooth, white, firm. UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, 
often areolate or scaly, forming a thick, long (deep), saclike volva which sheathes the base 
of the stalk; volva white to yellowish or dingy brown, often lobed. SPORE PRINT 
pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6.5-10 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
261 
262 
PLUTEACEAE 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods or fruiting from wounds in 
living trees; rare but conspicuous, found mostly in warm weather. It is widely distributed 
east of the Mississippi and has also been found in riparian woodlands in New Mexico and 
southern California. Elm and maple are among its favorite hosts; it also grows on beech, 
oak, magnolia, and various other hardwoods. Our rainy season is apparently too cold for it. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and according to reports, choice. I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: It is easier to identify this striking mushroom than to find it. The silky 
cap, pale color, deep saclike volva, and growth on wood make it unmistakable. The latter 
feature plus the pinkish spores (and mature gills) separate it from Amanita, which also has 
a volva. A yellow-capped variety has been found in Florida. Other species: V. volvacea, 
the edible "Paddy Straw Mushroom," sometimes turns up in greenhouses or straw and 
compost in warmer climates, and is fairly common outdoors along the Gulf Coast. It 
has a brown or partly brown volva and a gray to dark brown or blackish, often streaked 
cap. V. surrecta is a rare but distinctive northern species that grows parasitically on 
other mushrooms, particularly Clitocybe nebu/aris. It is small to medium-sized, with 
a white to grayish cap and an ample volva that is usually lobed. Since its favorite host is 
common in California, it may occur there rarely. 
AMANITACEAE 
oo 
spores 
MEMBERS of this family have white spores, white to pale-colored gills, a universal veil 
that envelops the young mushrooms, and in most cases, a volva. Many are also furnished 
with a partial veil and the stalk is cleanly separable from the cap. 
There are two genera: In Amanita the universal veil is membranous, warty, powdery, 
or cottony; in Limacella it is glutinous, manifesting itself as a layer of slime on the cap 
and sometimes the stalk. 
The Amanitaceae are most likely to be confused with the white-spored Lepiotaceae, 
which have neither volva nor viscid cap. Microscopically the two families are distinct by 
virtue of the amyloid or non-amyloid (but not dextrinoid) spores and divergent gill tissue 
of the Amanitaceae, as opposed to the typically dextrinoid spores and parallel to inter- 
woven gill tissue ofthe Lepiotaceae(see p. 19). 
Amanita is of paramount importance to toadstool-testers because it contains the 
deadliest of all mushrooms, as well as some of the most delicious and beautiful. Limacella 
is too rare to be of culinary value. 
Amanita "eggs" resemble puffballs while still enveloped by the universal veil. However, when sliced 
open lengthwise (perpendicular to the ground), they reveal the embryonic outline of cap, gills, and 
stalk (left and center), while a puffball (right) is solid within. Note difference in shape between the 
deadly poisonous A. pha//oides "egg" (center) and the edible A. ca/yptrata "egg" (left). 
AMANITACEAE 
263 
Key to the Amanitaceae 
1. V olva present at base of stalk as a sack, free collar, or series of concentric rings Amanita, below 
1. V olva absent or indistinct ....................................................... 2 
2. Cap usually viscid or slimy when moist, without warts or veil material; stalk sometimes slimy 
also ........................................................... Limacella, p. 291 
2. Cap usually with warts or universal veil material, often dry or slightly viscid but not usually 
slimy; stalk never slimy ............................................ A manita, below 
AMANIT A (The Amanitas) 
Medium-sized to large terrestrialfungi found mostly in woods. CAP smooth (bald) or with warts or 
a cOllony patch or other veil tissue. GILLS typically white. creamy. yellow. or pale gray. close. 
attached or free. STALK central, usually hollow or stuffed in age and cleanly separable from cap. 
PARTIAL VEIL often present and in most species forming a membranous ring on stalk. 
UNIVERSAL VEIL present. usually forming a volva at base of stalk in the form of a sack. rim. 
collar. or concentric scales. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth, amyloid or not amyloid. Gill 
tissue divergent, at least when young. 
LEARNING to recognize this genus should be an overriding priority for all mushroom 
hunters, since Amanitas are responsible for 90% of mushroom-induced fatalities. The 
outstanding attributes of any Amanita-what makes even a rotten Amanita not just 
another rotten mushroom, but a rotten AM AN IT A (and therefore worthy of your 
attention and respect)-are the white spores, pallid gills, and presence of a universal veil. 
The universal veil completely envelops the young mushroom, but breaks as the stalk 
elongates, usually forming a volva(sack or collar or scales) at the base ofthestalkand often 
depositing remnants on the cap in the form of a single large piece of tissue (volval patch) or 
many smaller pieces (warts). Obviously, it is important to carefully dig up any unfamiliar 
mushroom so as not to miss the volva, if it is present. It is also a good idea to examine the 
surrounding soil to be doubly sure pieces of the volva aren't left behind. 
Most Amanitas-including the most dangerous ones-are also furnished with a partial 
veil which, upon breaking, often forms a skirtlike ring (annulus) near the top ofthe stalk. 
At one time those species without a partial veil were placed in a separate gen us, A manitop- 
sis. A feature emphasized by most mushroom books is that the gills in Amanita are free. 
This is not necessarily the case, however, adG this feature is not stressed here. 
The only other genus of agarics consistently equipped with a volva is V o/variella, which 
has pinkish spores. Agaricus, Coprinus, and Cortinarius occasionally form a volva, but 
have brown to black spores, while Lepiota superficially t"esembles Amanita but typically 
lacks a volva and nearly always has free gills. 
Amanita is divided into two large groups (subgenera) based on whether or not the spores 
are amyloid. Half of the species described here (including the most dangerous ones!) have 
amyloid spores. It should be emphasized, however, that some species with non-amyloid 
spores are also poisonous. These two large groups are in turn subdivided according to the 
type of volva (see p. 264). If the universal veil is membranous (skinlike), a loose sack or cup 
is formed at the base of the stalk and the cap is usually bald or adorned with a volval patch. 
If the universal veil is friable (easily crumbling), it manifests itself as a series of concentric 
scales or rings around the base of the stem. If the universal veil is semi-friable and 
interwoven with the base of the stalk, it will form a collar or free rim (as in A. pantherina), 
but not a true sack. When the universal veil is friable or semi-friable, numerous pieces of 
tissue (warts) are usually deposited on the cap. These warts are typically white, gray, or 
yellow and with a few exceptions (e.g., A. magniverrucata) are readily removable-unlike 
the colored scales of an Agaricus or Lepiota. In fact, they are often washed off by rain. 
In some Amanitas, such as A. rubescens and A. silvico/a, a distinct volva is not formed. 
Different types of volvas in Amanita. Left to right: A. phalloides. A. pantherina. A. muscaria. 
A. rubescens. 
However, vestiges ofthe universal veil on the cap (in the form of warts or cottony tissue) 
signify Amanita. In the rare instances in which neithervolva nor universal veil remnants are 
visible, Amanitas can still be recognized by their uncanny "Amanita aura." They are so 
unequivocally elegant and graceful that you quickly learn to tell an Amanita without 
having to dig it up! 
Amanita is a study in antithesis. At one extreme are the most poisonous of all 
mushrooms-the death cap and destroying angels (A. phalloides, A. ocreata, A. virosa. 
etc.). Every fungophile should learn the telltale signs ofthese deadly fungi (for more de- 
tails, see pp. 892-893). At the other end of the spectrum are three of the most exquisitely 
flavored of the fleshy fungi-A. caesarea, A. calyptrata, and A. velosa. The rest of the 
Amanitas fall somewhere between these extremes: several are hallucinogenic and! or 
poisonous but not normally fatal (A. muscaria and A. pantherina); others are edible but 
scarcely incredible (A. pachycolea and A. rubescens); still others are of unknown edibility 
(A. aspera and A. magniverrucata). 
I for one do not subscribe to the wholesale philosophy (as expounded by many 
mushroom mentors) that Amanitas should not be eaten under any circumstances. In my 
humble fungal opinion, it is just as easy to carelessly overlook the volva and mistake a 
deadly Amanita for an edible mushroom of another genus as to mistake a deadly Amanita 
for the coccora (A. calyptrata) or grisette (A. vaginata). True, it is sheer stupidity to risk 
your life for the sake of a single meal, however delectable it may be. But the keyword here is 
risk-and in the case of a few species such as A. calyptrata, A. caesarea, and A. vaginata, I 
don't consider it a risk for discriminating amateurs to eat them, provided they become 
thoroughly familiar with their characteristics and those of their lethal counterparts. 
Simplistic slogans or catchwords such as "Do not eat-a the Amanita" often accomplish the 
precise opposite of what they intend. Rather than encouraging people to use their eyes and 
nose and the gray mass between their ears, to approach each and every mushroom with 
discrimination, intelligence, and respect, such adages reinforce people's desire for 
expediency by fostering an unhealthy, mindless reliance on shortcuts and glib generali- 
zations. Those who need simple rules should learn how to play dominoes or Scrabble 
rather than eat wild mushrooms. Adages such as the above can even be misconstrued to 
read: "If a mushroom isn't an Amanita it won't kill you"-a dangerous assumption! 
AMANITA 
265 
Too many people eat and enjoy edible Amanitas for me not to recommend them. But at 
the risk of being redundant, let me reiterate some rules of the trade. Unless you are 
ABSOLUTELY, INDISPUTABLY, and IRREFUTABLY sure of your Amanita's 
identity, don't eat it! (The one adage with which I wholeheartedly concur is: "When in 
doubt, throw it out!"). If possible, have an experienced collector verify your identification, 
and collect the species several times before venturing to eat it. Above all, don't rely on a 
single characteristic (such as striate vs. non-striate margin-see photo on p. 286) to dis- 
tinguish between edible and deadly poisonous species. Each individual mushroom is 
subject to a different set of environmental and genetic factors-therefore each will be 
slightly different. Only by using a combination of critical characteristics can you rest as- 
sured that you have a savory coccora or grisette instead of a death cap or destroying angel. 
Furthermore, don't assume that two or more Amanitas growing togetherarethe same spe- 
cies. Judge each and every mushroom on its own merits. Finally, always keep in mind the 
possibility of encountering a species not described in this book-or any other book! 
My reason for lecturing on the Amanitas at such length is that they never fail to attract 
attention and admiration. You certainly needn't eat them to enjoy them, for they are among 
the most beautiful and graceful of all fungi, the epitome of impeccability and elegance. 
The fly agaric (A. muscaria), with its fiery red cap and white "stars" is the most 
spectacular example, of course. Down through the ages it has been compared to bull 
testicles and male genitalia and worshipped as the earthly incarnation of infinity, divinity, 
and virility (more for its appearance, I suspect, than for its properties). It is one of the 
commonest mushrooms of our pine forests, yet one never tires offindingit. The variation in 
color, size, shape, and "constellations" is such that each and everyone presents a new and 
deliciously different feast forthe eye. It's hard to resist taking one ortwo hometo show off to 
impressionable neighbors or friends, but never is the ephemerality of life so emphatically 
underscored as when they come over the next day to pay their respects, only to find a 
writhing mass of beatific maggots where your blazing incarnation of the cosmos had been! 
In contrast to the flamboyant splendor of the fly agaric is the subdued and radiant 
warmth of the coccora (A. calyptrata). I say "warmth" because the huge eggs are so soft 
and cottony that they look positively warm inside. Finding a family of them in rich red 
madrone humus is like stumbling onto the nest of a rare and secretive woodland bird. And 
watching a coccora "hatch" -the round, orange head emerging from itscottonycocoon- 
is like watching the sun rise from a blanket of clouds, a quietly inspiring reaffirmation 
of life best experienced alone. 
Most Amanitas are mycorrhizal. As a result, theyare most common in the woods or near 
trees. Some, however, grow in grass or open ground. Amanita attains its greatest 
diversity in the warm temperate zone. In the southeastern United States, for instance, there 
is a very diverse and bewildering Amanita flora that is beyond the scope ofthis book. The 
west coast has fewer species but several are endemic. In our region two distinct floras can be 
recognized. The first, comprised of northern species, occurs primarily with madrone and 
conifers in the late fall and winter. A. muscaria, A. calyptrata, and A. si/vicola are 
prominent examples. The second group has a more southerly distribution and is associated 
with oak. Some members of this group fruit in the fall (e.g., A. phalloides), others in the 
late winter and spring (e.g., A. velosa, A. rubescens, A. ocreata-see photo on next page). 
Amanita is a far more diverse genus than once thought. Despite a wealth of studies 
conducted on the genus, no all-encompassing monograph has been published. (A volume 
by David Jenkins is in press.) Particularly perplexing are the "Lepidellas": those species 
with amyloid spores and a friable universal veil that leaves remnants on the cap margin. 
Several hundred species of Amanita occur in North America, including many poorly 
known or unnamed ones; California has over 25 species. Twenty Amanitas are described 
here and many others are keyed out. Their elegance and individuality make .them a 
fascinating and rewarding group to study, even for those not armed with a microscope. If 
your "Amanita" doesn't key out convincingly, try Cystoderma, Armillaria, and Lepiota. 
'- 
- .,.... 
... 
"., 
..... 
  
... 
'. 
.... r> 
" , 
 
\  
...' 
. 
jA. '. 
..1 : 
.. 
... 
Three species of Amanita that commonly fruit in the spring in association with live oak: Amanita 
ve/osa (two at left), a small specimen of A. ocreata (top), and A. rubescens (three at right). 
Key to Amanita 
l. Volva saclike (i.e., forming a true sack that sheathes base of stalk as shown on p. 264); cap 
usually bald or with a cottony or membranous patch of universal veil tissue or occasionally 
with several patches or non-friable warts ...... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 
I. V olva collarlike (i.e., intergrown with base of stalk but with a free rim), scaly, warty, powdery, or 
indistinct but not saclike (see p. 264); cap often with many small pieces of universal veil tissue 
(warts), powder, etc., occasionally with larger pieces .............................. 15 
2. V olva tough, thick, large; cap and/ or stalk often shaggy, fibrillose, or with cottony patches of veil 
tissue; cap white or tinged brown( especially at center), often bruising brown orreddish, margin 
often striate in age; stalk similarly colored; annulus (ring) absent; spores oblong or elliptical. 
amyloid; fairly common in eastern North America, rare in West A. vo/vata & close relatives 
2. Not with above features ........................................................ 3 
3. Margin of cap distinctly striate (at least when mature); spores not amyloid .............. 4 
3. Margin of cap not striate or only faintly so (occasionally striate in age); spores amyloid .. 12 
4. Partial veil present when young, usually (but not always!) forming an annulus (ring) on stalk 5 
4. Partial veil and annulus absent or rudimentary (but stalk sometimes scaly) ............. 8 
5. Gills and stalk yellow to yellow-orange; cap bright red to orange (but may fade to yellow or 
paler in age or sunlight) ........................... A. caesarea group & others, p. 284 
5. Not as above; gills and stalk typically white to creamy or very pale yellow .............. 6 
6. V olva often small and inconspicuous; cap brown to gray or sometimes nearly white; growing 
in mixed woods and under hardwoods in eastern North America .............. A. spreta 
6. Not as above; known only from western North America ............................. 7 
7. Cap brown to yellow or whitish, but if brown then usually with a yellow margin; partial veil typi- 
cally (but not always!) forming a prominent skirtlike annulus on stalk A. ca/yptrata, p. 284 
7. Cap variously colored, but the margin not yellow; annulus (ring) usually pressed closely to the 
stalk or poorly defined ....................................................... 48 
8. Cap dark brown to gray or grayish-brown ......................................... 9 
8. Cap white to pale tan, beige, orangish, pinkish, orange-brown, or reddish-brown ....... 10 
9. Fruiting body medium-sized to large; cap dark gray to dark brown when young, often paler 
in age and often developing a darker band near inner edge of striations; gill edges usually brown; 
known only from the West .................................... A. pachyco/ea, p. 290 
9. Fruiting body medium-sized to rather small and slender; cap usually gray, but sometimes 
grayish-brown or brown; gill edges not brown; widely distributed ................... 49 
10. Cap white with long striations; widespread, but rare in West A. alba (see A. vaginata, p. 288) 
10. Not as above; if cap white then with shorter striations and usually found near western oaks in 
winter and spring (or even summer); common .................................... II 
II. Cap pinkish-tan to orangish, beige, or paler ................... A. ve/osa & others, p. 286 
II. Cap orange-brown to reddish-brown, tawny, etc.; common in eastern North America, infrequent 
in West ......................................................... A.fu/va, p. 287 
12. Cap greenish to yellow-green, brownish-olive, grayish-olive, or nearly white when young, 
often duller (dingy tan, etc.) or with a metallic luster in age .......... A. pha//oides, p. 269 
12. Not as above; cap usually white or whitish when fresh (but may discolor by maturity) ... I3 
AMANITA 
267 
13. Cap white, but discoloring pinkish, brownish, or yellowish (at least centrally) in age; asso- 
ciated with oak; found in California and the Southwest and Texas. . . . " A. ocreata, p. 271 
13. Cap usually remaining white or found elsewhere ................................... 14 
14. Cap white; partial veil usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk (which may disappear 
in age!); very common in eastern North America, also found in the Pacific Northwest ..... 
.. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. virosa& others (see A. ocreata. p. 271) 
14. Not as above; partial veil absent or evanescent; found in eastern North America (do not eat!) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A. peckiana & others 
15. Universal veil remnants yellow to grayish-yellow (check cap for warts and base of stalk for 
volva); cap not whitish ....................................................... 16 
15. Universal veil remnants not yellow; cap mayor may not be whitish ................... 22 
16. Partial veil absent; gills yellow; found in eastern North America ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A. parcivo/vata (see A. caesarea. p. 284) 
16. Notasabove ................................................................ 17 
17. Cap bright red to orange-red (but may fade in age); stalk white ........ A. muscaria, p. 282 
17. Cap orange to yellow, yellow-brown, or dark brown; stalk white or yellow ............. 18 
18. Lower stalk sheathed with shaggy scales ................ (see Armi//aria & Allies, p. 189) 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Cap salmon to salmon-pink when fresh; found in mountains of eastern U.S. ..... A. we/Isii 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Base of stalk staining reddish in age or where bruised; found in eastern North America ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.flavorubescens(see A. aspera. p. 278) 
20. Not with above features (if staining as above, then found in West) .................... 21 
21. Cap yellow to yellow-brown to dark brown; stalk usually white; common along the Pacific 
Coast ......................................................... A. aspera, p. 278 
21. Cap yellow-orange to yellow; stalk often colored similarly; fruiting body rather small; common 
in eastern North America, rare in the West ....................... A.f/avoconia, p. 278 
22. Cap pale yellow-green to pale yellow to nearly whitish with thingrayish, whitish-buff, orpinkish 
to lavender-gray warts (which may wash off); cap margin not striate; stalk with an abrupt, soft, 
rounded bulb at base; spores amyloid; common in eastern North America, especially under 
hardwoods but also with conifers .................. A. citrina(see A. porphyria. p. 279) 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
23. Cap brown to olive-brown or paler; stalk lacking grayish patches, terminatinginanabrupt basal 
bulb that is usually split or chiseled longitudinally; flesh usually staining reddish-brown; 
spores amyloid; common in eastern North America (especially under hardwoods); also 
reported from the Pacific Northwest (but rare) .. A. brunnescens(see A. porphyria. p. 279) 
23. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
24. Cap brightly colored (red, orange, or yellow); partial veil present, usually forming an annulus 
(ring) on stalk .............................................................. 25 
24. Not as above (cap may be sordid reddish or reddish-brown, pinkish-tan, etc.) .......... 26 
25. Volva usually a series of concentric rings at apex of bulbous stalk base, but sometimes only a 
single ring or collar; cap medium-sized to large and bright red to orange, apricot, yellow- 
orange, or yellow (yellow form rare in coastal California, but common in the Sierra Nevada 
and most of eastern North America) .............................. A. muscaria, p. 282 
25. V olva usually a single collar at top of basal bulb or often indistinct, but sometimes consisting of 
several rings; cap small to medium-sized (occasionally large). usually pale yellow (but some- 
times brighter), at times completely covered by veil material; widespread A. gemmata, p.281 
26. Partial veil absent (check young specimens if possible); cap margin distinctly striate; spores not 
amyloid ................................................................... 27 
26. Partial veil present, or if absent, then cap margin not striate; spores amyloid or not ..... 31 
27. Cap gray to grayish-brown, brown, or darker ..................................... 28 
27. Cap pale yellow, orange-buff, salmon, pinkish, tan, or nearly white. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 30 
28. Cap powdery-mealy; volva if present also mealy A. farinosa (see A. sp. (unidentified), p. 275) 
28. Not as above ................................................................ 29 
268 AMANIT ACEAE 
29. Cap gray or sometimes grayish-brown, with or without warts; upper limb of volva usually well- 
developed (but falls off easily); common in California .............. A. constricta, p. 289 
29. Cap gray to brown to dark brown to nearly black, usually with warts; upper limb of volva not 
well-developed; widespread, but rare in California .. _ A. inaurata(see A. constr;cta. p.289) 
30. Cap yellow to creamy to whitish; volva usually collarlike (with free rim) . A. gemmata, p. 281 
30. Cap orange-buff to pale pinkish-orange to pinkish-tan, beige, or sometimes whitish; volva 
not typically collarlike; often growing in the open (but near trees) ....... A. velosa, p. 286 
31. Cap entirely brown when young, breaking up into large brown scales in age; flesh in stalk usually 
staining orange or saffron (and eventually reddish) when cut (see Lepiota rachodes, p. 297) 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Cap with erect, often pyramidal brown warts which usually come off easily; stalk and/ or under- 
side of veil with similar warts; spores usually dextrinoid, not amyloid . (see Lepiota, p. 293) 
32. Not with above features (but may have some of them); common ..................... 33 
33. Some part offruiting body usually with sordid reddish stains (especially the stalk); flesh slowly 
staining dingy reddish when bruised or cut; maggot tunnels also reddish A. rubescens, p.276 
33. Not as above ................................................................ 34 
34. Fresh fruiting body white or whitish (but may age buff, yellowish, brownish, pinkish, etc.) 35 
34. Not as above; cap distinctly colored or with colored veil material even when young ...... 42 
35. Stalk terminating in a fairly conspicuous bulb, not typically with a rooting portion below the 
bulb ....................................................................... 36 
35. Stalk without bulb, or if with a bulb, then also with a tapered rooting base below the bulb 40 
36. V olva typically present as a distinct free rim (collar) or series of concentric rings at apex of basal 
bulb; spores not amyloid ..................................................... 37 
36. Not as above; spores amyloid ......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . ... 38 
37. V olva typically consisting of a single tight-fitting collar around bulb apex; cap often tinged 
yellowish or brownish at center; often rather slender A. cothurnata (see A. panther;na. p. 280) 
37. V olva usually a series of concentric rings; cap white to grayish-white or tinged buff; not 
unusually slender. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . A. muscaria, p. 282 
38. Cap surface with rather soft and cottony universal veil tissue, lacking conspicuous warts; known 
only from western North America ................................. A. silvicola, p.273 
3H. Not as above (if cap cottony, then found elsewhere) ................................ 39 
39. Cap usually with brown warts; stalk often rather stout (up to 8 cm long); known only from 
California, associated with live oak. . . . . . .. A. sp.(unidentified)(see A. rubescens. p. 276) 
39. Not as above .......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 40 
40. . Cap without warts or warts obscure; growing in sand .................. A. baccata, p.273 
40. Not as above; cap usually with distinct, well-developed warts ........................ 41 
41. Cap covered with large, exaggerated warts; fairly common with oak and pine, known only from 
California .............................................. A. magniverrucata, p. 274 
41. Found elsewhere. or if found in California then warts smaller and often concentrated at center 
of cap ........ A. cokeri& many others (the"Lepidellas")(see A. magn;verrucata. p.274) 
42. Stalk arising from a well-developed cylindrical tojug-shaped, sometimes hollow, underground 
""tuber"; rare. . ... . ..... . . . .. ........ ..... ... .... .... . .... (seeSquamanita, p. 197) 
42. Not as above(but stalk may root deeply or have a bulbous base) ..................... 43 
43. Cap yellow to creamy, the margin usually striate or tuberculate-striate .. A. gemmata, p. 281 
43. Not with above features ....................................................... 44 
44. Volva indistinct, powdery, or scaly; cap margin not normally striate .................. 45 
44. Volva usually present as a free rim or collar on basal bulband/ or margin of cap striate in age 47 
45. Found in California .......................................................... 46 
45. Found in eastern North America (especially common in Southeast) .................. 50 
46. Usually found in open ground (pastures, etc.); partial veil often disappearing; cap grayish-white 
to gray to brownish-gray, small ........................... A. sp. (unidentified), p. 275 
46. Associated with oak; partial veil usually forming a persistent, prominent annulus; cap white 
to brownish ........................... A. sp.(unidentified)(see A. rubescens. p. 276) 
47. Warts gray and/ or stalk gray or with grayish patches; spores amyloid .. A. porphyria, p. 279 
47. Stalk white; warts usually white or pallid; spores not amyloid ........ A. pantherina, p. 280 
AMANITA 
269 
48. Cap brown .............. _ . _ " . . . . _ . . . . . .. A. calyptratoides(see A. ca/yptrma, p. 284) 
48. Cap orangish to salmon, pinkish-tan, buff, or even whitish .............. A. velosa, p.286 
49. Lower part of volva tightly constricted around stalk, the upper part flaring outward (see photo 
on p. 289) .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. constricta, p.289 
49. Not as above; volva saclike ...................................... A. vaginata, p. 288 
50. Cap pallid beneath a thin coating of pinkish-tan to brownish-orange universal veil material and 
often with several large chunky warts at center; found in woods in Southeast . A. roseitincta 
50. Not as above ................................................................ 51 
51. Cap distinctly pinkish when fresh; usually found in open; southern ........... A. salmonea 
51. Not as above ................................................................ 52 
52. Cap with concentrically arranged brown to grayish-brown universal veil remnants (scales); 
partial veil evanescent; known only from the Southeast .................. _ _ _. A. hesleri 
52. Not as above; cap usually grayish or with grayish warts .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 53 
53. Cap pale brown to dark grayish-brown, with large grayish warts or patches; partial veil usually 
forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk _....... _ . . . A. spissa (see A. pamherina, p. 280) 
53. Not as above; cap grayish .... A. onusta& A. cinereoconia (see A. sp. (unidentified), p. 275) 
Amanita phalloides 
(Death Cap) 
Color Plate 50 
CAP 4-16 cm broad, at first nearly oval, then convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid or 
tacky when moist, often shiny when dry or with a metallic luster; color variable: green to 
brownish-olive, yellow-green, yellowish, or sometimes white, often darker toward center 
and paler at margin, and often fading in age (to grayish-green, light brown, olive-buff, 
dull yellowish, etc.); sometimes with one or more patches of thin, silky, white universal veil 
tissue; margin typically not striate. Flesh white; odor at first mild, but later quite pungent 
or nauseating (like raw potatoes or chlorine). GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white 
or tinged faintly greenish. STALK 5-18 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, tapering upward or equal 
with an enlarged base; white or tinged cap color, smooth or with minute scales and fibrils; 
solid or hollow. PARTIAL VEIL membranous, white or tinged yellow-green, forming a 
persistent but fragile, superior, skirtlike ring which may disappear in age. UNIVERSAL 
VEIL membranous, white, forming a saclike volva that sheathes base of stalk; volva thin 
and rather fragile, usually buried in ground and sometimes disintegrating. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 7-12)( 6-9 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid. 
Amanita phalloides, showing the classical features of the deadly Amanitas: presence of a sack (volva) 
at the base of the stalk and a skirt or ring(annulus) near the top of the stalk, plus white or whitish gills. 
(Don't expect every specimen to be so ""classical," however!) 
 
.I 
') 
. 
\ 
..... 
., 
,, 
.... ' 
, " 
, ft". 
... -:,. 
... ."- 
" \ 
. , t ... -:I "1111 .. 
'. :'" ( " 
.,'" 
.. . 
1i 
'- 
. J \ 
. . 
. . 
( 
f" . 
, 
I . 
." 
 ...*'" ... 
.... . 
,.; 
" 
.. }. 
... 
,. 
. i. 
.t; 
. 
... 
. 
. 
, 
 
.. .: 
, 
. 
.. 
.. 
1 . 
Fruiting body development in the deadly Amanita pha//oides. At first it is enclosed by the universal 
veil, which ruptures to form a volva at the base of the stem as the stalk elongates. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops in woods or on lawns near trees; 
widely distributed. In our area it is very common under live oak in the fall and early winter 
and may even turn up in the summer if moisture is sufficient. In the late winter and spring, 
however, it is largely supplanted by A. ocreata. Perhaps an adventitious (but hardly 
advantageous!) introduction from Europe, it has taken a fancy to our native oaks and 
spread like the plague, so that it is now the most abundant Amanita of our live oak 
woodlands. Heavy fall rains often elicit a stupendous crop- I have counted as many as one 
hundred specimens under a single oak! I've never seen it growing without live oak in the 
vicinity, but in southern Oregon it grows with other oaks and in eastern North America it 
has turned up in numerous localities under conifers as well as hard woods. Apparently it can 
form mycorrhiza with a wide range of hosts! 
EDIBILITY: DEADLY POISONOUS! Learn to recognize this species before eating any 
mushroom with gills! It is particularly dangerous because the symptoms are delayed, not 
appearing for from 6 to 24 hours after ingestion, by which time there is relatively little 
modern medicine can do except to treat the victim symptomatically. In the last decade 
there have been one or two deaths in California every time a bumper crop has appeared. 
However, none of the victims were knowledgeable fungophiles, let alone "mushroom 
experts" (as they are often called by the press). The flavor, incidentally, is described by 
survivors as excellent-despite the awful odor which develops in old specimens. For an 
account of symptoms and treatment, see pp. 892-893. 
COMMENTS: There is no rational reason why anyone should mistake the death cap for 
an edible mushroom-but since when were human beings completely rational? The telltale 
signs are: (I) white gills (2) white spores (3) partial veil covering the gills, then breaking to 
form a skirtlike ring or annulus near the top of the stalk (4) mem branous white sack (volva) 
at the base of the stalk (5) margin of the cap not striate (however, I have seen mature 
specimens with small striations on the margin where the cap tissue had apparently 
270 
 
... 
( --. 
 't 
., 
..  
". , '" 
. " . '. 
i:. .. )Ot-  . 
.j) . .. 
" ..- 
 . 
.. ", 
" 'II . - 
... 
Maturing specimens of Amanita phalloides. Note how cap opens out and the partial veil breaks to 
form an annulus (ring) high up on the stalk. Cap coloris variable: green, yellow, brownish, even white, 
The cap is usually bald, but sometimes has a thin white patch of universal veil tissue (as shown here). 
collapsed against the gills!). The ring is sometimes obliterated and the volva can be 
carelessly overlooked, so just to be safe, - don't eat mushrooms with any two of these 
characteristics unless you are absolutely sure what they are. Your life is at stake! The 
cap color-usually greenish, but extremely variable-and the pungent odor in age (it 
reeks of death) plus the association with live oak (in our area) are good secondary field- 
marks. In eastern North America, A. phalloides can be confused with A. cUrina and A. 
brunnescens (see the key to Amanita and comments under A. porphyria). 
Amanita ocreata (Destroying Angel; Death Angel) 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, nearly round or oval becoming convex and finally plane; surface 
viscid when moist but soon dry, smooth, white when young but in age often discoloring 
pinkish, buff, yellowish, or brownish, especially toward the center; sometimes with a very 
thin white patch of universal veil tissue; margin usually (but not always!) not striate. Flesh 
thick, firm when young, white; odor mild, becoming disagreeable in old age. GILLS at first 
adnate or adnexed, sometimes free in age, close, white. STALK 6-20 cm long, 1-3 cm 
thick, tapered upward or equal with an enlarged base, white, often finely powdered or scaly 
at apex or occasionally throughout; hollow or solid. PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, white, 
forming a very fragile superior or apical skirtlike ring or shredding into pieces or 
disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, white, forming a saclike volva 
that sheathes the base of the stalk; volva often large and ample, but sometimes thin. SPO RE 
PRINT white; spores 9-14 x'7-1O microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth, 
amyloid. Flesh turning bright yellow in KOH (potassium hydroxide). 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground under oaks, known 
from Marin County in California east to the Sierra Nevada foothills and south to Arizona 
and Texas. In our area it is associated with live oak and is common in the winter and spring, 
271 
't ' 
, 
.- , 
. \.. 
I .: .. . 
..' ,'" ' 
.. 
--. 
J' 
: 
'Pt ." ,. 
.. 
. {ts:..\, 
, 
.... 
':.. 
t '" 
" 4I 
th 
... 
. 
Amamta ocreata. This deadly poisonous Amanita is pure white when young but usually discolors 
(pinkish, brownish, ochre, etc.) on the cap as it ages. Note the fragile partial veil, voluminous volva, 
and white gills. See Color Plate 53 for its eastern counterpart. 
usually after A. phalloides has finished fruiting. It is quite numerous, but doesn't normally 
produce the huge crops typical of the latter species. Related "destroying angels" are abun- 
dant under hardwoods and conifers in eastern North America, and to a lesser extent, the 
Pacific Northwest (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: DEADLY POISONOUS! It doesn't enjoy the same notoriety as A. phal- 
loides, but is just as dangerous, and in some regions (such as southern California), it is the 
more common of the two. It recently caused several deaths near San Diego. The victims 
were apparently starving illegal aliens who ate the mushrooms out of desperation. 
COMMENTS: This elegant, pristine-pure, lethal-looking Amanita is our only white 
mushroom with both an annulus (ring), a true sack (volva) at the base of the stalk, and a 
non-striate (or only rarely striate) cap margin. The species epithet ocreata means 
"sheathed," a reference to the voluminous volva which may extend as much as halfway up 
Amanita ocreata varies greatly in stature, as shown here. Left: A robust specimen that could easily 
be mistaken for the pale form of A. calyptrata (and isjust as big). Right: A slender, graceful mature 
specimen that could be mistaken for a washed-out A. velosa. 
.." 
... 
....._... 
. 
11:. 
. . 
.' 
.. . 
. 
AMANIT A 
273 
the stalk, though it is often much smaller. The partial veil is quite fragile, however, and 
often turns to shreds rather than forming a distinct ring (annulus). The sinister name 
"destroying anger' also embraces three closely related, deadly poisonous, pristine-white 
"veiled threats"-A. virosa(COLOR PLATE 53),A. verna, andA. bisporigera. All three 
are common in eastern North America - especially under hardwoods - and have been 
reported from the Pacific Northwest, but not from California. They closely resemble A. 
ocreata, but are often more slender and do not discolor as much in age; also, A. verna 
supposedly doesn't yellow in KOH. A. virosa is distinguished by its round spores and scalier 
stalk, while A. verna has elliptical spores and A. bisporigera has 2-spored basidia and 
round spores. A. alba and the pale (white to creamy) form of A. calyptrata are easily con- 
fused with these species, but always have a striate cap margin and non-amyloid spores. Be 
very careful-A. ocreata sometimes has a striate cap margin (see photo on p. 286)! Other 
species: A. mutabilis is an eastern species with a white or pinkish-tinged cap. It has a sac- 
like volva and amyloid spores, stains pinkish when bruised, and often smells like anise. 
Amanita silvicola (Western Woodland Amanita) 
CAP 5-12 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid when moist, white (but 
occasionally discolored in age), covered with flattened cottony or fluffy-powdery universal 
veil tissue; margin often hung with veil remnants and extending beyond the gills, not 
striate. Flesh white; odor mild or slightly soapy. GILLS white, close, adnate toadnexed or 
free, edges finely powdered or cottony. STALK 5-12 cm long, 1.5-2.5 cm thick, usually 
rather stout, terminating in a basal bulb which is up to 5 cm broad; white (or sometimes 
brownish-stained), usually powdery or with cottony scales. PARTIAL VEIL white, 
delicate, forming a slight ring or fibrillose zone or disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL 
VEIL cottony, white, forming a scaly or indistinct volva consisting of cottony white zones 
or patches at base of stalk which often disintegrate or remain in the ground. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 8-12)( 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in mixed woods and under conifers (e.g., Douglas- 
fir); known only from the Pacific Northwest (where it is fairly common in the fall, parti- 
cularly in campgrounds) and California. I have found it only once in our area, in December. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: This attractive Amanita can be told at a glance by its cottony white cap, 
rather stout stature(for an Amanita), and enlarged stem base( see photo on next page). The 
cap lacks the prominent warts characteristic of A. magniverrucata, A. cokeri, etc., and the 
volva is not saclike as in the destroying angels (A. ocreata, A. virosa, et al). Also, the stalk 
lacks the tapered, pointed, rooting base so characteristic of A. baccata. The attached gills 
and indistinct volva suggest Armillaria, but it has that ineffable Amanita "aura." Also 
see A. smithiana (under A. magniverrucata), a larger version of A. silvicola. 
Amanita baccata (Sand Amanita) Color Plate 54 
CAP 4-10 (12) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry or slightly tacky, white (but 
often dirty and sometimes discolored buff in age), with obscure mealy to powdery warts or 
flattened universal veil remnants which may disappear in age; margin often hung with 
veil remnants, not striate. Flesh white, soft, fragile; odor mild or slightly pungent. GILLS 
close or crowded, white, becoming dingy yellowish in age, usually adnate or adnexed, but 
sometimes free. STALK 5-18 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, with a long, tapered, often 
pointed rooting base below a slight to distinct bulb; dry, white, sometimes with yellowish or 
buff stains; usually somewhat fibrillose or with delicate ragged or powdery scales; 
apex often striate. PARTIAL VEIL white, cottony, very fragile; disappearing or forming 
a thin, poorly defined superior ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, white, forming 
. 
.1.. .' 
... 
. '1',_ . 
r;'or ".. '+ 
.....' . f.;, - ...!.r' .1.. 
..61 t 4.;" 
... 
,... 
. 
. 
i 
== 
, 
;. :.( 
, 
.1. 
o '>J', 
. . 
;0 "t. -;. 
it 
'- 
. r 
...: 
\ 
Left: Amanita si/vico/a lacks the saclike volva of A. ocreata and the tapered rooting base of A. baccata. 
Right: Amanita baccata grows in sand; note pointed rooting base (see color plate for view of cap). 
an indistinct volva or a scaly zone just above the bulb. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
10-15 x 4-6.5 microns, more or less cylindrical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in sand or sandy soil (often buried), associated with 
oak and/ or pine; distribution spotty-reported from southern Europe, northern Africa, 
and Michigan-frequent in our area in the fall and winter, but never in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as A. boudieri, this is an inelegant but oddly charming 
Amanita. The tapered, rooting stem base, soft flesh, absence of prominent warts on the 
cap, cylindrical spores, and habitat in sand form a most distinctive combination of 
features. The cap may scarcely poke above the ground and along with the rooting base, is 
usually covered with dirt or sand (see photo). The fruiting body decays rapidly and is hard 
to keep in one piece. For these reasons and many more, it is one of my favorite Amanitas. 
A manila magn;verrucala (Pine' Cone Amanita) Color Plate 55 
CAP 7-20 (30) cm broad, nearly round becoming broadly convex or plane; surface dry or 
slightly viscid when moist, covered with large (up to 2 cm broad and I cm high!), persistent, 
strongly-attached warts, the warts pyramidal at first becoming truncated or more flattened 
in age; color white to creamy-white becoming yellowish-buff or tan in old age (sometimes 
with darker stains); margin usually with cottony veil remnants and extending beyond the 
gills, not striate. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor unpleasant in age (like chlorine or dirty 
socks). GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or creamy, delicately powdered. 
STALK 7-12 (20) cm long, 1-4 cm thick at apex, rooting deeply in ground; equal above or 
tapering upward from a thicker base or bulb (up to 6 cm broad but sometimes incon- 
spicuous), the rooting portion below the bulb tapered downward; white throughout or 
with brownish to yellowish-buff stains; firm, rather tough. PAR TIAL V ElL white, mem- 
branous, usually forming a fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
warty and friable, forming a scaly volva consisting of concentrically arranged rows of 
warts or scales at apex of bulb, these sometimes disappearing in age. SPO RE PRINT white; 
spores 8.5-12.5 x 5.5-8.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious under live oak and pine; known only from California, 
but related species (see comments) are widespread. In our area it is not uncommon in the 
fall, winter, and spring. It develops slowly and persists for weeks without decaying. 
'.,a. 
274 
;. 
." 
.' 
" 
. 
.'\, :' 
.{ 
. 
l' .- 
- . ."'  " 
). . . 
/. '"'. S.. . 
 i '. .:-1<:"\' 
,., -4, 
.' ;;k.:- lt . 
. . '\ 
. rc1.. 
 
J. , 
" 
... 
/. 
.A" "' 
" 
1t 
. , ! 
 !' 
.. 
. Ii" · 
.. 
.....'t :. 
.. 
Left: Amanita magniverrucata. top view of cap. Note the exaggerated warts. Right: Amanita cokeri 
is a somewhat similar whitish species with smaller warts on the cap. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-do not experiment! It belongs to the "Lepidellas," a subgroup 
of Amanita that contains both poisonous and harmless species. 
CO MMENTS: One of our most spectacular mushrooms-the large, erect warts on the cap 
set it apart, making it look like a white pine cone or a glob of meringue (buttons resemble 
the Sierran puffball, Ca/vatia scu/pta). It is one of several large, white, warty Amanitas 
that for years have passed under the namesA. strobiliJormis andA. solitaria. However, our 
species is quite distinct because of its exaggerated warts, and has recently been rewarded 
with a name of its own. I t has several large counterparts in eastern North America with an 
unpleasant, often chlorine-like odor and more fragile warts, including: A. chlorinosma, 
A. polypyramis (especially large), and A. rhopalopus (with a large, deeply rooting base); 
A. ravenelii, with brownish imbricate (shingled) warts or scales; and A. daucipes, which 
often has a pinkish- or orange-tinged stalk. A. cokeri is a common eastern oak- and pine- 
loving species that also occurs in California. It has smaller (to 5 mm broad) but firmly- 
attached warts mainly at the center of the cap, a mild odor, a rooting bulb on the stalk, and 
an annulus (ring) and volva (see photo above). A. smithiana grows under conifers in the 
Pacific Northwest. It looks something like a matsutake or large A. si/vico/a with its poorly 
developed cottony warts, unpleasant odor,and ragged or shaggy stalk with an enlarged but 
scarcely pointed base. There are many other closely related white or pallid species (the 
"Lepidellas"), particularly in southeastern North America (e.g.,A. abrupta, with a broad, 
abrupt basal bulb; A. longipes, usually odorless with a pointed, often flattened, rooting 
bulb; A. thiersii, with a shaggy stalk; A. atkinsoniana and A. cinereopannosa, with a 
grayish veil; and A. praegraveolens, with a whitish to pinkish-tan, scaly cap and non- 
bulbous stalk). .. Lepidellas" grow on lawns as well as in the woods, and are often difficult 
to identify without a microscope. They should not be eaten. 
Amanita sp. (unidentified) (Anonymous Amanita) 
CAP 2.5-5 (8) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, whitish to gray, covered with 
darker (gray to brownish-gray) mealy or powdery warts which are easily obliterated; 
margin not striate. Flesh white, odor rather pungent in age. GILLS usually adnate or 
adnexed ( rarely free), close, creamy-white becoming dingy yellowish or yellowish-orange 
in old age. ST ALK 2-4 (7.5) cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or tapering downward, some- 
times with a short, rooting base or swollen slightly above the base; white and striate above 
the ring, dingy whitish or tinged cap color below and somewhat scaly. PARTIAL VEIL 
membranous but very fragile, disappearing or forming a superior, median, or even basal 
ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, mealy-powdery, forming an indistinct or scaly 
volva in the form of obscure grayish scales or powdery-mealy warts over lower portion of 
stalk. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 5-8.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
 . 
.... 
f, 
.:.. J 
....'" 
... 
.J 
. 
f' . 
Amanita sp. (unidentified). An odd, unimposing species that is locally abundant in pastures and open 
ground. Note the small size, stocky stature, and grayish warts on the cap. The fragile partial veil and 
volva are easily obliterated. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in pastures, open fields, hard-packed ground, under 
trees, etc. Fairly common in our area in the fall and winter and sometimes very abundant. 
It usually grows in the open, often mingling with Agaricus campestris and Agaricus 
cupreobrunneus. which it superficially resembles. Apparently it is not mycorrhizal. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: This anomalous, anonymous Amanita is quite unamanitalike with its 
short stem, compact mealy-warty, grayish cap, and predilection for growing in meadows. 
The volva is so fragile that it may disappear, but the warts on the cap signify Amanita. 
A. Jarinosa is a similar species (cap small, powdery-mealy, gray to brownish-gray, etc.), 
but has non-amyloid spores, a striate cap, no partial veil, and grows in forests Or at their 
edges. It is widespread but rare in the West. Two similar grayish species, A. cinereoconia 
and A. onusta, are larger and apparently restricted to eastern North America; the latter 
usually grows in sandy soil. 
Amanita rubescens (Blushing Amanita; The Blusher) 
CAP 4- I 2 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface slightly 
viscid or dry, at first covered with white, pinkish, brownish, or grayish warts, the back- 
ground white at first, then flushed sordid reddish, pinkish, reddish-brown, brown, etc.; 
margin usually not striate. Flesh firm, white, slowly reddening when bruised; odor mild, 
taste mild or latently bitter. GILLS adnate to adnexed when young, sometimes free in age; 
close, white or pallid, sometimes stained reddish. ST ALK 5-14 (20) cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, 
equal or enlarged downward to a swollen base (bulb); at first white, soon stained sordid 
reddish, reddish-brown, or pinkish below the ring and often somewhat scaly; white or 
tinged pinkish above. PARTIAL VEIL membranous, white or tinged reddish, forming a 
fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, forming an indistinct 
or scaly volva (i.e., disappearing or leaving sordid reddish scaly zones at base of stalk). 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 7.5-10.5)( 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups in woods and under trees, partial to oak but 
also found with conifers; common and widely distributed. In our area it is monogamous 
with live oak and usually fruits twice-a small flush after the first fan rains, and a larger 
crop in the late winter and spring (February-April) when A. velosa and A. ocreata 
"bloom." It can also turn up in the summer-in fact, I've found it every month ofthe year! 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It is edible when cooked, but indigestible or even 
poisonous raw, and it is easily confused with poisonous species. It is highly esteemed in 
Europe (chiefly France), but our local version does not have a good flavor. 
276 
, .. 
. 
Jt-- 
,. 
, .. 
.j; 
'" 
Amanita rubescens is extremely variable in size, stature, and color, but always stains dingy reddish 
(often slowly). These whitish-capped specimens are small; more can be seen below and on p. 266. 
COMMENTS: The "blushing" of the cap, stem, and flesh is the one infallible field mark 
of this fickle fungus. The blushing process is slow to manifest itself and is best seen on the 
lower stalk or around the edges of maggot tunnels (see photograph below). In other 
respects it is an exasperatingly variable Amanita. Young specimens may be pure white 
(in our form), while older individuals usually develop strong reddish or brownish tones. 
The warts may be evenly disposed over the entire cap surface, or concentrated at the center, 
or more prevalent toward the margin, or completely absent (especially in rainy weather). 
Mature specimens are sometimes mistaken for A.pantherina(ifthey are brownish), oreven 
A. muscaria (if they are reddish), but the indistinct volva, reddish stains, and amyloid 
spores separate it. Pure white buttons, on the other hand, resemble the A. strobiliformis 
group (see A. magniverrucata), but lack the tapered, rooting base ofthose species. They can 
also be confused with the "false blusher" (see below). The attached gills and absence of a 
volva can lead to confusion with Armillaria. but once again the reddish stains distinguish it. 
The "true" A. rubescens that is so common in eastern North America differs from our 
form in several respects. Its universal veil is grayish to dirty pinkish and its cap is soon 
reddish-brown to flesh-color to brown or olive-tinged, while ours is often white. Also, it is 
a much larger, taller, and more stately fungus, and is often parasitized bya pallid to pinkish 
mold (see photo on p. 884), whereas ourformisnot. In fact, about all that our version has in 
common with the "true" A. rubescens is its blushing behavior-and it may eventually 
prove to be a distinct variety or species. (Perhaps we should appoint an ad hoc committee 
to investigate the problem!) 
Also common under live oak in our area is the "false blusher"-an unidentified and 
probably unnamed species that closely mimics our A. rubescens in every respect save one: 
it does not "blush." Its bulb is often brownish-stained, however, and like A. rubescens it 
is whitish when young, browner in age, and has warts on the cap. Its edibility is unknown 
-another good reason not to eat A. rubescens! 
Amamta rubescens. Left: Mature brown-capped specimens; note warts on cap and indistinct volva. 
Right: Even the maggot tunnels stain reddish, as shown in this close-up. 
" 
/ 
I 
'/ 
. 
\ 
. :-' 
 
-:: 
.. 
-a. 
. 
 
.. 
 
-..;;;:: 
.,} 
... . 
 
278 
AMANIT ACEAE 
A manila aspera (Y ellow- Veiled Amanita) Color Plate 56 
CAP 4-12 (15) cm broad, nearly round to convex, then plane; surface viscid when moist, 
dark brown to grayish-brown, yellow-brown, or bright yellow, covered with yellow mealy 
or powdery warts which become flattened and grayish to dingy buff in age or occasionally 
disappear; margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh white or tinged yellow, soft. GILLS 
white or creamy-yellow" close, adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 5-15 (20) cm long, 
0.7-2.5 cm thick, equal or tapering upward, the base often enlarged; white to pale yellow 
above the ring, white to yellow, buff, or grayish-tinged below; base often with orangish, 
reddish, or brown stains ( on exterior or interior). PAR TIAL V ElL membranous, white or 
pale yellow above, bright yellow to grayish-yellow on underside; forming a superior, skirt- 
like ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL VEIL powdery, friable, forming a scaly volva (scaly 
zones and/ or yellow to grayish-yellow powdery scales) at base of stalk, but volva easily 
obliterated. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-12 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups under both hardwoods and conifers; 
common in our area and throughout the Pacific Northwest, but seldom in large numbers. 
I t often grows with A. muscaria in our coastal pine forests and the two make a colorful pair; 
it is also frequent in our oak-madrone woodlands. Rather than fruiting in one large, 
spectacular burst like A. calyptrata and A. muscaria, it usually keeps a lower profile, fruit- 
ing rather sporadically throughout the mushroom season. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. Chemical analysis has failed to reveal the presence of 
amanita-toxins, but this does not mean it is edible. True, the European form is edible 
(according to one source), and if ourform were poisonous we would probably know by now 
-but why tempt fate when there are so many other safe, savory mushrooms available? 
COMMENTS: This elegant Amanita is easily recognized by its powdery yellow universal 
veil and yellow partial veil. Fresh specimens are among our most lovely mushrooms. The 
cap color ranges from yellow through yellow-brown to dark brown and is apt to bewilder 
the color-conscious beginner. A. pantherina and A. gemmata are often confused with A. 
aspera, but have non-amyloid spores and white veils plus a collarlike volva. A. Jlavo- 
rubescens (=A.Jlavorubens) is a very similar if not identical species with a yellow-orange 
to yellow or yellow-brown cap. It is common in eastern North America, especially under 
oak. A.flavoconia is also similar, but is smaller and never brown and is rare in the West. 
A manila flavoconia 
CAP 2.5-7.5 (10) cm broad, nearly oval becoming convex or plane; surface viscid when 
moist, bright orange to yellow-orange or yellow, or orange at the center and yellow at the 
margin; adorned with scattered yellow warts which may disappear in age orrainy weather; 
margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh rather thin, white. GILLS adnate to adnexed or 
free, close, white, sometimes with yellow edges. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, 
tapering upward or equal with an enlarged base; smooth or somewhat scaly, yellow or 
sometimes white. PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, forming a superior, skirtlike ring which 
usually has a yellow underside. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, forming a scaly volva consis- 
ting of powdery yellow scales and patches at base of stalk which wear off easily or disappear 
in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in woods (mainly under hardwoods, but 
also with conifers); often abundant in summer and early fall in eastern North America, but 
rare in the West. (It occurs in Arizona and has been found in northern California.) 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: This beautiful Amanita looks like a miniature A. muscaria, and is often 
mistaken for the yellow-orange form of that species. However, it does not have concentric 
AMANITA 
279 
rings at the base of the stalk and is much smaller. The yellow veil remnants are reminiscent 
of A. aspera, but the cap is orange to yellow rather than yellow to brown, and the stalk is 
often yellow as well. Other species: A.frostiana of eastern North America is similar, but 
has whitish to buff warts, a more distinct volva, and non-amyloid spores. 
Amanita porphyria (Booted Amanita) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface slightly viscid when 
moist, gray to grayish-brown, often with a subtle purplish cast; usually adorned with 
scattered grayish (or sometimes whitish) warts, these sometimes merging to form a patch 
or often wearing off or washing away; margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh white; 
odor often turniplike in age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or sometimes 
aging or bruising grayish. ST ALK 5-18 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick at apex, equal above with 
a large, soft, abrupt, rounded or flattened bulb at the base; bulb often cleft; white or pale 
gray above the ring, gray or with grayish to grayish-brown or purple-gray patches below. 
PARTIAL VEIL membranous, forming a superior, skirtlike ring which often collapses 
or disappears in age; ring gray or grayish-yellow. UNIVERSAL VEIL somewhat mem- 
branous but also friable; forming a collarlike volva (free rim) around the apex of bulb or 
leaving scattered grayish patches or disappearing. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-10 
microns, round, smooth, amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups under conifers; widely distributed in 
northern North America. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest but rather rare in 
California. I have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous?? Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: The abrupt, soft, rounded, basal bulb and grayish color distinguish this 
conifer-loving Amanita. The volva may have a free margin but is not truly saclike. In 
eastern North America there are two related species with a prominent basal bulb: 
A. citrina (=A. mappa) is very common (mainly under hardwoods) and rather slim, with 
a pale yellow to yellow-green to whitish cap and buffy-white to pinkish or lavender-gray 
warts; A. brunnescens, also fond of hardwoods, has a brown to olive-brown or paler cap, 
a stalk that stains reddish-brown, and a longitudinally split or chiselled basal bulb; it has 
also been reported from the Pacific Northwest. Neither of these Amanitas should be eaten. 
Amanita porphyria. Note large basal bulb and grayish patches on stalk. Cap is purple-gray to brown. 
...- " . 
.... 
, 
'" 
l 
'\ 
, 
41t1 
, 
.: 
. .,....... a,:a 
, 
r 
-n P.q,. 
- 
i- . ......... j 
;, 
. 
.. 
.t 
... 
Amanita pantherina, young button at right, mature specimen at left, intermediate stages between. 
Note the collarlike volva (Le., the free rim of the basal bulb). 
Amanita pantherina (Panther Amanita) 
CAP 5-15 (25) cm broad, nearly round or convex becoming plane to slightly depressed; 
surface viscid when moist, color variable: dark brown to light brown, tan, dull yellowish, 
or paler (see comments), often darker at center and paler toward margin; adorned with 
many white to pale buff universal veil remnants ( warts), but these often washed off by rain; 
margin usually striate. Flesh firm, white. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or 
pallid. STALK 5-15 (20) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, tapering upward or equal with a basal 
bulb; dry, white or aging buff; usually smooth above the ring, often scaly below. PAR TIAL 
VEIL membranous, white, forming a superior or median skirtlike ring whose margin is 
often ragged or toothed. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, white, usually forming a collarlike 
volva (i.e., adhering to the bulb except for a free rim at apex of bulb), sometimes also with 
scaly or ragged zones above the free rim, or sometimes indistinct (no free rim). SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 9-13 )( 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed, 
but especially common under conifers from the Rocky Mountains westward. In our area it 
fruits from fall through spring and is quite common under pine, oak, and Douglas-fir, 
though rarely in the large numbers characteristic of A. muscaria. In the Pacific Northwest 
and Sierra Nevada it is perhaps the most omnipresent of all the Amanitas. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! It contains the same toxins as A. muscaria, but apparently in 
higher concentrations-large doses can be fatal! It is said to be one ofthe most common 
causes of mushroom poisoning in the Pacific Northwest. 
COMMENTS: The dark brown to tan or dull yellowish cap with whitish warts and the 
free rim or collar at the top ofthe basal bulb are the field marks ofthis ubiquitous species. As 
is often the case in Amanita, there is considerable variation in cap color as well as in size. 
Yellowish forms are difficult to distinguish from A. gemmata-generally they are duller 
and often somewhat browner at the center, but the two species appear to intergrade (see 
comments under A gemmata). The cap is never red or bright orange-yellow as in A. 
muscaria, and the stalk lacks the grayish patches characteristic of A. porphyria. A. sp;ssa 
of eastern North America is somewhat similar, but has amyloid spores and a gray universal 
veil that leaves a powdery-scaly rather than collarlike volva. A. cothuTnata is a slender 
eastern species with a whitish cap that is often tinged yellowish or brown at the center. A 
mushroom meeting this description occurs in our area, but is rare. Some amanitologists 
consider A. cothurnata to be a variety of A. pantherina. 
AMANITA 
281 
Amanita gemmata (Gemmed Amanita; Jonquil Amanita) 
CAP 4-10 (14) cm broad, rounded becoming convex to plane; surface slightly viscid when 
moist, creamy to pale yellow, golden-yellow, or buff (but see comments), often slightly 
darker at the center; covered with whitish universal veil remnants (warts) which may merge 
to form a patch or may disappear in age; margin striate or not. Flesh white, fairly thick. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, 
tapered upward or equal with an enlarged base; dry, white or tinged yellowish, usually 
smooth above the ring and sometimes scaly below. PARTIAL VEIL typically present 
(but absent in var. exannu/ata), membranous, white; forming a fragile, superior to 
median, skirtlike ring on stalk, or disappearing. UNIVERSAL VEIL friable to somewhat 
cottony, white, usually forming a collarlike volva (free rim) at apex of basal bulb, 
sometimes also with scaly zones above rim, or sometimes forming a thin sheath instead 
of a rim, or sometimes the volva more or less indistinct. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
8-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods or along forested paths and roads; 
widely distributed. In our area it occurs in mixed woods and under live oak shortly after the 
first fall rains and less commonly thereafter. In the Sierra Nevada and Pacific Northwest 
it is common under conifers in the springas well as the summer and fall. The mountain form 
differs slightly from the typical form and may eventually be classified as a separate species. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! Some books list it as edible, but other sources say it contains 
the same toxins as A. pantherina and A. muscaria. 
COMMENTS: Also known asA. junqui//ea, this attractive Amanita can be distinguished 
from typical A. pantherina by its yellow to creamy cap and more modest size. (A. pan- 
therina ranges from small to very large.) However, a confusing series of "hybrids" exist 
whose cap color and degree oftoxicity are intermediate between the two species. A. aspera 
and A.j7avoconia differ by having yellow veil remnants, while the yellow-capped form of 
A. muscaria is larger, with a volva composed of concentric rings. Sometimes the universal 
veil of A. gemmata forms a continuous layer over the entire ca p, but does not peel off easily 
like the volval patch of A. calyptrata. The latter also differs inits large, thick, saclike volva. 
Other species: A. russu/oides of eastern North America is a similar, slimmer version of 
A. gemmata and may just be a regional variation. A. breckoniihas a double, nearly basal 
annulus (ring) and a short, tapered, rooting base beneath the bulb. It occurs in our area 
under pine and perhaps oak, but is rare. A small species with an orange cap (sometimes 
yellow toward margin) and no partial veil also occurs rarely in our area. It may be a form 
ofvar. exannulata or it may be an undescribed species. 
Amanita gemmata. Left: Typical specimens; note collarlike volva. Right: A vernal mountain form 
that may actually be a distinct species. It also has a yellow cap, but is often stockier. It usually 
appears when the morels are out. 
....... 
. 
It 
" . 
, 
... 
.'--. tI 
, 
,.. 
 
 
282 
AMANIT ACEAE 
A manila muscar;a 
(Fly Agaric; Fly Amanita) Color Plates 58, 59 
CAP 5-30 (40) cm broad, round becoming convex and finally plane or slightly depressed; 
surface viscid when moist, color variable: bright red to blood-red, scarlet-red, or orange- 
red when fresh (var. muscaria and var.flavivolvata), but often fading to orange, yellow- 
orange, or paler; bright yellow-orange to yellow, then fading( var.formosa); yellow with a 
peachy center ( var. persicina); or white to buff to silvery-grayish-white( var. alba); covered 
at first with a dense coating of universal veil fragments (warts) which are usually white( but 
are yellow in var.flavivolvata and often buff or tan in var. alba); warts flattened in age, often 
wearing away or washed off by rain; margin usually at least somewhat striate. Flesh firm 
when young, soft inage; thick, white. GILLS adnatetoadnexed or free, close, broad, white. 
ST ALK 5-20 (30) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick at apex, tapering upward or equal with a basal 
bulb up to 6 cm broad; white or whitish, or somewhat discolored in age; smooth or 
somewhat ragged-scaly below the ring; often fragile in old age. PARTIAL VEIL 
membranous, usually forming a thin, persistent, median to superior, skirtlike ring on stalk 
which may collapse in age; ring white or with yellow patches, margin often torn or toothed. 
UNIVERSAL VEIL friable, forming a scaly volvaatapex of bulb consisting of one or more 
(usually 24) concentric rings. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 6.5-9 microns, broadly 
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious or in large rings in forests and at 
their edges, also with planted trees. Common throughout most of the northern 
hemisphere-its fa vorite mycorrhizal mates include pine, spruce, fir, birch, and aspen. The 
bright red form with white warts (vaL muscaria) is the common one in western North 
America as well as Europe and Asia. In our area it fruits along with the yellow-warted 
variety from fall to early spring and is often abundant in our coastal pine forests and along 
freeways where pines have been planted. It also turns up occasionally under oak and 
madrone. In the Rocky Mountains it is common in late summer with spruce and in the 
Pacific Northwest in the fall with various conifers. The red-capped form with yellow warts 
(vaL j7avivo/vala) has a southern distribution but is quite common in our area. The form 
with a bright yellow to yellow-orange cap (vaLjurmu:m) is the dominant one in eastern 
North America. In California it iscommonin the Sierra Nevada but ratherrarein the Coast 
Amanita muscaria. Left A button completely covered with white warts (the universal veil). Right: 
"Bloody mirror ofthe galaxy." This large button was frisbee-sized when fullyexpanded.(J oelLeivick) 
') 
" 
.. 
'. 
"'- 
.'" .. 
'...... 
, 
. t.. 
f... -.=.. 
"" 
.t 
.. 
. 
. 
v 
.. 
. :. 
" 
 
.. 
, ,.J 
., 
4 
_...<1' A 
... 
, 
Amanita muscaria var. alba closely resembles the more common red- and yellow-capped varieties, 
but has a white to grayish-buff cap. 
ranges. The grayish-white form (var. alba) is more common in northern regions. It has been 
found in northern California, but is rare. The peach-centered variety (var. persicina) is 
most common in the Southeast. It is interesting to note that wherever A. muscaria grows it 
is often accompanied by Boletus edulis. and can serve as a "red flag" indicator for that 
species. I've even seen a very large ring of A. muscaria locally that numbered over 100 
fruiting bodies, with three bulky B. edu/is growing right in the middle of it! 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous and hallucinogenic-esteemed by both maggots and mystics. 
Fatalities are extremely rare, but it is undoubtedly dangerous in large or even moderate 
amounts. The effects vary from person to person, mushroom to mushroom, and from 
region to region and season to season, so that there is no way to determine in advance 
what one's reaction will be. Too many people have had unpleasant experiences for me to 
recommend it (for an account of its effects, see p. 894). Tales of "getting off' by nibbling 
on a piece of the veil or licking the "stars" off the cap are frivolous. However, the skin ap- 
parently contains greater concentrations of the toxins than the rest of the fruiting body. 
The name ..fly agaric," incidentally, is derived from the ancient practice of using the mush- 
room (often mixed with milk) to stupefy flies. It is also notable for its ability to concentrate 
vanadium-a rare, malleable, ductile metal used to add tensile strength to steel-from the 
soil. 
COMMENTS: The brilliant red form of this mushroom needs no introduction-it is 
known to every myopic middle-class ..mystic" in America. Its caricature appears on key 
chains, incense holders, posters, candles, curtains, calling cards, and calendars. Large 
plastic reproductions can be found on lawns and in display windows, amusement parks, 
and fantasy decor. The irony of it is that few people realize that such a mushroom actually 
exists! The color, of course, is its outstanding field mark, plus the numerous warts on the 
cap, which look like curds of cottage cheese, or to the more cosmically inclined, like ..stars." 
(The warts may be washed off by rain, however.) The white gills, presence of an annulus 
(ring), and scaly volva separate it from other bright red mushrooms(notablythe Russulas), 
and, unless you're color blind, it is difficult to confuse it with any of our other Amanitas. 
The cap may fade drastically as it ages, especially in direct sunlight or after a soaking rain, 
but will usually retain at least some vestige of its original splendor. The other color forms, 
particularly the white one, are not quite so distinctive, and are best recognized by their 
valva, which usually consists of a series of scaly concentric rings above the basal bulb. In 
our area the fly agaric grows bigger than any other Amanita-I have seen ..monsters" 
nearly two feet broad! In such specimens the stalk has difficulty supporting the weight of 
the cap and will break at the slightest provocation, or even topple over of its own accord. 
283 
284 
AM AN IT ACEAE 
A manila caesarea group (Caesar's Amanita) Color Plate 60 
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, nearly oval to convex, becoming broadly convex or plane; surface 
slightly viscid when moist, smooth, or sometimes with one or two pieces of thick white 
universal veil tissue; bright red to orange-red or orange, often fading to yellowish or even 
paler in sunlight or heavy rain; margin conspicuously striate. Flesh thick, yellow under 
the cuticle, otherwise white. GILLS close, broad, adnate to adnexed or free, bright chrome- 
yellow or at times egg-yellow, or pale yellow with darker yellow edges. STALK 5-15 (20) 
cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below (but may appear bulbous from the 
thick volva); smooth or with small scales, same color as gills or slightly paler; stuffed with a 
pith or jelly, eventually hollow. PARTIAL VEIL membranous, forming a persistent, 
su peri or and often striate, skirtlike ring which is colored like the gills. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
thick, membranous, white, forming a large, rather tough, lobed, saclike volva which is 
attached only to the base of stalk and may have a flange within. SPORE PRINT white or 
faintly yellow; spores 8-12)( 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or sometimes in large rings, in pine and oak woods in 
southern Europe and much ofthe warm temperate zone. Its North American distribution 
parallels that of Lactarius indigo: it is common in the summer under ponderosa pine in 
Arizona and New Mexico, as well as with various pines in Mexico and Central America, 
and a slightly different variety (see comments) occurs in the southeastern United States 
north to Quebec. It has not been recorded from California but is to be looked for in the 
warmer parts of the state (it is apparently supplanted by A. calyptrata). I have seen 
enormous fruitings near the Grand Canyon, in August and September. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly prized in Europe, where it is considered among the very 
best of all mushrooms (it is said to have been a favorite of the Caesars). In America, 
however, it is not so highly regarded. Its flavor is very similar to that of A. calyptrata, which 
is to say, not to everyone's liking. Because of its brilliant color it is by far the safest ofthe 
Amanitas for the table (but not necessarily the best-see A. velosal). 
CO MMENTS: This resplendent prince of the Amanitas is easily distinguished by its bright 
yellow gills and stalk, brilliant red to orange cap with striate margin, and thick, volumi- 
nous, white saclike volva. It is a robust fungus that calls to mind A. calyptrata. In fact, 
it may mimic the latter in having one or more thick patches of veil tissue on the cap, 
especially in dry climates. The variety in eastern North America has a slimmer stalk 
(sometimes with reddish fibrils) plus a usually bald, sometimes umbonate cap that is often 
yellow toward the margin in age. It is now considered a distinct species, A. hemibapha 
(formerly A. umbonata). Another common eastern species, A. parcivolvata, is similar in 
color( red to yellow-orange striate cap and yellow gills), but lacks a partial veil and does not 
have a saclike volva; it is harmless anyway. The poisonous A. muscaria is easily dis- 
tinguished by its warted cap, white gills and stalk, and scaly rather than sac1ike volva. 
Amanita calyptrata (Coccora; Coccoli) Color Plates 61, 62, 63 
CAP 7-25 cm or more broad, rounded becoming convex and finally plane; surface viscid 
when wet, usually with a large, thick, central, cottony whitish patch of universal veil tissue; 
otherwise typically dull orange to orange-brown, bronze, yellow-brown, or dark brown, 
usually with a paler (yellow) margin, or pale yellow to creamy or whitish (the pale form) 
or occasionally greenish; margin usually clearly striate. Flesh firm, thick, white or creamy; 
odor mild becoming slightly unpleasant in age. GILLS broad, close, adnate becoming 
adnexed or free, white to pale creamy-yellow. ST ALK 7-25 cmlong, 1-3.5 cm thick, equal 
or tapering upward, smooth, creamy to yellowish (typical form) or creamy to white (pale 
form) or white to greenish (greenish form); hollow, the cavity often filled with a cottony 
or jellylike substance. PARTIAL VEIL membranous, colored like stalk or slightly darker, 
\ \ :''f 
" , 
, 
 
.r; 
 ,t 
") 
. p't:  
.; -. 
f. 
I.. . 
,,, 
.' ,\-v 
-'  ,. 
" "'-.. -, "+'\- 
. 
-*" 
 
.. 
, .. 
. , 
.11 
... 
Amanita calyptrata (=A. calyptroderma), mature specimens. Note striate cap margin. (Joel Leivick) 
forming a large but fragile, superior, skirt like ring on stalk which is easily obliterated. 
UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, white, forming a large saclike volva that sheathes the 
stalk base; volva thick, ample, felty or cottony, often lobed, often with a collar or flange 
within. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; known only 
from the west coast. The distribution of the typical (darker) form parallels that of its 
favorite mycorrhizal mate, madrone: it is common in northern California and southern 
Oregon, where madrone is also common, less frequent in Washington, where madrone is 
likewise less numerous, then common again on Vancouver Island in British Columbia, 
where madrone is abundant. In our area it usually fruits after the first fall rains, sometimes 
in tremendous quantity. The pale form, on the other hand, is a late winter and spring 
mushroom. In our area it favors oak, but never fruits in the large quantities characteristic 
of the fall (typical) form. In the Sierra Nevada the pale form is prevalent under pine and 
other conifers, often forming "mushrumps" (especially in the spring). 
ED IBILITY: Edible and popular, but with a ra ther strong, fishy fla vor tha t doesn't appeal 
to everyone. Too many people eat and enjoy the typical form for me not to recommend it. 
However, be absolutely sure of your identification, review the comments on pp. 264-265, 
and avoid the pale and greenish forms, which are easily confused with poisonous species 
(see photo on next page!). The caps are superb stuffed and then broiled. The hollow stems 
can be sliced crosswise(to make rings) and marinated. The flesh does not keep well, so use 
what you pick as soon as possible. Italian-Americans stalk it with a passion, undoubtedly 
because of its resemblance-in both appearance and flavor-to their beloved A. caesarea 
of Italy. "Coccora," "coccoli," and "cocconi" (another nickname) are presumably derived 
from an Italian word for cocoon-a very apt description ofthe large, soft, cottony "eggs." 
COMMENTS: For many years this species has been called A. calyptroderma, but the 
name A. calyptrata, first applied to the greenish form, may be the correct one according 
to the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (whose purpose it is to dispel con- 
fusion) because it was published first. The typical ( darker) formand the pale form are quite 
different in color, as evidenced by the color plates. In my opinion they merit at least varietal 
status Uust like the varieties of A. muscaria) because they do not appear to intergrade and 
are ecologically distinct (see comments above). The rare greenish form, on the other hand, 
may be environmentally-induced (mycologist Harry Thiers suggests it is caused by cold 
temperatures). The typical form of this magnificent mushroom is distinguished by its 
(1) large size (2) orange to brown or yellow-brown cap with a yellow margin (3) cottony 
285 
 " 
.. - 
r' ,. .... 
 .....f---' · 
, 
. 
" 
M 
,., 
, ".. ". 
-.It .. 
. 
" " 
" 
, 
.. 
. 
- 
...... 
, 
\" '. 
'\. 
<II 
. 
,  ' 
(, 
.. 
 
. . 
 
Left: The pale winter-spring form of Amanita calyptrata. Right: Close-up of cap in Amanita ocreata 
(p. 271-272). The pale form of A. calyptrata is easily confused with the deadly A. ocreata (see photos 
on p. 272). A. ocreata usually lacks striations (fine lines) on the margin of the cap, but as evidenced 
here, striate or partially striate specimens do occur-some of them with vol val patches! 
white volval patch or "skullcap" on the cap (4) striate cap margin(5) creamy or pale yellow 
tints to the stalk and veil(6) thick, voluminous, saclike volva(7) non-amyloid spores. Even 
beginners have little trouble recognizing the typical (darker) form once they've seen it 
several times. In the deadly poisonous A. phalloides the cap is usually (but not always) 
greenish to greenish-yellow or paler, there is no volval patch or if one is present it is very 
thin, the cap margin is only very rarely striate, the spores are amyloid, and an unpleasant 
pungent odor often develops in age. Veteran toadstool-testers can differentiate them at a 
glance by their color, but beginners should not place undue emphasis on such a capricious 
character. The veil tissue on the cap ofA. gemmata and A. pantherina can mimic a" patch," 
but does not peel off easily, and the volva in those species is collarlike or indistinct, not sac- 
like. The pale form of A. calyptrata is easily confused with poisonous Amanitas such as 
A. ocreata and A. gemmata. and I cannot recommend it to any but the most seasoned and 
intrepid toadstool-tester. The same goes for the greenish form. Another variety, originally 
called A. calyptratoides, may be a distinct species. I have found it only once in our area, but 
it is quite common in southern California under oaks. It sometimes approachesA. vel os a in 
size and stature, and has a very poorly formed, appressed or evanescent annulus (ring), a 
brown cap without a yellow margin, and a modest volval patch. It is edible, but care must be 
taken in identification! 
Amanita velosa (Springtime Amanita) Color Plate 64 
CAP 3-12 (15) em broad, at first nearly oval, soon convex and finally plane; surface viscid 
when moist, smooth, pinkish-tan to orange-buff to salmon, beige, "the color of a brown 
hen's egg," or sometimes much paler (even white), often fading; usually with a white patch 
of universal veil tissue or several large, thick pieces; margin distinctly striate. Flesh 
fairly thick, white, odor rather pungent in age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, 
white, sometimes dull pinkish in old age. STALK 5-12 (15) em long, 0.5-1.5 (2.5) em thick, 
equal or tapering upward; white or tinged cap color, apex often powdery or striate, 
lower portion smooth or broken into rings or scales. PARTIAL VEIL usually absent, but 
a rudimentary ring (annulus) sometimes present as a cottony or fibrillose-scaly zone. 
UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, forming a saclike volva which sheathes the stalk base; 
volva white or tinged cap color, usually buried, ample but sometimes disintegrating or 
obscure. SPORE PRINT white or tinged very slightly pinkish; spores 8.5-12.5 x 6-10 
microns, nearly round to elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. 
AMANITA 
287 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious, common in winter and spring, associated in 
our area with live oak but often growing out in the open(in fields and around their edges, 
brushy areas, lawns, etc.), up to 40 feet away from its mycorrhizal host (which is often 
stunted by poor soil conditions). It also occurs in the aspen-conifer forests of the Sierra 
Nevada and with various oaks in the Sierra Nevada foothills and southern Oregon. It is 
apparently endemic to the west coast and more common in our area than anywhere else. 
With A. rubescens and A. ocreala it forms a striking triumvirate of springtime Amanitas 
that are monogamous locally with live oak. It is interesting to note that when all three form 
mycorrhiza with the same tree, they frequently occupy distinctly different zones or niches: 
A. ve/osa typically grows in the open at the outer fringes of the host's roots; A. ocreala 
grows in deep shade near the trunk; and A. rubescens occupies the intermediate zone or 
"shade border" near the perimeter of the branche. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and incredible! Most "objective" fungophiles rate it far superior to 
the better-known A. ca/yplrala and A. caesarea. At any rate, it is far sweeter. As a bonus, 
it fruits in the spring when there is a paucity of other collectable delectables. However, 
it is nol a good choice for beginners. Faded specimens should be avoided, as they are 
easily confused with A. ocreala and other poisonous Amanitas. 
CO MMENTS: The pinkish-tan to orange-buff, beige, or paler ca p with striate margin and 
volval patch or large warts, absence of a partial veil, saclike volva and habit offruitingin the 
open (unusual behavior for an Amanila.') are the fallible field marks of this handsome but 
variable fungus. In our area it is the last of its clan to appear-often not showing up until 
February-but as if to make up for its tardiness, it lingers on through April or even May. 
A. ca/YPlrala and A. ca/yplraloides both have volval patches but are differently colored, 
tend to grow in the woods, and have a partial veil. However, A. ve/osa often has a 
rudimentary ring and one specimen I found had a full-fledged membranous partial veil that 
covered the gills when young and broke to form an annulus (ring). This lends credence to 
the modern trend toward de-emp hasizing gross structural (" Friesian") fea tures and paying 
more attention to chemical and anatomical (microscopic) similarities. The obsolete genus 
AmanilOpsis (Amanitas without a partial veil) was incorporated into A manila onjust such 
a pretext. The trend may bode ill for the multitudes without microscopes, but it better 
reflects natural relationships. A. crocea, an eastern and Rocky Mountain species, is similar 
and equally delicious, but has an oranger, usually bald cap and orangish scales on the stalk. 
Amanitafulva (Tawny Grisette) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, oval becoming convex to plane or umbonate; surface slightly viscid 
when moist, smooth or rarely with large whitish fragments of universal veil tissue; 
orange-brown to reddish-tan, tawny, or tan; margin deeply grooved (striate). Flesh thin, 
white, odor mild. GILLS close, adnexed or free, white or creamy. STALK 7-16 cm long, 
0.4-1.5 cm thick, more orlessequal, usuallyratherlong, white or tinged cap color; fibrillose 
or with a few scales, hollow in age. PARTIAL VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
membranous, forming a large, loose, persistent, lobed, saclike volva which sheathes the 
stalk base; volva or "bag" white to pale tan or rusty-stained. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
8-10 microns, round, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious under both hardwoods and conifers, often 
in boggy areas; widely distributed but not yet reported from California. I have seen large 
fruitings in the aspen-conifer forests of the southern Rocky Mountains in late summer. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but be sure of your identification! 
COMMENTS: This species is essentially a "fulvous" version of the grisette, A. vaginala, 
and for many years was regarded as a mere color form of that species. The orange-brown to 
, 
\ 
.......... 
-.... 
, 
" 
- 
\ 
Amanita fu/va. Note conspicuously striate (grooved) cap and absence of a partial veil (annulus). 
Cap color ranges from orange-brown to reddish-tan to tan. 
reddish-tan, markedly grooved cap, absence of a partial veil, large "bag" at the base of the 
stem, and rather tall, slender stature distinguish it. It is quite handsome when fresh. Other 
species: A. CTocea is similar but has an oranger cap and pale orange scales on the stalk. 
Amanita vagi nata (Grisette) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, at first oval, then convex and finally plane or with a slight umbo; 
surface slightly viscid when moist, gray to grayish-brown, smooth or sometimes with a 
white patch or patches of universal veil tissue; margin grooved (deeply striate). Flesh soft, 
white to grayish, thin. GILLS white or tinged gray, adnate to adnexed or free, close. 
ST ALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, usually rather long and slender; equal or tapering 
upward, smooth and white or often covered with delicate grayish to grayish-brown scales. 
PAR TIAL VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, forming a saclike volva that 
sheathes the stalk but is attached only at the very base; volva white or tinged gray 
(occasionally rusty-stained), loose, lobed. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-12 microns, 
round or nearly round, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in woods or under trees; common and 
widely distributed. In our area it occurs under both hardwoods and conifers, but is largely 
supplanted by A. pachycolea and A. constricta. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when cooked, and fairly good. Though prized in France, it tends to be 
flaccid, thin-fleshed, and does not refrigerate well. It is one of the safest Amanitas for the 
table, but see comments on pp. 264-265 before eating it! 
COMMENTS: The combination of deeply striate gray to gray-brown cap, white gills, 
absence of a ring, and membranous sack or "bag" at the base of the stem typifies a group of 
Amanitas collectively called A. vaginata. The group is especially complex in the South- 
west, where a number of forms with white to gray or brown caps are common in ponderosa 
and pinyon pine forests after summer thundershowers. Several color forms of A. vaginata 
have been described, some of which are now considered distinct species. One is A.fulva 
(see description); another isA. alba, which has a pure white, grooved (striate) cap, a saclike 
volva, and no partial veil. Although edible, A. alba should not be eaten because of its 
resemblance to the destroying angels (A. ocreata, A. virosa, etc.). I have found it only twice 
in our area, but it is said to be fairly common in some regions. A. vaginata has also been 
called A man;tops;s vag;nata and J1 ag;nata plumbea. 
." 
¥ 
1(. 
r f I 
'; ',,- 
.. 
."'-'" 
.  
At 
I 
... 
'" '. -/ 
? 
.. 
... 
-,... 
!'",.. 
II. . .)11 
J 
" 
{! 
... 
. 
..... 
 .,  
.. . 
.t. 
".. .... 
- r,. 
\ 
.. .: 
......4'{fo.. J 
,,,,. ";,. 
Left: Amanita vaginara. mature specimens. The cap does not necessarily feature the small patch of 
universal veil tissue shown here; note saclike volva. Right: Close-up of the constricted, flaring volva 
of Amanita constricta (which otherwise resembles A. vaginata). 
Amanita constricta (Constricted Grisette) 
CAP 4-13 cm broad, oval becoming convex or plane to slightly umbonate; surface slightly 
viscid when moist, smooth or covered with a large patch of white to buff or grayish universal 
veil tissue which often separates later into several pieces; color beneath the veil tissue (if 
present) gray, or sometimes brownish-gray. Flesh fragile, rather thin, white to grayish. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or grayish. ST ALK 10-16 cm long, 1-2 cm 
thick, equal or tapering upward, stuffed or hollow in age; smooth or more often belted with 
numerous delicate grayish scales. PARTIAL VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL VEIL mem- 
branous, gray to white or buff, often bruising reddish when wet; forming a constricted, 
flaring volva (i.e., lower portion of volva constricted around the stalk, upper margin 
flaring outward) which may disintegrate in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9.5-13 )( 
8-10.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups in woods, associated mainly with oaks; 
apparently endemic to California or at least the west coast. Common in our area 
throughout the mushroom season but most abundant in the winter 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but see comments on pp. 264-265 before eating it! 
COMMENTS: The gray, conspicuously striate cap, absence of a partial veil, and peculiar 
constricted volva are the hallmarks of this Amanita. It is the most common grisette 
in our area. It is easily distinguished from both A. pachycolea and A. vaginata by its 
constricted rather than saclike volva, and frequent presence of universal veil tissue on the 
ca p. A. inaurata (= A. strangulata, A. ceciliae) is a closely related species" com plex" whose 
volva is also "strangled," usually forming a belt of grayish tissue around the stalk base. 
It has a gray to grayish-brown to blackish cap decorated with gray to charcoal-gray warts 
(which may wear off in age) and it has round spores(IO-14 microns). It is fairly common in 
the Pacific Northwest as well as in eastern North America, but I have yet to find it in our 
area. 
289 
., 
'" 
" 
,-4 
. 
 
.i,.:. 
'.... 
. fIIfi :' 
.. 
.. 
":. " 
, ...... 
J(: "", 
. ?' ;"f1... : 
...;. .' 
- ' 
..... , 
" 
a. 
Amanita pachyco/ea is easily told by its large size and dark brown to grayish-brown striate cap. 
The cap is often darkest at the inner edge of the striations (a feature also shown in the color plates). 
Amanita pachycolea (Western Grisette) Color Plates 65, 66 
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, at first nearly oval, then convex or somewhat bell-shaped, finally 
plane or with uplifted margin and often a low, broad umbo; surface smooth, viscid when 
moist, dark brown when young, brown to grayish-brown or paler in age (usually darker 
at the center and paler toward margin or with a darker brown band at inner edge of the 
striations); sometimes completely washed out in old age, occasionally with a thick patch or 
patches of universal veil tissue; margin grooved (deeply striate) for 1.5-3 cm. Flesh white, 
rather soft; odor sometimes unpleasant in age. GILLS close, broad, adnate becoming 
adnexed or free; white with dark brown edges when fresh, sometimes discoloring dingy 
orange or yellow-orange in old age. STALK 12-30 cm long or more, 1-3 cm thick, equal 
or tapering upward gradually, usually covered with fine, delicate, grayish-brown to brown 
particles or fibrillose scales on a pallid background; stuffed or hollow in age. PARTIAL 
VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL VEIL membranous, forming a very large, loose, lobed, 
saclike volva which sheathes lower portion of stalk for up to 12 cm but is attached only at 
the very base; volva ample, thick, white or rusty-stained. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
11-14.5 x 10-12.5 microns, broadly elliptical to round, smooth, not amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in mall groups in mixed woods and under conifers; 
apparently restricted to the Pacific Coast. It is fairly common in our area in the fall and 
winter with pine and oak, but rarely fruits in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice. Though meatierthanA. vagi nata, it develops a rather 
strong fishy taste in age. See comments on pp. 264-265 if you plan to eat it. 
COMMENTS: This lofty Amanita is easily recognized by its brown, deeply striate cap, 
absence of a ring (partial veil), and huge sheathing "bag" at the base of the stem. It is one of 
the most strikingly beautiful of all mushrooms, differing from its close relatives in the 
A. vaginata group by its larger size, brown rather than gray cap, and frequent presence of 
rusty stains on the huge volva. The volva is so voluminous that even washed out specimens 
are easily recognized. The stalk in mature individuals is so long and fragile that it is difficult 
to transport them home in one piece. Other species: A. umbrino/utea is similar, but is 
said to have white gills, smaller spores, and a wide distribution. 
290 
291 
LIMA CELLA 
Medium-sized, mostly terrestrial fungi. CAP usually smooth and viscid or slimy. GILLS free or 
nearly free, close, white or pallid. STALK typicaIly central, hoIlow or stuffed, dry or viscid. 
PARTIAL VEILpresent, sometimes forming a ring, sometimes evanescent. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
slimy, not forming a volva. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth, not amyloid (but rarely dex- 
trinoid). GilI tissue divergent, at least when young. 
THE viscid to slimy cap, presence of a veil, typically free gills, and absence of a volva typify 
this small, rather rare genus. Many Limacellas used to be placed in Lepiota, but the 
divergent gill tissue suggests a closer relationship to Amanita. The stature of the fruiting 
body is somewhat like Amanita, but the universal veil takes the form of a layer of slime 
that coats the cap and often the stem, and does not form a volva. 
About a dozen species are known from North America. They are woodland fungi with 
whimsical fruiting habits. Generally they are rare, but every so often there is a large, 
localized fruiting. Little is known of their edibility. Five species are keyed here and two are 
described. 
Key to Limacella 
I. Stalk distinctly viscid or slimy ................................................... 2 
I. Stalk not viscid (but patches of slime from cap may drip onto it) ...................... 4 
2. Partial veil forming a distinct membranous annulus (ring) L. roseicremea (see L. i//inita, p. 292) 
2. Veil slimy, not forming a membranous annulus .................................... 3 
3. Cap (and slime) entirely brown to bright reddish-brown to golden-brown. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6 
3. Cap white to creamy, or brownish at center and white toward margin .... L. illinita, p.292 
4. Partial veil fibrillose, disappearing or forming a slight ring or ragged zone on stalk; cap reddish- 
brown, chestnut-brown, pinkish-brown, or orange-brown .......... L. glioderma, below 
4. Not as above; partial veil forming a distinct membranous (flaring or skirt like) ring ....... 5 
5. Cap white or pale buff .............................. L. solidi pes (see L. i//inita, p. 292) 
5. Cap dull ochre to pale tan to creamy-pink; gills developing olive-gray stains in age or upon 
drying in one variety, not developing them in another ........ L. guttata(=L.lenticularis) 
6. Cap and stalk bright reddish-brown ................ L. glischra (see L. g/ioderma, below) 
6. Cap and stalk more or less golden-brown .......... L. kauffmanii(see L. g/ioderma, below) 
Limacella glioderma 
CAP 3-8 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface viscid to nearly dry, 
bright to dull brick-red. reddish-brown, cinnamon, chestnut-brown, or at times orange- 
brown, sometimes fading in age to pinkish-tan; cuticle often breaking up into small fibril- 
lose scales or pulling away from the margin, revealing the pinkish flesh underneath; margin 
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, tinged pinkish; odor distinctly but pleasantly 
farinaceous. GILLS adnexed or notched, or in age becoming free; close, whitish or tinged 
cap color. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, often rather slender and fragile, 
equal or slightly thicker at either end; dry or occasionally with a few patches of slime from 
the cap; whitish or pallid above the ring, with cap-colored scales, patches, and/ or fibrils 
below. PARTIAL VEIL fibrillose, whitish, forming a slight superior ring or ragged zone 
on stalk or disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL VEIL evanescent (usually not visible), 
not forming a volva. SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-5 microns, round, smooth, not 
amyloid. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed, and 
the most common Limacella in our area. I find it regularly in the late fall and winter with 
oak, madrone, and conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like myself, likely to remain so. 
- . 
:""' 
-.. 
'. .t' 
.- 'r 
.- 
- 
" 
, "' 
t,# 
, 
-- 
" .. 
" 
...\.,. 
06 
'd..' 
t 
Limacella glioderma. Note ragged or patchy stalk and evanescent partial veil. 
COMMENTS: The viscid reddish-brown cap, evanescent veil, and dry fragile stem 
distinguish this species from other Limacellas. Because the gills may be slightly attached 
to the stalk, this fungus has been placed" in Trich%ma and Armillaria. However, the 
divergent gill hyphae (a microscopic feature) indicate Limacella. The prevalent form in 
our area has only a slightly viscid cap, but fairly glutinous specimens are also encountered. 
L. g/ischra is a widespread but rare species with a bright reddish-brown cap and stalk, both 
of which are very slimy when moist.L. kauJJmanii is a southern species with a more or less 
golden-brown, viscid-slimy cap and stalk. N either of these is worth eating. 
Limacella illinita 
(White Limacella) 
Color Plate 67 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, at first rounded or oval, then convex, finally plane or broadly umbo- 
nate; surface smooth, very slimy or at least viscid, white to creamy-white in typical variety, 
brownish at the center and white at the margin in var. argi//acea; margin often hung with 
slimy veil remnants. Flesh thin, soft, white. GILLS notched or free, white, close, ST ALK 
5-9 (13) cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, equal or tapering upward, slimy or viscid, white in typical 
variety, but tinged tan or buff in var. argillacea. PARTIAL VEIL fibrillose beneath a layer 
of slime, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring. UNIVERSAL VEIL slimy, coating stalk 
and cap but not forming a volva. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-6.5 )( 4-6 microns, 
broadly elliptical to round, smooth, not amyloid. Gill tissue divergent. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups in woods, widely distributed; probably the most 
common Limacella in North America. In our area the typical variety turns up occasionally 
after heavy rains in the fall and winter in mixed woods and under Douglas-fir. I have seen 
var. argillacea only once-a large fruiting under tanoak. The typical variety is also said 
to occur in sand dunes. In the South it is said to be common on lawns as well as in woods. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. The slime is a formidable deterrent. 
COMMENTS: The slimy white or brown-tinged cap and stem combine with the free gills 
to set this slippery mushroom apart. Hygrophorus eburneus isjust as glutinous, but has 
adnate to decurrent gills and is much more common. L. so/idipes is a widely distributed 
but rare species with a viscid white cap, large flaring to skirtlike ring, and dry white stalk. 
It also occurs in mixed woods in our area and could be mistaken for Lepiota naucina, 
but the viscid cap and woodland habitat distinguish it. Other species: L. roseicremea, 
known only from Washington, is similar but has a creamy or rose-tinged cap plus a dis- 
tinctly membranous partial veil and annulus (ring). 
292 
  
 spores LEPIOTACEAE (Parasol Mushrooms) 
293 
Saprophytic, mostly terrestrial mushrooms of variable size. CAP typically dry or only slightly 
viscid, often scaly with a smooth center when mature. GILLS typically free. white to pallid or 
yellow, close. STALK cleanly separable from cap, central, base often enlarged. VEIL pf'esent. 
usually forming a ring (annulus) on stalk. or ifnot then stalk usually scaly below the veil. VOL V A 
typically absent. SPORE PRINT white 10 pale buff or dull greenish. Spores smooth, usually 
dextrinoid, but not amyloid. Gill tissue parallel or interwoven. 
THIS family is defined here to include one very large and diverse genus, Lepiota, plus a 
single green-spored mushroom, Chlorophyllum molybdites, which could just as well be 
considered an aberrant species of Lepiola. The ..splitters" have erected several additional 
genera for Lepiotas with thick-walled spores (e.g., Leucocoprinus, Leucoagaricus, and 
Macrolepiota), but until one system of classification is firmly agreed upon, it seems best 
for the purposes of this book to retain them in Lepiota. 
Among the white-spored genera, Lepiota is most likely to be confused with Cystoderma 
and Limacella-both of which were originally included in Lepiota. Cystoderma, however, 
has attached rather than free gills plus a granulose cap and stalk, while Limacella has a 
sticky or slimy cap. Lepiota also bears a superficial resemblance to Amanita, but lacks a 
volva. * There are also fundamental microscopic differences: the gill tissue is parallel to 
interwoven in Lepiota, divergent in Amanita (see p. 19), and the spores are typically 
dextrinoid in Lepiota, while in Amanita they are frequently amyloid but never dextrinoid. 
Aside from spore color, Lepiota closely resembles the common genus Agaricus (which 
has chocolate-brown spores) in having free gills, a veil, and no volva. (Some taxonomists 
even consider the Lepiotas to be a subfamily of the Agaricaceae.) There are ecological 
similarities between Lepiota and Agaricus, as well as morphological ones. Both are large 
genera centered in the warm temperate zone and tropics. (Lepiota is one ofthe largest and 
most bewildering genera of tropical agarics.) And both are at their best in moist, relatively 
warm weather. Furthermore, both are largely if not exclusively saprophytic-in contrast to 
the Amanitas, which are mostly mycorrhizal. The larger Lepiotas or..parasol mushrooms" 
frequent roadsides, waste places, lawns, gardens, pastures, and open woods. Many ofthe 
smaller species occur in both heavily forested and cultivated areas. In our area, cypresses 
are unusually rich in Lepiota (and Agaricus) species-some of them unclassified. 
The large, white-spored parasols are among our most delicious edible mushrooms. 
However, allergic reactions are reported for virtually every edible Lepiota, and extreme 
care must be taken not to confuse them with poisonous species. L. procera of eastern North 
America is the best of the best, L. rachodes and L. barssii are the best in the West, while L. 
naucina is the best ofthe rest. The dozens of smaller Lepiotas should be strictly avoided. 
Not only are they devilishly difficult to differentiate, but several (e.g., L. josserandii. 
L. helveola, and L. castanea) are said to contain potentially fatal amanita-toxins! The 
green-spored parasol, Chlorophyllum molybdites, can cause severe gastrointestinal 
distress, and the powdery yellow greenhouse species, L. lutea, is also said to be poisonous. 
At least 200 species of Lepiota are thought to occur in North America. Many have very 
limited or erratic distributions. Only some of the larger or more distinctive species are 
presented here. The diligent Lepiota-Iover will doubtlessly uncover many species that 
cannot be identified, particularly in California and the southern United States. 
Key to the Lepiotaceae (Lepiota & Allies) 
I. Fruiting body medium-sized to large; stalk usually (but not always) at least 6 mm thick; veil 
usually forming a distinct collarlike or sleevelike annulus(ring) on stalk which mayor may not 
be thick, ragged, and double-edged .............................................. 2 
I. Fruiting body small to medium-sized; stalk usually less than 6 mm thick; veil disappearing, or 
ifforming an annulus then the annulus not typically thick and double-edged .......... 10 
· L. rachudes. however, may have a volva-like rim on its basal bulb. 
294 LEPIOT ACEAE 
2. Both scales and background of cap white or whitish, the center often tinged yellow or yellow- 
brown; margin distinctly striate at maturity; common in Gulf Coast region in many habitats; 
spore print white; (may be very poisonous!) ................................. L. humei 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Cap (and often stalk or underside of veil) covered with pointed, often pyramidal warts (at least 
when young) that usually rub off easily ......................................... II 
3. Not as above; scales on cap absent, or if present then caused by the breaking up of the cap cuticle 
and not rubbing off easily ...................................................... 4 
4. S pore print greenish or grayish-green; usually growing in grass or gardens; fruiting in warm 
or hot weather ................................... Chlorophyllum molybdites, p. 295 
4. S pore print white or pallid, not greenish or grayish ................................. 5 
5. Fruiting body tall (12-40 em), cap 7 -25 em broad; stalk brown or breaking up into delicate brown 
scales or granules below the ring (which may wear off); found in woods, old pastures, etc., in 
eastern North America (also in southern California and the Southwest?) L. procera, p. 298 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Cap smooth when young, but soon breaking up into brown to reddish scales or fibrils .... 7 
6. Not as above; cap white to gray, grayish-brown, or buff ............................. 9 
7. Cap red to reddish-brown, pink, pinkish-orange, or cinnamon-buff, at least at center; fruiting 
body not staining when bruised or in age; stalk typically up to I em thick L. rubrotincta, p.305 
7. Not as above; stalk interior usually staining yellow-orange to reddish when cut or bruised . 8 
8. Fruiting body aging or drying dark reddish-brown to vinaceous; stalk often spindle-shaped 
(i.e., swollen above the base) ................................... L. americana, p. 301 
8. Not as above; stalk terminating in a swollen base or bulb ............. L. rachodes, p. 297 
9. Cap covered with flattened gray to grayish-brown fibrils when young, sometimes scaly in age 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. barssii, p. 303 
9. Cap white to gray or buff, usually smooth (but sometimes breaking up into small scales in age 
and typically without fibrils when young) .......................... L. naucina, p. 299 
10. Cap (and sometimes stalk) covered with small, erect, pointed or pyramidal scales which rub off 
easily; cap not striate ......................................................... II 
10. Notasabove ................................................................ 13 
II. Stalk with pointed scales below the veil .......................................... 12 
II. Stalk with few if any scales (but underside of veil often has them); mainly found in eastern North 
America and the Southwest ................ L. acutesquamosa (see L. eriophora, p. 303) 
12. Veil usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk; stalk 1-2 em thick ................. 
.... ... ...... . . ..... . ...... .... . . .... . '" " .. . . L. asperula(see L. eriophora, p. 303) 
12. Veil disappearing in age; stalk 4-8 mm thick ....................... L. eriophora, p. 303 
13. Cap conspicuously striate, at least in age, the surface usually powdery or mealy or with small 
scales when young; flesh thin and fragile; veil usually (but not always) forming a distinctive 
sleevelike or collarlike annulus (ring) on stalk (examine several specimens) ........... 14 
13. Not with above features; cap not normally striate .................................. 16 
14. Fruiting body yellow or mostly yellow, at least when fresh ........ L.IUlea& others, p. 302 
14. Fruiting body not yellow (but may stain yellow) ................................... 15 
15. Cap and base of stalk purplish to pinkish-brown or purple-brown when young, the cap surface 
breaking up into purplish scales; found in nurseries and greenhouses .................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. lilacinogranulosa (=Leucocoprinus Iilacinogranulosus) 
15. Not as above ........................................ L. cepaestipes & others, p. 30 I 
16. Stalk shaggy or cottony below the veil; cap margin often shaggy also; growing in woods; spores 
12-20 microns long ................................... L. clypeolaria & others, p. 309 
16. Not with above features ....................................................... 17 
17. Fruiting body whitish or with a brownish cap, the stalk typically staining reddish; common 
in grazed pastures (but not on dung) in Florida ................... L. sp. (unidentifiedr 
17. Notasabove ................................................................ 18 
18. Veil usually forming a distinct collarlike annulus (ring) on stalk (examine several specimens) 19 
18. Veil usually disappearing or forming only a fibrillose or cottony zone or obscure annulus 29 
*Popularly known as "Peele's Lepiota" because it was discovered by Stephen Peele of Florida, this species is said 
to be hallucinogenic; it should not be eaten until better known, because several similar species are poisonous! 
LEPIOTA& ALLIES 
295 
19. Cap, stalk, andl ur flesh staining bright orange LO red (or staining yellow and then orange LO 
reddish) when bruised or rubbed, then often discoloring to dark brown or purplish ..... 20 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
20. Fruiting body aging or drying dark reddish to vinaceous; stalk usually spindle-shaped (i.e., 
swollen above or at the base); cap often with coarse scales; growing in compost, sawdust, 
around old stumps, etc., usually in groups or clusters. ...... L. amer;eana& others, p. 301 
20. Not as above ................................................................ 21 
21. Tropical or found along Gulf of Mexico; staining yellow before reddening or darkening . 22 
21. Not as above; not staining yellow ............................................... 23 
22. Gills tinged pale yellow; center of cap and scales on cap blackish-brown ...... L. jianguiJlua 
22. Not as above ........................... L. t;netor;a & others (see L. americana. p. 30 I) 
23. Gills bruising pinkish or red-orange .... L. roseiJol;a& others (see Lflammeatincta, p. 304) 
23. G ills not staining when bruised ....................... L. flammeat;ncta & others, p. 304 
24. Cap black or dark gray at center, usually with scattered gray to greenish-gray scales ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. atrod;sea, p. 304 
24. Not as above; cap scales not gray or black ............................. 25 
25. Cap white to yellowish or pale tan ............................................... 26 
25. Cap purple, red, pink, reddish-brown, or brown, at least at the center ................. 27 
26. Taste strongly acidic; cap typically with small scales in age; usually growing with alder. . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. puleherr;ma 
26. Not as above; cap usually smooth, yellowish to tan or grayish at center and paler toward margin 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. sequo;arum & others, p. 307 
27. Cap or fibrils on cap purplish . L. rose;lh';da (see L. rubrulincta. p. 305 & L. cristata, p. 306) 
27. Not as above; cap (or scales) some shade of red. pink, orange, brown. etc. ............. 28 
28. Cap 3-8 em broad, typically with radiating fibrils .......... L. rubrot;neta & others, p. 305 
28. Cap usually 5 em broad or less, with small scattered or concentrically arranged scale ... 32 
29. Gills yellow ...................................... L. luteophylla (see L. IUlea, p. 302) 
29. Gills not yellow .............................................................. 30 
30. Cap and stalk tinged lavender to lilac, without scales; odor unpleasant; growing in woods; 
rare .............................................................. L. buck nail;; 
30. Not as above ................................................................ 31 
31. Cap small (usually 2.5 em broad or less), white or tinged pinkish to pinkish-cinnamon; smooth 
or minutely powdery but without contrasting colored scales .......... L. sem;nuda, p. 307 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Stalk typically without scales; cap small (usually 1-5 em broad); annulus (ring) often present 
on stalk ................................................ L. er;stata & others, p. 306 
32. Stalk typically with scales below the veil or cap larger; distinct annulus usually lacking .. 33 
33. Stalk and often the cap developing strong ochraceous to rusty-orange tones in age or after 
handling; fruiting body small (stalk typically 1-3 mm thick) .......... L. castanea, p. 307 
33. Not as above(but reddish tones may develop); fruiting body small to medium-sized ..... 34 
34. Scales on cap and stalk blackish to dark brown. . . . . . . . . L. fel;na (see L.josserandii, p. 308) 
34. Not as above; scales brown to reddish .................... L. josserand;; & others, p. 308 
Chlorophyllum molybdites (Green-Spored Parasol) 
CAP (5) 10-30 (40) em broad, oval or nearly round, then convex to broadly cone-shaped, 
plane, or umbonate; surface dry, at first smooth but soon breaking up into light brown to 
brown or pinkish-brown scales on a white background; scales flat or curled, usually rather 
few at maturity and concentrated toward the center. Flesh thick, white, soft in age; not 
staining when bruised or bruising slowly reddish or occasionally bruising orange in the 
stalk. GILLS free, broad, close, white to dingy yellowish, then slowly becoming grayish 
to greenish in old age. STALK 5-25 em long, 1-2.5 em thick at apex, equal or thicker at base; 
smooth, firm, white or brownish-stained VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent, 
superior, double-edged ring on stalk; ring becoming brownish on underside and usually 
,,""' 
I 
 
" 
"" 
........ 
 
'"  
\. ." 
 
 -. 
  
.. 
./ 
- 
,"" 
" 
.\ 
- 
-- 
, 
;,. 
l- 
i · 
Chlorophyllum molybdites is best distinguished from other parasol mushrooms by its greenish spore 
print. Note how the gills are still white in the fully expanded specimen in background. 
movable in age. SPORE PRINT grayish-olive to greenish; spores 8-13 )( 6.5-9 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, thick-walled, with an apical pore, dextrinoid. Cap cuticle composed 
of narrow, interwoven, mostly repent hyphae (but often upright at center of cap). 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in groups or large rings on lawns and other grassy 
places, also in gardens; fruiting in summer or during warm weather and widely distributed 
in the tropics and warm temperate zone. It is common in most of eastern and southern 
North America as well as inland northern California. I have seen enormous fruitings on 
lawns in Fresno, Los Angeles, Palo Alto, and San Diego, but have never seen it on the 
central California coast, perhaps because of the cool summers. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! Some people eat it without ill effect but many suffer severe 
gastrointestinal distress. It is probably the most common cause of mushroom poisoning in 
the United S ta tes, a tribute to its growth on la wns, tern pting size( it borders on being irresis- 
Chlorophyllum molybdites growing on a lawn. Note broadly cone-shaped cap of mature specimen at 
top right, and drumstick shape of buttons in foreground. Gills at far right have started to darken. 
\ 
.. ..., 
-.. 
., 
.... r. 
f". ' 
, 
. 
..".....- 
." 
CHLOROPHYLLUM 
297 
tible) and resemblance to LeplOta rachodes, Coprinus comatus, Agaricus species, etc. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive summer mushroom always attracts attention because of 
its large size and handsome appearance (frisbee-sized specimens are commonplace). In 
much of inland and southern California and the Southwest, it is one of the commonest 
urban lawn mushrooms or "toadstools:' It so closely resembles other large Lepiotas that 
some lepiotologists merely consider it an aberrant species with greenish spores (i.e., 
Lep;ota molybd;tes). It is most likely to be mistaken for Lepiota rachodes, especially in the 
button stage. It differs, however,inits habitat (usually grass), fondness for hot weather, less 
pronounced staining reactions (though this character is variable), and less bulbous stem. 
The only completely reliable fea ture, however, is the spore color. But beware-the gills may 
remain whitish well into maturity, so that making a spore print is the only sure way to 
determine the spore color! Young buttons looklike drumsticks when they first emerge from 
the ground. They may not show any white on the cap, whereas adults may be almost entirely 
white. Lep;ota morgan; is an older name for it. 
Lep;ota rachodes (Shaggy Parasol) Color Plate 69 
CAP 5-20 cm broad, oval to convex or marshmallow-shaped, becoming plane in age or 
slightly umbonate; surface dry, at first pale brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon-brown, 
or brown, soon breaking up into large, coarse or shaggy scales as the cap expands, revealing 
the white to dingy buff background, the center usually remaining smooth and brown; 
margin usually fringed or shaggy. Flesh thick, white, fairly firm, typically bruising yellow- 
orange to orange and then reddish or brown when cut. GILLS broad, free, white, close, 
sometimes dingy brownish in old age or when handled. STALK 5-18 cm long, 1-3 cm thick 
at apex, enlarged below (var. rachodes), or with a large, abrupt basal bulb which may have 
a raised rim (var. hortens;s); white when young, developing brownish stains in age orupon 
handling; smooth, dry; interior usually staining bright orange or saffron and then reddish 
to dark brown when cut. VEIL membranous, white or with a brown, ragged margin; 
forming a large, thick, collarlike, double-edged, superior ring on stalk which is usually 
movable in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-13 )( 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, with 
a large apical pore, thick-walled, dextrinoid. Cap cuticle composed of enlarged, erect cells. 
HABITAT: Usually in groups or rings on ground under trees (particularly conifers) and 
bushes, in gardens and compost piles, near stables, on ant hills, along roads and other 
disturbed places, even in basements and greenhouses, sometimes also in open fields or in 
Lepiota rachodes var. hortensis differs from the typical variety (shown in color plate) by having a 
more abrupt and pronounced, even rimmed (volva-like) basal bulb. Note how cap cuticleissmoothat 
first, then cracks into scales. Specimen at far right has been sliced to show the staining of the flesh. 
..... 
 
.-..:--...  , 
t.' .'" 
. 
.., 
\ 
I: 
\ 
't. . .; 
 
...... 
298 
LEPIOT ACEAE 
the woods; widely distributed, but most common in western North America. It fruits 
whenever conditions are favorable, i.e. moist and mild, and often produces several crops a 
year. "Patches" are not particularly numerous, but can be very prolific-I've seen several 
hundred specimens under a single tree! Variety hortensis is quite common in our area, 
especially under planted conifers (e.g., cypress) and in sandy soil along the coast (I have 
found it on Ano Nuevo Island in sand and elephant seal dung, and in the splash zone at 
Pebble Beach!). The typical variety is more common in the Pacific Northwest. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and excellent, with caution. A number of people have had severe 
"allergic" reactions to it, particularly on the west coast, and it is easily confused with 
Chlorophyllum molybdites. It has an exceptionally strong, nutty flavor but the water 
content is high. For the best and safest results, fry it on high heat in an open pan. Delicious! 
COMMENTS: The outstanding features of this outstanding mushroom are the large 
brown scales on the cap, free white gills, prominent collarlike ring (not skirtlike as in 
Amanita!), basal bulb or thickened stem base, and brusing ofthe flesh to orange and then 
reddish. (The latter feature is best seen by cutting the stem.) The brightness and duration 
of the color changes vary according to the moisture content and age of the mushroom. In 
variety hortensis (the common one in our area), the basal bulb may have a raised rim which 
can be mistaken for a volva. However, the brown cap scales and collarlike ring point to 
Lepiota. The poisonous Chlorophyllum molybdites looks very similar, but has dull 
greenish spores. L. rachodes (sometimes spelled L. rhacodes and also known as Macro- 
lep;ota rachodes and Leucoagar;cus rachodes) can also be mistaken for an Agaricus 
(especially A. augustus), but the white spores and gills distinguish it. 
Lepiota procera (Parasol Mushroom) 
CAP 7-25 cm broad or more, at first oval, then expanding to convex, plane, or umbonate; 
surface dry, at first smooth and brown, soon breaking up into brown scales and patches 
except for the smooth, dark central umbo; flesh between the scales at first white but soon 
weathering to buff, grayish, or brownish and usually with a shaggy or torn-up appearance. 
Flesh white or tinged reddish, but not staining orange or red when cut; soft in age. GILLS 
free, broad, close, white when young, but sometimes discoloring to pinkish, tan, or dingy 
brownish in old age. STALK 12-40 cm long, 0.8-1.5 cm thick, typically very long and 
relatively slender with an enlarged base; pallid but the surface below the ring covered with 
numerous small brown scales or flakes which often separate into belts or wear away in 
age. VEIL membranous, forming a thick, superior, brown and white, double-edged ring on 
stalk; ring collarlike and movable. SPORE PRINT white; spores 12-18 x 8-12 microns, 
broadly elliptical, thick-walled, with an apical pore, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in open woods and at their 
edges, in old pastures, along trails, etc.; fairly common in the summer and fall in eastern 
North America (especially New England and the South) and Mexico. It (or something 
similar) also occurs in southern California, and it may very well grow in southern Arizona 
and New Mexico, where a number of so-called "eastern" species (e.g., Lactarius indigo, 
Strobilomycesfloccopus) occur. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and one of the very best of all agarics! Prized by connoisseurs for its 
strong, meaty-nutty flavor, it is now being grown commercially in Europe. It does not rot 
readily and is usually free of maggots. The leathery, sun-dried specimens frequently found 
in dry weather can be just as good as fresh ones if treated properly. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Macrolep;ota procera and Leucoagar;cus procerus, this 
lofty, imposing mushroom is the most distinctive of all the Lepiotas. It is also the safest 
and the tastiest, although "allergic" reactions have been reported. It is much taller than L. 
'I" 
. ., 
., 
# 
... 
 
The parasol mushroom, Lepiola procera. Left Side view of mature specimen. Right Top view of two 
mature specimens. The fruiting bodies look like long drumsticks before the cap opens out. 
rachodes, and doesn't stain red or orange when cut. The spore print is white(not greenish 
as in Chlorophyllum molybdites), and the brown stalk that breaks up into delicate 
branlike scales (which may wearaway) isalsodistinctive. Thereis novolva at the base of the 
stalk as in Amanita, and the solid brown "nipple" or umbo at the center of the cap is also 
distinctive. The stalk is so slender in relation to its height that it is not uncommon for large 
specimens to topple over in old age from the weight of the cap. 
Lepiota naucina (Smooth Parasol; Woman On Motorcycle) 
CAP 4-10 (15) cm broad, oval to nearly round when young, then broadly convex to plane; 
surface dry, typically dull white but at times gray, buff, or creamy, the center sometimes 
tinged pinkish-buff; usually smooth, but sometimes with numerous small branlike par- 
ticles, or breaking up into scales in age; one form staining yellow when handled, another 
brown. Flesh thick, white, not bruising; odor mild, or in one form unpleasant. GILLS free, 
close, white, but often becoming buff, pinkish, or grayish-pink in old age, and finally 
brownish. STALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base; dry, 
white, without scales, sometimes staining yellow when bruised, and usually discoloring 
brownish in age or upon handling. VEIL membranous, white, forming a distinct, 
persistent, superior, double-edged, collarlike or sleevelike ring on stalk which is usually 
movable in age (and may fall off). SPORE PRINT white or very faintly pinkish; spores 7-9 x 
5-6 microns, broadly elliptical, thick-walled, smooth, with an apical pore, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in grassy areas (lawns, pastures, etc.), 
sometimes also along roads, freeways, and in other disturbed places, and sometimes 
under trees or even in the woods; widely distributed and common. In our area it is often 
abundant in the fall and early winter, and occasionally encountered in the spring and 
summer as well. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very good, but not recommended. Either some persons are sen- 
sitive to it, or certain variants (perhaps the yellow-staining or ill-smelling ones) are toxic. 
According to one source, it is one ofthe most frequent causes of mushroom poisoning in the 
Pacific Northwest, yet it is listed as "edible" in every mushroom book! One former friend 
of mine who had eaten it previously was made quite ill by a cream-of-L. naucina soup 
which I had painstakingly prepared. There is also the more serious danger of carelessly 
confusing it with a deadly Amanita! 
... ;  , \ '1 · 
, , 
t'.' .,' ': " 
x' 
" 
".-- 
"'" 
\ 
  "- 
. \,' 
Lep;ota naucina in its favorite milieu: grass. Note free gills and annulus. (Nancy Burnett) 
COMMENTS: The white to grayish cap, membranous annulus (ring), free gills, white 
spores, and fondness for grass are the hallmarks of this cosmopolitan mushroom. Its 
appearance on lawns and in cemeteries marks the beginning of our fall mushroom season. 
A good way to become acquainted with it is to bicycle around town: there it will be-tall, 
white, stately, in graceful groups on lawns. Later it appears in pastures. It is a beautiful 
mushroom when young, the smooth unexpanded cap being reminiscent of a motorcycle 
helmet. The shape, though difficult to describe, is very distinctive (see photographs). 
Though the stalk base is often enlarged, there is never a sack (volva) as in the deadly 
Amanitas, and the ring is not skirtlike, nor is the cap viscid as in Limacella. The staining 
reactions are also an important field mark. In some specimens the cap and stem stain yellow 
quite dramatically in the tradition of Agaricus xanthodermus. Usually, however, they 
discolor yellow-brown to brown after handling and in age-especially on the stem. The 
frequent darkening of the old gills to pink or brown leads to confusion with Agaricus. 
and once again points out the folly of equating gill color with spore color. I have also seen 
buttons of Agaricus californicus interspersed with L. naucina that were virtually indis- 
tinguishable. A final hint: If your "L. naucina" fails to turn brown when cooked, double- 
check your identification, because you may have something else! Lepiota leucothites, 
L. naucinoides, and Leucoagaricus naucinus are synonyms. 
Lep;ota naucina. sometimes called the "Woman on Motorcycle" because of the helmet-shaped young 
caps. 
l 
.... 
\, t 
- 
, 
'\, 
,,\ 
 
.\- 
..... 
, 
 
l 
--"'. 
,.., 
 
.. 
'- 
\. 
. 
Lepiota americana, a distinctive reddening species with a spindle-shaped stalk. 
Lepiota americana (American Parasol) 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, oval becoming convex, plane, or broadly umbonate; surface dry, 
smooth at first, soon breaking into coarse vinaceous- to reddish-brown or pinkish-buff 
scales, the center usually remaining smooth; background white, but often reddening with 
age. Flesh white, bruising yellow to orange when young and fresh (especially in stalk), but 
aging or drying reddish to vinaceous. GILLS free, close, white, but may stain or age like 
the flesh. STALK 7-14 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, enlarged at base or often spindle-shaped 
(swollen at or below the middle, with a narrowed base); smooth, at first white, but aging or 
drying reddish to dark vinaceous. VEIL membranous, forming a white, double-edged, 
superior ring on stalk which may disappear in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-14 x 5- 
10 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an apical pore, thick-walled, dextrinoid. 
HABITAT: In groups or clusters in sawdust and compost piles, around old stumps, in 
waste places, rich soil, etc. Widely distributed and fairly common in eastern North 
America, but rare in California. I have found it only once in our area, growing with 
Agaricus subrufescens, in the summer and early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but be sure of your identification! I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This species is easily recognized by its tendency to darken to reddish or 
burgundy as it ages or dries, and the yellow to orange staining of fresh specimens (best 
seen by cutting the stalk). In addition, the shape of the stalk is quite unusual-often very 
slender at the apex and blatantly bulbous at or toward the base(see photo).L. badhamiiof 
Europe is very similar, but is said to be poisonous. There are also several closely related 
species in the southeastern U.S., including one unnamed variant with pale green spores 
and several species (e.g., L. tinctoria) with smaller, paler, and more numerous cap scales. 
Lepiota cepaestipes (Onion-Stalk Parasol) 
CAP 2 -8 cm broad when ex panded, oval beco ming broadly conical or bell-sha ped to nearly 
plane or umbonate, eventually drooping; surface dry, powdery or mealy becoming some- 
what scaly or fibrillose-scaly in age, white to pale pinkish (but may be darker when young 
and yellowish to brownish in age); margin clearly striate at maturity. Flesh thin, white, 
sometimes bruising yellowish. GILLS white, crowded, free. STALK 4-14 cm long, 3-6 
mm thick, equal or swollen in places, with an enlarged base; smooth or powdery, slender, 
301 
302 
LEPIOT ACEAE 
white, but may discolor yellowish when handled. VEIL white, forming a persistent, 
superior but easily detachable ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-10 x 5-8 
microns, elliptical, with an apical pore, smooth, thick-walled, weakly dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters in rich soil, wood chips, around old stumps, straw piles, 
gardens-in other words, in decomposing organic matter of almost any kind; widely 
distributed, but much more common in eastern North America than in the West. In our 
area it fruits in the summer or during warm, moist weather. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Though traditionally listed as edible, it has adverse 
effects on some people and is very thin-fleshed besides. 
COMMENTS: Also known asLeucocoprinuscepaestipes, this species is easily recognized 
by its mealy, whitish, striate cap. It is essentially a whitish version of L.lurea, and the two 
used to be considered color forms of the same species. There are many closely related tropi- 
cal and southern species, including: L. breviramus, similar but with soft warts on the cap 
(including the center) and usually growing scattered or tufted; L.longistriatus, with a tan 
to pale tan fibrillose cap; and L. brebissonii, with a small (2-3 cm) white cap with a dark 
gray to brownish center. I have found the latter on lawns in Berkeley, California, in the 
summer. Because of their mealy, striate caps, all of these species are placed in their own 
genus, Leucocoprinus, by many mycologists. 
Lepiota lutea (Yellow Parasol; Flower Pot Parasol) Color Plate 70 
CAP 2.5-6 cm broad when expanded, oval becoming broadly conical or bell-shaped, then 
eventually umbonate or plane and finally drooping; surface dry, powdery, mealy, and/ or 
minutely scaly, usually scalier and less powdery in age; bright yellow to greenish-yellow 
or pale yellow, the center sometimes brown or buff; fading quickly after it matures or 
becoming browner; margin conspicuously striate nearly to center at maturity. Flesh very 
thin, yellow. GILLS free, crowded, yellow or pale yellow. STALK 3-10 cmlong, 1.5-5mm 
thick, usually slender and enlarged somewhat at or toward base base; dry, smooth or 
powdery like the cap, yellow. VEIL yellow, forming a small, superior, collarlike ring on 
stalk which may disappear. SPORE PRINT white; spores 8-13 x 5.5-8 microns, elliptical, 
with an apical pore, thick-walled, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, tufted, or in groups in flower pots, greenhouses, and planter boxes, or 
if it is warm enough, outdoors (in lawns, gardens, etc.); widely distributed, fruiting indoors 
most anytime, outdoors mainly in the summer. The specimens in the color plate were 
growing in a planter box in front of the Bank of America in downtown Los Angeles. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to some people, according to some sources. 
CO MMENTS: This brilliant yellow greenhouse mushroom boasts a plethora of pseudo- 
nyms, including Leucocoprinus luteus, L. birnbaumii, and L. cepaestipes var. luteus. It 
can be the object of considerable consternation to plant lovers when it pokes up in one of 
their flower pots. However, it won't hurt the plant (or you, unless you eat it). If one should 
appear, consider yourself lucky and take advantage of the situation-sprinkle it lightly 
as you would any other houseplant, and watch new individuals develop from tiny "pin- 
heads" within a few days. The bright yellow color and striate cap set apart L. lurea from 
other Lepiotas. It has a Coprinus-like stature, but the spores are white and it doesn't deli- 
quesce (though like many tropical fungi, it withers quickly). Bolbitius vite/linus is also 
yellow, but has a slimy-viscid cap. Other species: L. flavescens is another yellow green- 
house species with smaller, nearly round spores (5-7 microns broad);L.fragilissimushasa 
very thin, fragile cap and pale yellow to white gills and is a tropical and subtropical wood- 
land species. Lepiota luteophylla has a brownish, non-striate cap and bright yellow gills. 
It was originally found in California but has also turned up in Michigan. 
LEPIOTA 
303 
Lepiota eriophora (Sharp-Scaled Parasol) 
CAP 2-7.5 cm broad, oval or convex when young, broadly convex to um bonate or plane at 
maturity; surface dry, white to buff, covered with small, erect, pointed brown scales which 
rub off easily. Flesh white, rather thin, not staining. GILLS free, white to buff or tinged 
pinkish, close. STALK 2-10 cm long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at base, 
dry, smooth at apex, covered with brown scales (like cap) below, but these often wearing 
away in age. VEIL evanescent, not forming a membranous ring on stalk, but sometimes 
leaving a fibrillose zone. SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 2-3 microns, oblong, smooth, 
dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods and in rich soil, widely 
distributed. Occasional in our area in the fall and winter, especially under cypress. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of a number of confusing, Amanita-like Lepiotas with erect, 
pointed scales on the cap. It was described in the first edition u"nder the name L. hispida, 
a possible synonym. Closely related species include: L. asperula, with an annulus (ring) and 
stalk 1-2 cm thick;L. scabrivelata, a small subtropical species with yellow warts on the cap 
and stalk; and L. acutesquamosa, medium-sized to large (cap 5-15 cm) with large brown 
warts on the cap but few if any on the stalk, and veil often with brown scales on its under- 
side but not necessarily forming an annulus (ring). The latter, which is said to be edible, 
is fairly common in eastern North America and also occurs in the Southwest. 
Lepiota barssii (Gray Parasol) 
CAP 4-15 cm broad or more, nearly round to convex, becoming broadly convex to plane or 
umbonate; surface dry, covered with fine, flattened gray to brownish-gray radiating fibrils, 
the center often darker; sometimes becoming scaly in age or direct sunlight. Flesh fairly 
thick, white to grayish, not staining when bruised. GILLS close, free, white or staining 
dingy yellowish to brownish. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, equal or more often 
swollen below, but with a tapered base (no bulb!); smooth; white or stained brownish. 
VEIL membranous, white, forming a superior, collarlike ring on stalk which may be 
movable or drop off at maturity. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-6 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in cultivated or composted soil, lawns, gardens, 
pastures, and plowed fields; known only from the west coast. It is fairly common in 
Washington and Oregon, but rather infrequent in our area, where it fruits mainly in the 
summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-but be sure of your identification! 
COMMENTS: The grayish fibrillose cap, membranous ring, free white gills, absence of 
a basal bulb on the stalk, and habitat in cultivated ground are the telltale traits of this 
fine fungus. The stalk is often buried deep in the soil, especially if it is growing in mulch. 
Specimens growing on lawns or hard soil tend to be smaller, with a shorter stem. The flesh 
does not stain noticeably when cut as in L. rachodes. The veil is persistent but may be 
obliterated, in which case the free gills are an important field mark. It is much stouter and 
paler than L. atrodisca. and does not grow in the woods. It is darker and more fibrillose 
than L. naucina, and it can also be confused with an unidentified Amanita(p. 275) which 
has warts on the cap, amyloid spores, and yellowish gills in old age. In the W illamette Valley 
in Oregon L. barssii is quite common and frequently attains a large size; most of the speci- 
mens I've seen in California, however, have been smaller, averaging 4-10 cm broad. Other 
species: L. excoriata is vaguely similar, but has a cuticle that recedes from the margin as 
the cap expands. 
\rt; 
" 
If II 
;::; 
\ 
o 
. 
'Y, 
" 
.... 
,- 
Lepiota atrodisca has black to greenish-gray cap scales and a smooth stem. Note sleevelike annulus. 
Lepiota atrodisca (Black-Eyed Parasol) 
CAP 1-5 (6.5) cm broad, oval or convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, the margin 
sometimes uplifted in age; surface dry, white with flattened black, gray, or greenish-gray 
scales or fibrils, the center usually darker(blackish). Flesh thin, white, not bruising. GILLS 
free, white or creamy, close. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-7 mm thick, usually slender but 
sometimes rather stout, enlarged somewhat at the base; smooth, dry, white or discoloring 
slightly upon handling. VEIL membranous, forming a fragile, sleevelike, white or black- 
edged ring at or above middle of stalk, or sometimes disappearing. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 6-8 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotting wood under both 
hardwoods and conifers, fall and winter, apparently endemic to the west coast. During 
cold, dry weather I have seen enormous numbers in woodland thickets (oak-manzanita- 
hazel nut)-an unusual abode for a Lepiola-but it is not restricted to that habitat. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-do not experiment! It is too small to be of importance anyway. 
COMMENTS: This attractive little woodland Lepiola is easily recognized by its unusual 
grayish-black scales. L. felina (see comments under L. josserandii) has dark brown to 
blackish scales on both the cap and stem, and an evanescent veil; it is poisonous. 
Lepiota flammeatincta (Flaming Parasol) 
CAP 1.5-5 (7.5) cm broad, convex when young, then plane or with uplifted margin or 
sometimes broadly umbonate; surface dry, with nearly black to dark purple-brown to 
brown or reddish-brown fibrils or scales (sometimes very sparse) on a whitish background; 
surface quickly staining scarlet to scarlet-orange when bruised, then slowly turning dark 
brown or dark purple-brown. Flesh white, staining slightly pinkish, reddish, or orange 
when bruised, then fading. GILLS free, close, white, not staining when bruised. STALK 
3-10 (15) cm long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, slender, white above the 
ring, fibrillose (like cap) below and quickly bruising scarlet to scarlet-orange like the cap 
surface, then discoloring dark brown. VEIL membranous, white, forming a median to 
superior, sleevelike ring on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-8.5 
)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups in woods and under trees, along trails, etc.; not 
uncommon along the Pacific Coast. In our area it fruits in the fall and early winter, but 
seldom in large numbers. L. roseifolia(see comments) is also fairly common. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of our most striking Lepiotas because of the spectacular scarlet- 
304 
 
.. .. :...t _ .. 
L 
"":' 
.i 
. . .. ,..;- ;.. 
- 
,. 
<II" .,......, 
\ 
It 
') 
A 
'.,  
" 
. 
\.", 
, 
t, 
 *" 
Lepiota flammeatincta. Surface of cap and stalk stain bright reddish-orange when rubbed, but gills 
do not. A very similar species, L. roseifolia (not illustrated) has pinkish-staining gills. 
staining ("flaming") of the cap and stem. The dark brown color that wounded areas sub- 
sequently assume is also characteristic. L. roseifolia is a very similar species whose gills 
turn pinkish or red-orange when bruised (within five minutes); it favors cypress in our area. 
An unidentified local species with a lovely purple to vinaceous-pink cap when young 
(browner in age) also occurs, usually under oak. Its cap and especially the stalk sometimes 
stain orange or orange-red when rubbed. L. brunneseens and L. rose at in eta are two 
eastern scarlet-staining species; the latter has a pinkish-red cap. 
Lepiota rubrotincta (Red-Eyed Parasol) 
CAP 3 cm broad, oval or rounded becoming convex, finally plane or broadly umbonate 
or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, at first uniformly pinkish-brown or reddish, then 
breaking up into flat, radially arranged fibrils or scales which vary in color from cinnamon- 
buffto coral-pink, reddish, or pinkish-orange; background whitish and thecenterremain- 
ing smooth and usually darker (deep red to chestnut); margin often splitting in age. Flesh 
Lepiota rubrotincta. Cap has fibrils and a smooth dark center; common in the fall. (Joel Leivick) 
...... 
-" 
 
4 
"" 
,'; . 
; 
-- 
306 
LEPIOT ACEAE 
thin, white, not bruising. GILLS free, white, close, not bruising. STALK 4-16 cm long, 
0.4-1 cm thick, usually rather slender and equal or thicker below, often extending fairly 
deep into the humus; smooth, white, discoloring somewhat in age and becoming hollow. 
VEIL membranous, white, forming a thin, fragile but persistent ring on stalk; ring median 
to superior, typically sleevelike above and flaring below. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
6-10 Ie 4 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid(?). 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in humus, usually in woods; widely 
distributed and sometimes common in our area, especially after the first fall rains. 
EDIBILITY: Not firmly established. Katy Caldwell of Santa Cruz claims to have eaten 
a small quantity without ill effect, but it is easily confused with other Lepiotas, some of 
which are poisonous. 
CO MMENTS: This beautiful mushroom is one of our more common and easily identified 
woodland Lepiotas. It is larger and taller than L. cristata, and has a more persistent ring. 
The color of the cap fibrils varies considerably, but usually has a reddish tone. The smooth, 
dark center is suggestive of a human breast. Other species: L. roseilivida is somewhat 
similar but smaller, has a purplish cap, and occurs under various western conifers;L. glat- 
felteri has a vinaceous-brown fibrillose cap and has been found in rich soil and under 
cypress in Santa Barbara. Also similar is the beautiful unidentified species mentioned 
under L. flammeatincta; its cap is purple or pink at first and its stalk often bruises orange. 
Lepiota cristata (Brown-Eyed Parasol) 
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane or broadly umbonate; 
surface dry, soon breaking up into small tawny to brown or red-brown scales (often 
concentrically arranged) on a white background, the center usually remaining smooth and 
darker( brown to red-brown). Flesh thin, white, not bruising; odor mild or sweet and fruity 
or pungent. GILLS free, white to buff, close. ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or 
thicker below, slender, white to pinkish-buff and often darker toward base; more or less 
smooth, fragile. VEIL white, sometimes disappearing, at other times forming a thin, 
fragile, median to superior ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT white to pale buff; spores 5-8 Ie 
3-5 microns, bicornute (wedge-shaped and spurred at one end), smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups on ground in woods, under trees (especially redwood 
and cypress) or shrubs, on lawns, etc. Widespread; common in our area in fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided-perhaps poisonous. 
Left: Lepiota cristata. Note absence of prominent scales on stalk. Right: Lepiola seminuda, our 
smallest Lepiota. Note the free whitish gills and fragile veil that leaves remnants on cap margin. 
-. 
J 
"", 
t ' 
. ''''..:  
" 
t ... 
. 
LEPIOT A 
307 
COMMENTS: The chestnut to dark brown cap center, fragile ring, small size, and smooth 
stem characterize a number ofLepiotas which can only be differentiated microscopically. 
L. castane;d;sca, for instance, has elliptical rather than bicornute spores but is otherwise 
identical. In my experience it is just as common in our area as L. cristata. There are many 
other similar species too numerous to mention. They include: L. decorata, with reddish to 
pink scales; L. roseil;v;da, with a purplish or purplish-pink, fibrillose cap; andL. "tomen- 
todisca, " with pale to dark reddish-brown scales. I n all three of these species the center 
ofthe cap is minutely hairy (tomentose), a character best seen with a hand lens. 
Lepiota sequoiarum (Boring Lepiota) 
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, oval becoming convex or finally plane; surface dry, smooth, without 
distinct scales, yellowish to tan at the center, pallid toward the margin. Flesh thin, white, 
not bruising. GILLS white, free, close. STALK 2-7 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or thicker 
below, slender, white, smooth. VEIL membranous, white, forming a superiorring on stalk 
which often collapses in age. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9)( 3.5-4 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in small groups in woods and planted areas, infrequent. I have 
found it several times in the fall and winter under redwood. It is one of several small 
Lepiotas apparently endemic to the west coast. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: The smooth cap, small size, membranous ring, free white gills, and white 
spores are the decisive features of this lackluster Lepioca. The less said about it the better. 
A somewhat similar unknown species with a grayer cap when young occurs on wood chips. 
Lepiota seminuda (Lilliputian Lepiota) 
CAP 1-2 (4) cm broad, conical or convex becoming plane; surface dry, white or tinged 
pinkish (especially at center), smooth or minutely powdery-mealy; margin often with veil 
fragments. Flesh very thin, white. GILLS free, white to pale pinkish, close. ST ALK 2-5 
cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, white to dingy pinkish or tinged 
cinnamon toward base, thin and fragile, smooth or minutely mealy like the cap. VEIL 
evanescent, leaving remnants on the cap margin, but not a distinct ring on stalk. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 3-5 )( 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered in humus under hardwoods or conifers; widespread. Oc- 
casional in our area in the fall and winter (e.g., under redwood) but easily overlooked. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. It is hardly worth troubling with such a trifle. 
COMMENTS: Also known as L. s;strata, this is our smallest and most delicate Lepiota. 
Its lilliputian dimensions might lead to confusion with Mycena or Collybia, but it has free 
gills and a veil when young. It is smaller thanL. sequoiarum, and the veil does not normally 
form an annulus (ring) on the stalk (see photo at bottom of p. 306). 
Lepiota castanea (Petite Parasol) 
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, convex-umbonate to nearly plane; surface dry, covered with rusty- 
ochraceous to chestnut-brown to cinnamon-brown scales on a pallid to yellow-brown or 
ochraceous background (scales often densest at center). Flesh very thin, yellowish-buff; 
odor sometimes faintly sweet. GILLS close, usually free, white to buff or rusty-stained. 
STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, very fragile and slender, equal or enlarged slightly at 
base; smooth above the veil, covered with rusty-ochraceous to dark chestnut-brown scales 
(like those on cap) below, often staining orange or yellow-orange when handled or in age. 
: .-..::.' "" . 
;. 
, 
. . 
'. 
 .. 
<, 
'\ '1 
:.. : 
. 
"., 
. .. . 1- 
d 
". 
... ... 
 ...- ...... 
, \ 
" '';'  
'\ 
'- 
Two deadly poisonous Lepiotas. Left: Lepiota casranea. Note scales on lower stalk. Right: Lepiola 
josserandii is easily confused with L. crisrara (p. 306), but usually lacks an annulus (ring) on stalk. 
VEIL fibrillose, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring on stalk, but sometimes leaving 
remnants on cap margin. SPORE PRINT white; spores 9-13 )( 3.5-5 microns, bullet- 
shaped, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in rich humus in woods, espe- 
cially under conifers. It has a wide distribution and is not uncommon in our area in the fall 
and winter, but never seems to fruit in large numbers and is likely to be overlooked. 
EDIBILITY: POISONOUS! Like L.josserandii, it contains deadly amanita-toxins. 
COMMENTS: The rusty-orange to chestnut-colored scales on cap and stem, free or 
nearly free gills, and lack of a distinct annulus (ring) typify this petite Lepiota. It 
might be mistaken for a Cystoderma, but the gills are usually free and the spores are 
dextrinoid. It is quite fragile and difficult to transport home in one piece. 
Lepiota josserandii (Deadly Parasol) 
CAP 2-5 (7) em broad, convex to plane or sometimes umbonate; surface dry, with cinna- 
mon-brown to pinkish- or reddish-brown scales, the center darker and the background 
whitish to ochraceous, but reddish or rosy tints often developing in age or upon drying; 
margin often fringed with veil remnants. Flesh thin, pallid; odor faintly sweetish or musty, 
especially if several are left in a closed container. GILLS free or adnexed, close, white to 
creamy-yellow, not bruising. STALK 3-7 em long, 0.3-1 em thick, equal or enlarged 
downward, pallid at apex, fibrillose-scaly to near smooth and cap-colored (or slightly 
pinker) below. VEIL fibrillose, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring on stalk, but 
sometimes leaving a hairy zone. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 6-8 )( 2.54.5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in cultivated ground, under bushes and trees 
(including cypress), on lawns, etc.; widely distributed and not uncommon in California. 
I have found it several times in our area in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: POISONOUS! Deadly amanita-toxins have been isolated in this species and 
several relatives. Fortunately, they are unlikely to be eaten because of their small size and 
infrequent occurrence. However, L. josserandii has been implicated in at least one fatality 
(in Albany, New York). 
308 
LEPIOT A 
309 
COMMENTS: This undistinguished little Lepiota( see photo at top of p. 308) is described 
here because it poses a threat to those who sample mushrooms wantonly, or think that only 
the Amanitas are deadly poisonous. It belongs to a large group of small, poorly-known, 
difficult-to-identify Lepiotas with no annulus (ring) or only a slight one, and a more or less 
fibrillose-scaly or cottony stem. Until they are better known, none should be eaten. Several 
occur in our area under cypress, including a beautiful pinkish-hued species that might be 
L. subincarnata, another poisonous species. Other deadly poisonous species include: 
L. helveola, very similar to L.josserandii, but with larger spores (7-10 microns long) and 
a slightly more membranous veil; and L. felina, with blackish to dark brown scales on 
both the cap and stalk. See also L. castanea. Other species: L. cortinariusis a medium-sized 
species (cap 3-10 em broad; stalk 0.6-2 em thick) that grows under northern conifers such 
as spruce. Its cap cuticle soon breaks up into numerous concentrically-arranged small 
brown to reddish-brown scales, its veil is evanescent, and its gills are remote from the stalk 
or attached to a collar. It does not age or stain reddish or pinkish; its edibility is unknown. 
Lepiota clypeolaria (Shaggy-Stalked Parasol) 
CAP 2-8 em broad, oval or bell-shaped becoming convex to nearly plane with a low, broad 
umbo; surface dry, soon breaking up into yellow-brown or brown scales except for the 
smooth, darker center; often yellower toward margin, which is soft and ragged from 
cottony veil remnants. Flesh white, not staining appreciably; odor sometimes pungent. 
GILLS free, close, white or creamy. STALK 4-12 (18) em long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, usually 
slender and about equal, fragile; sheathed with soft, shaggy or cottony scales below the 
veil, usually yellow or colored like cap. VEIL cottony, leaving remnants on cap margin or a 
slight cottony-fibrillose ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT white; spores 12-20)( 4-6 microns, 
fusiform (elongated), smooth, dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods, widely distributed. In our area 
it favors conifers such as Douglas-fir, and is fairly common in the fall and winter. A related 
species or variant (see comments) occurs under oak in the winter and spring. 
upiota clypeolaria, mature specimens. The shaggy stalk plus the smooth dark cap center typify this 
beautiful woodland mushroom. The cap is oval or convex before it expands. 
.' 
 
4- " 
f" I ' 
ft 
; 
,. .'f 
,,;.... 
(  
t 
........ 
.. 
- 
". 
'.:. 
.. 
; \ 
.t i 
.. 
Lep;ota c1ypeo/ar;a (form "nab;scod;sca"). This form is notas shaggy as the one shown on the previous 
page, and does not show as much yellow. In our area it favors oak. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be poisonous-all slender woodland Lepiotas are best avoided. 
COMMENTS: The ragged or shaggy appearance of the cap margin and stalk, smooth 
"eye" at the center of the cap, absence of a distinct annulus (ring), free whitish gills, and long 
narrow spores are diagnostic. In prime condition it is one of our most beautiful and 
exquisitely adorned mushrooms. In age, however, it assumes a rather decrepit appearance 
-the stalk is weak and collapses easily. In North America L. clypeolaria is probably a 
"collective" species-that is, there are several varieties which may be distinct species. In 
addition to the form described above, we have in our area an oak-loving variety with 
fusiform spores, a more evenly colored and less ragged cap, and a whitish, only slightly 
shaggy stalk. I call it var. "nabiscodisca" because of its cookie-colored cap cuticle, but it 
may prove to be the "true" L. clypeolaria of Europe (and the L. clypeolaria described 
above may be L. ventr;osospora-but such issues are best left to licensed lepiotologists). 
Other species: L. c1ypeolar;o;des of the Pacific Northwest lacks yellow tones, is not as 
shaggy, and has elliptical spores (6-9 microns long). 
AGARICACEAE (Agaricus) 
 
.. 
@"@) 
spores 
Mostly medium-sized to large, terrestrial, saprophytic mushrooms. CAP smooth or scaly, typically 
neither brightly colored nor viscid. Flesh usually white. GILLS close,free or nearly free (at least at 
maturity), pallid or pinkish when young, chocolate-brown to blackish-brown in age. STALK 
central, fleshy, cleanly separable from cap. VEIL present, membranous or cottony. usuallyforming 
an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A typically absent (except in A. bitorquisand relatives). SPORE 
PRINT chocolate-brown. Spores smooth, mostly elliptical or almond-shaped. 
FROM both an economic and gastronomic standpoint this is unquestionably the most 
important group of gilled mushrooms, for it includes the familiar cultivated or "grocery 
store" mushroom as well as a large number of other delectable collectables. As defined here, 
the Agaricaceae include only one common genus, Agaricus (sometimes listed in older 
books as Psa/liota). It is a remarkably clearcut, "natural" genus, and as such is a cinch to 
recognize: the stalk is typically furnished with an annulus (ring) but lacks a volva, the gills 
are pinkish or pallid when young but become chocolate-brown and are free at maturity, and 
the spore print is always chocolate-brown (the color of dark chocolate, not milk chocolate). 
Strop haria is somewhat similar to Agaricus, but usually has a viscid cap and attached gills 
that are never pink, while Amanita has white spores and white or pallid gills plus (usually) a 
volva. Lepiota and Chlorophyllum are very similar in general appearance, but have white 
and greenish spores respectively. (The Lepiotas and several miscellaneous smaller genera 
are included in the Agaricaceae by many mycologists.) 
310 
\': f'  
'\ , ,t . " 
. , 
;  ' 
"  \ 
..:' 
'\ ' . 
" ,, 
.t 
These photographs show the key field marks of any Agaricus: presence of a veil that usually forms 
an annulus on the stalk plus gills that are free and chocolate-brown at maturity. Left: Close-up of a 
mature Agaricus auguslus (p_ 337). Right: Mature specimens of A. arorae (an unusual species-see 
p. 325). Note how cap separates easily from stalk. 
Because so many of its species are edible, one often hears Agaricus characterized as a 
"safe" genus. This is hardly the case, however. True, no Agaricus is deadly poisonous, but 
some species produce mild to severe vomiting and diarrhea in most people, and most of the 
edible species (including the cultivated mushroom, A. bisporus) produce mild to severe 
vomiting and diarrhea in some people. In fact, Agaricus species are the most frequent cause 
of mushroom poisoning in our area, if not in California-not a very good track record fora 
"safe" genus! It therefore behooves you Agaricus-eaters to sample each and every species 
cautiously to determine your reaction to it, and to be absolutely sure of your identification! 
Unfortunately, being "absolutely sure of your identification" is easier said 
than done, because Agaricus species are perplexingly polymorphic (variable in size, sha pe, 
color, etc.), and as a result, devilishly difficult to differentiate from each other. In view of the 
frequency with which Agaricus species are eaten, and the fact that there is no single "Simple 
Simon" rule for distinguishing the edible ones from the poisonous, it seems prudent to 
detail some of the more important characters used in separating them: 
1) Staining reactions should be noted when fresh on the surfaces of the cap (near the 
margin) and stalk, the flesh in both the cap and stalk, and the flesh in the extreme base of the 
stalk. Some species do not stain at all; others are rufescent, (i.e., they stain red to orange or 
vinaceous when cut) or lutescent (i.e., they stain yellow to yellow-orange when bruised or 
rubbed repeatedly); still others are latently lutescent (i.e., they stain yellow only when a 
drop of 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) or sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is applied to the 
surface of the cap near the margin). * Actually, potassium and sodium hydroxide drama- 
tize the yellow-staining of all the naturally lutescent species, but in our area are especially 
useful for distinguishing the edible, non-staining A. campestris from the inedible or 
poisonous, latently lutescent A. californicus. 
2) Odor should be noted by gently crushing the cap tissue as well as the flesh in the very 
base of the stalk. Three odors are especially prevalent in Agaricus: mild (or "fungal") to 
faintly fruity, as in the cultivated mushroom, A. bisporus; sweet (like anise or almond 
extract) as in A. august us; and phenolic (an unpleasant chemical odor reminiscent of 
phenol, carbolic acid, creosote, library paste, ink, tar, or bleach), as in A. xanthodermus. 
However, these odors, when present, are not always obvious and it sometimes takes an 
experienced nose to detect them. It is interesting to note that there is often a correlation 
between the degree of lutescence and strength of odor-as a rule, the more quickly and 
brightly an Agaricus stains yellow, the stronger it will smell! 
*Many household cleaning agents contain potassium or sodium hydroxide and can be substituted successfully. 
Drano (one teaspoon per  cup water) and Lysol both work, but don't eat the tissue tested with these chemicals! 
. 
 
J. 
1'1 
4. 
\ 
-.. 
Veil detail in Agaricus. Left to right: A. campestris. with a thin cottony veil; A. californicus. with a 
thicker membranous veil and inrolled, lobed cap margin; and A. arvensis. whose membranous veil 
shows a cogwheel pattern of patches on its underside. (Ralph Buchsbaum) 
3) Veil characteristics: The veil in Agaricus is actualy composed of two layers of tissue. 
In some species only one layer is clearly visible, while in others the lower layer (universal 
veil) can be seen as distinct patches of tissue on the underside of the upper layer (partial 
veil), as shown in the photograph above. The type of annulus( ring) formed by the ruptured 
veil is also significant: whether skirtlike (pendant), sheath like (peronate), or intermediate 
between the two (see illustrations on this page). 
4) Spore size is extremely useful in delimiting species, as are reactions to other chemicals 
besides potassium and sodium hydroxide. However, these features are not stressed here 
since most people will beunabletoascertain"them. The best spores for measuring purposes, 
incidentally, are those that are deposited naturally (in the wild) on the annulus or stem. 
intermediate 
sheathlike 
Different types of rings in Agaricus. Left to right: A. silvicola. A. praeclaresquamosus. A. bitorquis. 
What makes identification of Agaricus species so difficult is that all of the above charac- 
ters with the exception of spore size are easily influenced or altered by the environment, as 
are grosser features such as the size, shape, color, and degree of scaliness of the fruiting 
body. Specimens growing in the open, for instance, can be differently colored or squatter or 
more scaly than specimens of the same species growing in deep shade. Dry or old specimens 
are apt to manifest their staining reactions and odors much more slowly or subtlely than 
young, fresh individuals, and soggy specimens may not display their normal odor and 
staining reactions at all! It is obvious, then, that habitat and environmental conditions 
are among the first things to be taken into account when you are attempting to identify an 
unfamiliar Agaricus. 
312 
AGARICUS 
313 
One practical way for beginners to overcome some of the vagaries and difficulties dis- 
cussed is to approach the genus Agaricus at the level of section (subgroup) rather than 
species. The overwhelming majority of North American species will fit into one of seven 
groups or "sections." A few, such as A. subruti/escens and A. arorae. do not fit con- 
veniently into any of them, and may well represent "bridges" between them. The seven 
sections are: 
Section Agaricus: Not staining; annulus thin and slight or even absent (when present 
usually intermediate); KOH-negative; edible. 
Section Hortenses: Not staining or rufescent; annulus skirtlike or intermediate; stature 
usually rather squat; KOH-negative; edible. 
Section Bitorques: Not staining or rufescent; annulus sheathlike; flesh hard; stalk 
solid; KOH-negative; edible or sometimes too tough to eat. 
Section Sanguinolenti: Rufescent; annulus ski rtli ke; stature usually erect; KOH- 
negative; edible. 
Section Xanthodermati: Latently or strongly but fleetingly lutescent (i.e., staining 
yellow, then eventually discoloring brownish or vinaceous); annulus skirtlike or 
intermediate; odor phenolic (sometimes faint!); KOH-positive; poisonous! 
Section Anenses: Latently or strongly but persistently lutescent; annulus skirtlike; 
odor usually sweet; veil typically with two distinct layers; KOH-positive; edible. 
Section Minores: Very much like section Arvenses and sometimes grouped with it, but 
with a small, usually slender and fragile fruiting body, and veil often with only one 
distinct layer. 
Learning to recognize these "sections" has several advantages. The most obvious is 
that it hones critical skills while dealing with only seven entities instead of dozens. 
Moreover, you learn to group species according to their chemistry. which is precisely what 
edibility is all about! For instance, it appears that the phenol-smelling species (section 
Xanthodermati) poison a majority of people who eat them. The phenol odor is not always 
evident in the field, but usually becomes quite pronounced if the mushrooms are cooked. 
(The taste ofthese species is rather astringent or metallic, yet there are people who eat them 
not only with impunity, but with gusto!) It is also interesting to note that people who have 
an allergy to an edible species are likely to have allergies to other members of the same 
section, but not necessarily to species in other sections. For instance, someone allergic to 
A. august us is likely to be adversely affected by A. arvensis also. Similarly, someone who 
can eat the cultivated mushroom (A. bisporus) will probably not have trouble with other 
species in the section Hortenses. Thus it clearly pays for prospective Agaricus-eaters to 
learn something of the chemistry and interrelationships of the common species, in addi- 
tion to their critical fieldmarks. 
The best known-and perhaps the most mediocre-of the edible Agaricus species is 
undoubtedly the cultivated mushroom, A. bisporus. The meadow mushroom or 
"champignon," A. campestris. is also very popular, but the best species are somewhat lesser 
known-A. augustus, A. subrufescens. A. arvensis. A lilaceps. and A. bernardiiarechoice 
mushrooms if there are any, and A. bitorquis has few peers. Agaricus species are also 
notable for their beauty. Some rival the Amanitas for stateliness and elegance, while 
others are as plump and meaty as boletes. 
Agaricus species are saprophytic and are among the most conspicuous urban and 
suburban mushrooms. Not only is the cultivated or"button" mushroom, A. bisporus. to be 
found in practically every grocery store and produce stand, but its untamed (and in some 
cases unnamed) cousins fruit prolifically on lawns (where they are often kicked over like 
other "toadstools"), in cemeteries, under hedges and shrubbery, along roads and sidewalks, 
in gardens, and on compost piles. Many species are rural as well, fruiting by the bushel in 
pastures and fields, and some also favor the woods, but comprise a much smaller 
314 
AGARICACEAE 
percentage of the fleshy fungi found there. Few, if any, are mycorrhizal. It is interesting to 
note that in our area cypresses-particularly old ones-harbor a remarkable wealth of 
species, including both cosmopolitan and rare or endemic ones. 
Agaricus species fruit whenever conditions are favorable-that is, moist and mild. In our 
area the greatest variety can be found shortly after the first fall rains, but another crop 
appears in the spring, and if it is mild enough, in the winter. Some species also fruit on 
watered lawns in the summer, and A. augustus is a common summertime mushroom in 
the coastal fog belt. 
Agaricus is a large genus centered in the tropics and su btropics, hence one would expect 
to find more species in the southern United States than in the north. About 200 species 
are estimated for North America, but no all-encompassing critical study has been made. 
In California the total number of known species is about 60, most of which occur in our 
area. Many ofthe 24 species described here have wide distributions, but some are presently 
known only from California. * Readers outside "our area" will undoubtedly enounter 
several species they can't identify, but with a good nose and a keen eye they should be able to 
assign most of them to one of the seven "sections" already described. 
Key to the Agaricaceae (Agaricus) 
Note: As already pointed out, many of the characters used in this key are subject to 
environmental influence- particularly the intensity( or even presence) of staining reac- 
tions and odor. It is therefore imperative to have several specimens of each species in 
hand, preferably collected in conditions neither exceptionally wet nor unusually dry. 
I. Very base of stalk giving off an unpleasant odor (like phenol or library paste) when crushed; 
base sometimes also staining yellow when cut or crushed ............................ 2 
I. Not as above; odor not phenolic; base of stalk typically not stainingyellow(but may stain orange 
or yellow-orange), or if staining yellow then odor sweet ............................. 7 
2. Extreme base of stalk staining bright yellow when cut or nicked; other surfaces often staining 
yellow also .................................................................. 3 
2. Base of stalk not staining bright yellow (but may stain faintly yellow) .................. 4 
3. Cap with inky-gray to grayish-brown to brown or dark brown fibrils or fibrillose scales; surface 
of cap not bruising yellow or only sometimes bruising yellow ........................ 6 
3. Cap white or discoloring grayish to buff or tan; surface usually bruising bright yellow when 
rubbed repeatedly, especially near margin .................... A. xanthodermus, p.329 
4. Cap with pale pinkish-brown to fawn-colored, tan, or reddish-brown fibrils (or at times nearly 
white); annulus (ring) on stalk thick and feltlike; stalk 1-3 cm thick at apex, the base enlarged; 
cap 6-15 cm or more broad; growing in woods or under trees ........ A. hondensis, p. 326 
4. Not with above features ......................................................... 5 
5. Cap 3-9 cm broad, entirely white or whitish with a brown center, or sometimes brownish 
throughout; stalk 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick; found in many habitats on west coast, but especially 
common in urban and suburban areas, in grass, under cypress and oak, etc. ........... 52 
5. Not as above; if found in West then cap (4) 5-25 cm broad, with inky gray to grayish-brown, 
brown, or dark brown fibrils or fibrillose scales (never entirely white) and stalk 1-3 cm thick, 
and usually growing in woods or along roads and paths through the woods ............ 6 
6. Found in eastern North America; cap typically finely fibrillose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. placomyces& A. pocillator(see A. praeclaresquamosus, p. 329) 
6. Widespread but most common in West; cap fibrillose to scaly A. praeclaresquamosus, p. 329 
7. Some part of fruiting body (especially cap surface) staining yellow when bruised and/ or 
the flesh smelling sweet when crushed (like almond extract or anise); cap surface typically 
yellowing in KOH ............................................................ 8 
7. Not as above (odor rarely slightly almondy, but if so then flesh reddening when cut) ..... 25 
.Several of the species depicted or mentioned in this chapter have been named and described by Rick Kerrigan in 
an article which, at the time of this writing, is about to be published. The provisional names he has given them are 
used here with his permission. They are: A.fuscovelatus. A. arorae, A. sequoiae. A. vinaceovirens. A. blandianus. 
A. smithii, A. summensis. A. perobscurus, and A. rubronanus. Another provisional name, A. pinyonensis. 
is used here with the permission of Bill Isaacs and Chuck Barrows. 
AGARICUS 
315 
8. Cap white or whitish when young and fresh (but may discolor yellow to buff or amber in age) 9 
8. Cap not white (i.e., with distinctly colored cuticle, fibrils, or scales, at least at center) .... 16 
9. Growing in grass (lawns, pastures, etc.) or in pinyon-juniper forests .................. 10 
9. Not typically growing in above habitats .......................................... 12 
10. Cap small (2-5 cm broad), often with a brownish to buff-tinged center; stalk less than I cm thick; 
spores 5.5 microns long or less............. . A. comtulus(see A. micromegathus, p. 340) 
10. Not as above; usually larger and spores larger ..................................... II 
II. Stalk stuffed or sometimes hollow; fruiting body medium-sized, or if large than not particularly 
squat; cap surface usually smooth (or with a few fissures); widely distributed, but favoring 
lawns over pastures in California; spores 7-8.5 microns long ........... A. arvensis, p. 332 
II. Not as above; either growing in pinyon-juniper forests or if growing in grass, then stalk usually 
solid, fruiting body often large (cap 7 -50 cm broad), the cap smooth to conspicuously scaly or 
warty, stature often robust or squat; especially common in pastures and prairies but also on 
lawns; spores either smaller or larger than above ................................. 41 
12. Fruiting body often robust, quickly staining amber when bruised (especially the cap surface) 
and often aging amber overall; cap often fibrillose; odor strongly almondy or anise-like; im- 
mature gills often staining yellow; known only from the West ..... A. alboluteseens, p. 335 
12. Not as above .................. : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 13 
13. Fruiting body robust (stalk 2 cm thick or more); cap typically with slightly colored (yellowish) 
fibrils; rare ........... A. summensis& A. augustus(white form) (see A. augustus, p. 337) 
13. Not as above; common ........................................................ 14 
14. Cap surface typically staining distinctly yellow when rubbed repeatedly, at least at the margin; 
common and widespread .................................. A. silvieola group, p. 334 
14. Not as above; yellow-staining weak or erratic; found in eastern North America or in western 
mountains ................................................................. 15 
15. 
19. 
Cap white, 4-8 (15) cm broad; odor pungent or faintly sweet; spores only4-5 microns long; fairly 
common in woods of eastern North America ............................ A. cretaeellus 
Cap white or silvery; gills remaining pink for a long time; found in western mountains ...... 
. .. .... ..... .. ...... . . . . ....... . . . ... A. ehionodermus(see A. si/vicola group, p. 334) 
Fruiting body fairly small; cap 1-5 (7) cm broad; stalk usually less than I cm thick ...... 17 
Fruiting body medium-sized to very large; not as above. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 19 
Growing in grass; odor usually anise-like .............. A. micromegathus & others, p. 340 
Growing in woods or under trees; odor mild or aniselike ............................ 18 
Odor distinctly anise-like; cap fibrils brown to reddish-brown .......................... 
.. ... ........ .. ........ .. .. ...... ....... . . A. semotus(see A. micromegathus. p. 340) 
18. Odor faint or absent; cap fibrils pink. purple, purple-gray, or vinaceous when fresh ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. diminutivus group, p. 340 
Growing in pastures or grass; fruiting body robust, often squat; cap often with large warts or 
scales, but sometimes smooth, whitish becoming yellowish or pale brownish ............. 
. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A. croeodilinus(see A. osecanus group, p. 333) 
Not growing in grass, or if growing in grass then not as above. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 20 
Growing in compost or rich soil; cap with pallid to pale brown to faintly grayish, pale pinkish- 
brown, fawn-colored (or sometimes brown or tawny) fibrils, sometimes slightly ruddy or 
yellowish in age; stalk not scaly or shaggy (or only obscurely so) below the veil; stalk often with 
a swollen base; odor strongly sweet; spores 5.5-7 microns long ..... A. subrufeseens, p. 336 
Not as above; often but not always growing in woods .............................. 21 
Cap with pink or purple tints; not common .......................... A. lilaeeps, p. 323 
Not as above ................................................................ 22 
Stalk typically ratherslender(l-I.5(2)cm thickatapex), but usuallywitha bulb at base; fibrils on 
cap ochraceous-orange to tawny; found in the coastal forests of northern California and the 
Pacific Northwest, especially under Sitka spruce ...... A. smithii(see A. augustus, p. 337) 
Not as above ................................................................ 23 
15. 
16. 
16. 
17. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
20. 
21. 
21. 
22. 
22. 
23. 
Fibrils on cap yellow when young, ochraceous or tawny in age; rare ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A. summensis (see A. augustus, p. 337) 
Not as above; fibrils brown to gray to tawny, but not yellow ......................... 24 
23. 
316 AGARICACEAE 
24. Fibrils on cap distinctly gray to grayish-brown to nearly black (at center) when young, but often 
paler in age; scales on stalk below the veil often scanty; gills usually passing through a pinkish 
phase as they mature; known only from California. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. perobscurus, p. 339 
24. Not as above; fibrils on cap brown to tawny; stalk usually conspicuously shaggy or scaly below 
the veil, at least when young; gills rarely pink; widely distributed ...... A. augustus, p. 337 
25. Flesh normally staining red to orange or vinaceous when cut or rubbed repeatedly ...... 26 
25. Not as above (but cap and flesh may have reddish stains in old age or wet weather) ...... 38 
26. Flesh in base of stalk staining orange to yellow-orange when cut; flesh elsewhere reddening at 
least somewhat; cap with broad, flattened, chocolate-brown scales, often depressed centrally 
at maturity; growing in woods, very rare (reported from the Pacific Northwest) .. A.lanipes 
26. Not as above ......... _ . _ . . . . . . . . _ . _ _ _ _ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 27 
27. Unbroken veil (i.e., underside of broken veil) soon brown to grayish-brown, purple-brown, or 
chocolate-brown to nearly black .............................................. _ 28 
27. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
28. Stalk averaging 2.5-4 cm thick at apex, often bulbous A. pallersonae (see A. lilaceps, p. 323) 
28. Stalk usually more slender, or if thick then without a bulb at base ..................... 29 
29. Underside of unbroken veil soon purple-gray to brown ordark brown; flesh staining only slightly 
(often orangish) when cut; stalk typically less than 2 cm thick ...... A.fuscovelatus, p. 324 
29. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
30. Veil forming a sheathlikeannulus(ring) on stalk; cap whitish to buff or sometimes dingy brown- 
ish, sometimes cracked into scales; stalk solid; fruiting body very firm or hard; growing in 
disturbed soil, mud flats, on lawns near ocean, etc.; coastal in distribution A. bernardii, p.322 
30. Not as above; veil forming a skirtlike to intermediate annulus ...................... _ 31 
31. Growing in compost or manured soil .............................. A. bisporus, p.319 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Fruiting body large and dense (cap 8-25 cm broad when mature, stalk 2-7 cm thick; cap brown or 
sometimes with pinkish, purplish, and/ or ochre or yellow-orange tones; veil often yellow- 
tinged before breaking, forming a skirtlike annulus(ring) on stalk; found mainly undercypress 
and other planted trees, but not in manure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A.lilaceps, p. 323 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
33. Margin of cap inrolled when young; stature of fruiting body usually rather stout or squat; 
annulus (ring) on stalk intermediate or skirtlike .................................. 54 
33. Not as above; annulus usually skirtlike ........................................... 34 
34. Flesh staining distinctly red .................................................... 35 
34. Flesh staining dingy vinaceous or vinaeous-brown or dingy reddish (usually weakly) .... 3H 
35. Cap white or whitish, sometimes with faintly grayish or brownish fibrils .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. benesi(see A.fuscofibrillosus. p. 325) 
35. Not as above; cap darker .., _ . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ., . .. . . - 36 
36. Common under mountain conifers (especially spruce and fir) in southern Rocky Mountains and 
Southwest ...................................... A. amicosus (see A. arorae, p.325) 
36. Not as above ................................................................. 37 
37. Stalk usually less than 1 cm thick; cap 3-7 (10) cm broad; cap surface yellowing in KOH; known 
only from California, usually growing in mixed woods and under oak .... A. arorae, p. 325 
37. Not as above; stalk usually thicker and/ or growing under cypress; cap surface not yellowing 
in KOH; widespread .............................. A.fuscofibrillosus& others, p. 325 
38. Veil forming a sheathlike or even volva-like annulus on stalk or a large collarlike band (with 
both upper and lower edges free from stalk); found in hard-packed or disturbed soil or some- 
times in grass or under cypress; texture very firm; stalk solid .. A. bitorquis& others, p. 321 
38. Not as above; veil not sheathlike or band like and/ or stalk with a central hollow in age ... 39 
39. Cap white or whitish when fresh (but may discolor tan, yellowish, or buff in age) _...... 40 
39. Cap colored at least at the center, or with colored fibrils or scales. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . ... 42 
40. Cap medium-sized to very large (10-50 cm broad when mature); either growing in grass or in 
pinyon-juniperforests ........................................................ 41 
40. Not as above; smaller and/ or habitat different .................................... 42 
AGARICUS 
317 
41. Found with pinyon and juniper in the Southwest ................. A. pinyonensis, p. 331 
41. Found in grassy places A. osecanus group & A. crocodilinus(see A. osec:anus group, p. 333) 
42. Cap 1-4 cm broad when expanded; stalk 2-6 mm thick; fruiting body fragile ............ 43 
42. Not as above; typically larger (cap 3 cm broad or more; stalk 5 mm thick or more) ...... 44 
43. Cap grayish to grayish-brown, granular or powdery; margin usually hung with veil remnants; 
gills deep pink to blood-red, then darker; spore print reddish or tinged greenish when moist, 
drying darker brown; growing in greenhouses, leaf litter, rich soil, bogs, etc.; widely distributed 
but not common _...................................... Melanophyllum echinatum 
43. Not as above; cap with reddish-brown to pinkish or purplish fibrils, not granular or mealy; 
growing in woods ...................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. diminutivus group. p. 340 
44. Cap silvery-white or white; fruiting body often rather erect and slender; growing in mountain 
forests ofthe West. ... ... ....... . ..... A. chionodermus(see A. s;/v;co/a group, p. 334) 
44. Not as above ................................................................ 45 
45. Cap covered with dark brown to purple-brown or wine-colored fibrils or fibrillose scales; stalk 
shaggy or sheathed by cottony white scales below the veil, at least when young; common in 
woods ................................................... A. subrutilescens, p. 326 
45. Not as above ................................................................ 46 
46. Growing in the open (usually in grass, occasionally in hard-packed soil); veil typically thin and 
somewhat cottony, forming only a slight annulus (ring) on stalk or disappearing (annulus 
usually intermediate, not skirtlike); gills usually pink or brownish in button stage; cap surface 
not yellowing in KOH ........................................................ 47 
46. Not as above; habitat different and/ or veil typically membranous and forming a distinct 
intermediate to skirtlike annulus; gills pinkish, brown, or white in button stage ........ 49 
47. Cap white or sometimes with pale brown to grayish fibrils or scattered scales; very common and 
widespread .......................................... A. campestris& others, p. 318 
47. Cap covered with brown to grayish-brown or reddish-brown fibrils, even when young ... 48 
48. Cap often ruddy or reddish in age or after handling; growing in la wns or hard-packed soil along 
roads; not common ..................... A. rutilescens(see A. cupreobrunneus. p. 319) 
48. Not as above; growing in lawns or pastures; common .. A. cupreobrunneus& others, p. 319 
49. Stature erect (stalk more than 5 cm long); cap white or pallid (pale buff) ............... 50 
49. Not as above; cap darker and/ or stature rather robust and stocky .................... 52 
50. Stalk 8-30 cm long; found in redwood and mixed forests of coastal northern California, usually 
near rivers or in bottomlands ...... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . A. sequoiae (see A. p;nyonens;s. p. 331) 
50. Not as above; stalk generally up to 9 cm long; habitat usually different ................ 51 
51. Veil usually disappearing or leaving scaly zones on mid- or lower stalk rather than forming a 
distinct annulus (ring); found under trees or on coastal bluffs; rare ............ A. altipes 
51. Not as above; common ........................................................ 52 
52. Cap white or pallid; veil ample, usually with a cogwheel pattern of patches on underside; stalk 
rather stout(3-6 cm long); growing in pastures, sometimes in rings; known only from the central 
California coast; not common ............ A. sp. (unidentified) (see A. campestr;s. p. 318) 
52. Not as above; very common .................................................... 53 
53. Cap covered with purplish to purple-gray or purple-brown fibrils, the margin usually white; 
found in woods and under trees in southeastern North America .............. A. rhoadsii 
53. Not as above ................................................................ 54 
54. Gills pinkish to brownish in button stage; fruiting body usually stout, stalk usually 1-4 cm thick; 
found in manure, compost, rich soil, hard-packed ground, and under cypress (or rarely in the 
woods); odor never phenolic; cap surface not yellowing in KOH or rarely yellowing slightly 
............................................................................ 55 
54. Gills pallid or whitish in button stage(but often pink after veil breaks); stalk0.5-1 (1.5)cm thick; 
found almost anywhere (including lawns, gardens, woods, under cypress), but only rarely in 
manure or compost piles; odor sometimes phenolic; cap surface yellowing in KO H ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . A. californicus, p. 327 
55. Growing in hard-packed ground, often in towns or cities (often developing underground, then 
pushing through); veil thick, often forming a double ring; cap surface usually breaking up in 
age to form large brown to reddish-brown scales ....... _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . .. A. vaporarius 
55. Not as above; found in compost, manure, under cypress, or occasionally in other habitats; cap 
white or with brown fibrils or fibrillose scales; common. . . . .. A. bisporus& others, p. 319 
318 
AGARICACEAE 
Agaricus campestris (Meadow Mushroom) Color Plate 71 
CAP 4-11 (15) cm broad, convex or dome-shaped for a long time, then often becoming 
plane; surface dry, smooth or silky-fibrillose, pure white, or sometimes with a few grayish 
to brown or cinnamon-buff fibrils or fibrillose scales; margin extending beyond the gills, 
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, not staining when bruised but sometimes 
discoloring brownish or reddish in age or wet weather (especially just above the gills); odor 
mild. GILLS close, free at maturity, pale pink in button stage, then bright pink, becoming 
purple-brown to chocolate-brown and finally blackish-brown. ST ALK 2-6 (10) cm long, 1- 
2.5 cm thick, usually with a tapered base; firm, white, smooth above the veil, often with a 
few fibrils below; stuffed or hollow (but see comments). VEIL thin, somewhat cottony, 
white, forming a thin ring on stalk or leaving remnants on cap margin or disappearing 
entirely; ring rarely well-formed, intermediate (sometimes flaring) or rarely skirtlike, 
median to superior. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6.5-8.5 )( 4-5.5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. Basidia mostly 4-spored. 
HABIT A T: As its name implies (campestre=field), this is a grassland species, occurring 
throughout the world from sea level to above timberline. It usually grows in groups or 
rings in lawns, pastures and meadows, cemeteries, golf courses, baseball fields, etc., but can 
also be solitary. It fruits practically year-round in our area, but is most abundant in the fall 
and early winter, when stupendous crops are sometimes produced in our pastures. Thou- 
sands of pounds, in fact, go unpicked every year. Though they can often be seen from the 
road, fungophobic Americans drive right by them, some undoubtedly on the way to the 
store to buy mushrooms! 
EDIBILITY: Edible and excellent, both raw and cooked. It is the most widely picked 
mushroom in English-speaking countries (where it is also known as the "pink-bottom"), 
and is the popular champignon of France. Those who equate it with the cultivated mush- 
room (A. bisporus) do it an injustice. Its flavor islar superior, though the texture is softer. 
When the gills are bright pink and the cap pure white, it is as beautiful as it is delicious. 
COMMENTS: The silky white cap, bright pink gills when young, poorly defined or evan- 
escent annulus (ring), tapered stem, absence of a volva, stocky stature, chocolate-brown 
spores, and growth in grass are the principal field marks of this universal favorite. It is 
the type species of Agaricus as well as the entire order Agaricales. The gills are pinkish 
even in the button stage, unlike A. californicus. The cap is white or has scattered brownish 
scales, but is not brown and fuzzy in youth as in A. cupreobrunneus. The cap remains 
dome-shaped for a long time, and its surface does not bruise yellow, though I have 
encountered a solid-stemmed variety in New Mexico whose cap sometimes ages faintly 
yellowish. This variety may be A. so/idipes, an edible southern species with slightly larger 
spores than A. campestris(bl!t identical in most other respects, including habitat). 
In most regions the meadow mushroom is a perfectly safe mushroom for beginners. 
Unfortunately, in California it is frequently confused with the mildly poisonous phenol- 
smelling Agaricus species. Compare it especially carefully with A. californicus (see com- 
ments under that species), which has a more persistent, membranous veil and whitish 
gills in the button stage. A small, anonymous Amanita (p. 275) sometimes grows withA. 
campestris in pastures and looks very similar from the top. However, its gills are white to 
to yellow-orange, never pink or chocolate-brown. The poisonous destroying angels 
(Amanita ocreata. A. virosa. etc.) can also be distinguished by their white gills, plus the 
presence of a volva (sack) at the base of the stem. Other species: An unidentified, probably 
unnamed Agaricus occurs occasionally in our pastures. It resembles A. campestris in 
size, shape, and color, but has an ample veil with a cogwheel pattern of patches on its 
underside. Its veil, in fact, is reminiscent of A. arvensis, but the fruiting body is smaller 
and does not have a sweet odor. It stains yellow in potassium hydroxide (KOH), but does 
not normally yellow naturally, and its edibility has not been determined (it might be a 
member of the A. xanrhodermus-A. californicus group, and therefore unsavory or toxic). 
AGARICUS 
319 
Agaricus cupreobrunneus (Brown Field Mushroom) Color Plate 73 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane or slightly uplifted; surface 
dry, more or less tomentose (hairy) from a layer of small brown to grayish- or reddish- 
brown fibrils or fibrillose scales; margin usually extending beyond gills. Flesh white, rather 
soft and fragile, not staining when bruised but often discoloring reddish to brownish in old 
age or wet weather, especially just above the gills; odor mild. GILLS free at maturity, close, 
pale dingy pinkish in button stage, becoming pinkish-brown to purple-brown, then choco- 
late-brown to blackish-brown. ST ALK 2-4 cm long, 0.7 -1.2 (2) cm thick, usually equal but 
sometimes thicker at either end; white, smooth above the veil, often somewhat scurfy or 
scaly below; hollow or stuffed. VEIL thin, white, somewhat cottony, forming a thin ring 
on stalk; ring more or less median, intermediate (sometimes flaring), well-formed or 
disappearing, sometimes with a slight second ring below it. SPORE PRINT chocolate- 
brown; spores 7-9)( 4-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. 
Basidia mostly 4-spored. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious( often in rings) in pastures, lawns, and other 
grassy places, but showing a special affinity for poor soil; very common in California and 
probably widespread. In our area it fruits prolifically in the fall and early winter, often 
growing with and outnumbering A. campestris. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. The flavor is comparable to that of A. campestris, but the texture is 
much softer and more fragile. Also, the buttons tend to develop underground, making it 
difficult to find specimens with pink gills. 
COMMENTS: For many years this species has passed as a small, brown, fuzzy form of A. 
campestris. It shares with that species certain fundamental characteristics: e.g., a poorly 
defined or even absentannulus( ring), stocky stature, and growth in grass. However, it hasa 
softer texture than A. campestris, and is smaller and brown-capped from the button stage 
on. Other species: A. porphyrocepha/us, widely distributed, is very similar but has dull 
reddish-brown to purple-brown fibrils or scales on the cap, firmer flesh, and smaller 
spores. A. ruti/escens is also similar but has a ruddier complexion and a tendency-at least 
in some forms-to stain reddish. It grows on lawns or in hard-packed soil along roads, but 
is not common. A. argenteus is a grass-loving species with a silky or silvery cap with brown 
to grayish-brown fibrils, larger spores, and a better-defined annulus. It is common in 
the southern United States. All three of the above species are edible. 
Agaricus bisporus (Cultivated Mushroom; Button Mushroom) 
CAP 3-16 cm broad, convex when young, often plane or even slightly depressed in age; 
surface dry, in one form entirely white, but more often with flattened pale brown to brown 
fibrils which in age or dry weather often break up into fibrillose scales; margin inrolled 
when young, often extending beyond the gills. Flesh thick, very firm, white, usually (but not 
always) discoloring somewhat (brown to reddish or pinkish-orange) when cut and rubbed 
repeatedly; odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close, pinkish or pale brown 
when young, purple-brown to chocolate-brown in age, and finally blackish-brown. 
ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, usually stout, very firm, equal or enlarged at base; 
white or turning dingy brownish with age, smooth or slightly cottony-scaly below ring. 
VEIL membranous, cottony, white, two-layered, typically forming a delicate, median to 
superior ring on stalk which may collapse in age; ring intermediate or sometimes skirtlike, 
its upper surface often striate. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5.5-8.5 )( 4-6.5 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. Basidia mostly 2-spored. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or in clumps in compost and manure, rich 
soil, along paths and in gardens, and also very common under cypress, but only rarely 
found in woods or on lawns; very widely distributed. In our area it ""fruits" year-round 
in markets. The major fruiting in the wild is typically in the fall or winter. 
.., 
., 
 '\'. $ 
. 
"< II' 
.... 
" 
.. 
,.. 
.. II 
" 
,.."l..t' 
" \ "...:-- 
:/. 
I 
" 
"J 
. "ft"T' 
............... 
<1'....,.-+ ..... 
Agaricus bisporus (=A. brunnescens) looks like the cultivated mushroom, which it is. Specimens at 
far right are mature; next to them is a button. Cap usually has brown fibrils. 
EDIBILITY: Edible-and if popular demand is any indication-choice (over a halfbil- 
lion pounds are cultivated annually in the United States!). However, as with any 
mass-produced agricultural product, flavor has been sacrificed for appearance, keeping 
quality, yield, and disease resistance. Pesticides are used, of course, and the result is, in 
Valentina Wasson's felicitous phrase, "a sickly simulacrum" of what a mushroom should 
be. The "wild" form is slightly better-especially the young, hard buttons. 
COMMENTS: Also known as A. brunnescens and A. hortensis (the latter name is 
applied only to the white form), the cultivated mushroom mimics the meadow mushroom, 
A. campestris. but has 2-spored basidia, a well-developed ring, a browner cap, slightly 
reddening flesh, and does not normally grow in grass. If you use mushroom compost(from 
a mushroom farm) in your garden or put old cultivated mushrooms in your compost pile, 
you are likely to get some sooner or later. The largest fruitings I've seen have been around 
old compost piles and under cypress, where, curiously, it is one of our most common 
mushrooms. Care should be taken not to confuse it with A. californicus. which is also 
common in gardens and under cypress. The latter is more slender and usually smells slightly 
of phenol, at least when cooked. For a more detailed comparison, consult couplet #54 of 
the key to Agaricus. A very similar edible species with more rapidly reddening flesh, 
skirtlike ring, and 4-spored basidia, A. blandianus, also occurs quite commonly under 
cypress; A. subJloccosus is another similar edible species with 4-spored basidia, but it 
has a whitish cap with small, cottony scales (squamules) near the margin, and frequently 
has a strong odor as well. It occurs under conifers, including cypress, and is widely 
distributed, but not common. See also A. spissicaulis (under A. arorae). 
The cultivated or "button" mushroom, Agaricus bisporus. Large specimens from a mushroom farm. 
" 
. ", 
..''!Ii-.... 
;,., 
i- 
..J' 
,.. 
" - 
. ,- 
'- 
. '; 
" 
". 
...' 
&.. 
 
 
Agaricus bitorquis (= A. rodmani), mature specimens, Note prominent, flaring band like annulus. The 
flesh is exceptionally firm, especially in the stalk. For a view of it in its natural habitat, see color plate. 
Agaricus bitorquis (Banded Agaricus; Urban Agaricus) Color Plate 80 
CAP 4-18 cm broad or more, broadly convex becoming plane or with a slight central de- 
pression; surface dry, smooth or occasionally cracking into scales; white or whitish but 
often dirty; not bruising yellow but sometimes discoloring sordid yellowish to tan in old 
age; margin inrolled when young, often extending beyond gills. Flesh thick, very firm, 
white, not staining when bruised (but may discolor slightly); odor mild. GILLS close, free 
or nearly free; pallid, soon becoming grayish-pink, then deep reddish-brown to chocolate- 
brown, finally blackish-brown. STALK 2-10 (18) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, very firm, 
solid, equal or slightly thicker below, but often with a narrowed or pointed base; white, 
without scales. VEIL membranous, white, thick, forming a prominent, persistent, more or 
less median (or even basal) ring on stalk; ring band like (upper edge free or flaring and 
lower edge free) or sheathlike (like a vo Iva, with only the upper edge free). SPO RE PRINT 
chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not 
yellowing in KOH. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in grou,ps or rows on road shoulders, in hard-packed 
soil, along sidewalks, around playgrounds, and in other disturbed areas; often fruiting 
underground (looking for them can be like digging for clams!). Widely distributed but 
not common on the coast, where it is largely replaced by A. bernardii. I have heard of 
gigantic fruiting bodies (10 inch buttons!) of either this species or A. bernardii buried deep 
in alluvial soil in riverbeds in the Livermore-Pleasanton area of California. In colder 
regions A. bitorquis often appears along roads where salt is sprayed in the winter. In the 
Southwest it is often abundant along highways, but is hard to spot because of its subter- 
ranean habit. However, shaggy manes (Coprinus comatus), which are hard not to spot, are 
often an indicator of its pres,ence.ln our area I have found it in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and in my fickle fungal opinion, the best of all Agaricus species. In 
Europe it is cultivated commercially because of its immunity to the virus disease that 
plagues A. bisporus. It is larger, meatier, and much firmer than either A. bisporus or A. 
campestris. One devotee goes so far as to say: "Life is like an Agaricus bitorquis-all good 
except for a few gills." Life may not be so consistently good, but A. bitorquis certainly is! 
COMMENTS: The white cap, band like or sheathing ring (see photographs), and un- 
changing flesh plus the solid stem, firm texture, and fondness for hard packed soil distin- 
guish this hardy, handsome fungus from other species of Agaricus. There is no anise or 
phenol odor and it does not stain yellow or red. When it fruits underground you must search 
321 
.y 
4l,o' 
, 
'!. 
- 
,- 
..... '0 
..'f 
"'II 
., - - 
.' . 
"-A .)0 
, 
"/I 
. .#..... 
.... 
..,.. 
. :," 
- 
"" . 
,. .....-", 
.f". ," 
Agaricus bitorquis is common inland in disturbed or hard-packed soil. Note how the large bandlike 
ring can mimic a volva (specimens at topandfarright). A. bernardii(notillustrated) isa similar species 
that is common along the coast. It has reddening flesh and often has a scaly cap. 
very carefully for the telltale cracks in the soil that mark its presence (see color plate!). 
When the annulus (ring) is sheathlike it sometimes resembles a volva, but the chocolate- 
brown spores and gills prevent confusion with Amanita. For years it has been called 
Agaricus rodmani; A. edu/is is another name for it. A. ch/amydopus is a similar species 
with a cottony white cap, sheathing veil, stout stature, and larger spores. It is particularly 
common in the southern United States on la wns and along roads, and is edible.A. vinaceo- 
virens is a cypress-loving species with a repulsive briny odor and a slightly scaly or scurfy 
whitish to light brown cap. It often develops vinaceous tints in age and sometimes stains 
greenish as well. Its edibility is unknown. 
Agaricus bernardii (Salt-Loving Agaricus) 
CAP 5-15 cm or more broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed centrally; surface 
dry, smooth or often breaking up to form scales or warts; white or buff, but may discolor 
dingy brownish in age; margin inrolled when young. Flesh thick, very firm, white, staining 
reddish-orange to reddish, vinaceous, or reddish-brown when cut (sometimes slowly); 
odor mild to p.ungentorbriny. GILLS free at maturity, close, soon grayish-pink or pinkish, 
then reddish-brown and finally deep chocolate-brown or blackish. STALK 4-10 (13) 
cm long, 24 (8) cm thick, solid, very firm, equal or tapered below (rarely thicker 
below), smooth, white. VEIL membranous, thick, somewhat rubbery, white, forming a 
more or less median, sheathlike (or occasionally bandlike) ring on stalk (the upper edge 
often flaring). SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6-7.5 )( 5 microns, broadly 
elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious in sand, sandy soil, disturbed areas, 
on lawns, and in various saline habitats; occurring along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts 
and in Europe. In our area it is quite common in the fall and winter, usually appearing after 
the first soaking rains. In Santa Monica, California, I have seen it in the summer on lawns. 
It apparently has an even greater tolerance (or liking) for salt than does A. bilorquis, 
and like that species, sometimes fruits underground. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-almost the equal of A. bitorquis. but a little chewier and 
sometimes with a slightly salty or briny taste. 
COMMENTS: Also known as A. ha/ophi/us and A. mariti mus, this is a characteristic 
coastal species. It has the general appearance of its close relative, A. bilorquis. (i.e., hard 
flesh, sheathing or even bandlike veil, and whitish color), but differs in staining reddish 
when cut and is more apt to have a warty or scaly cap. In dry weather, however, the staining 
may be slow and/ or slight. 322 
,,' 
.... .... . 
, 
.."\. 
I'< 
,1;..., 
.f 
.. " 
. 
.:i-. . 
. 
.1'. 
\ \. -,# 
, 
:. 
... 
\.- 
... " 
"",'. 
 
.. -t.: 
". 
-. 
\. 
..." 
. 
" . 
Agaricus /i/aceps is one of the largest and firmest of its tribe. Note thick stalk, skirtlike annulus (ring), 
and tendency of the flesh to darken (redden) when cut. The veil is often tinged yellow before it breaks. 
Agaricus lilaceps (Giant Cypress Agaricus) 
CAP 7-25 cm broad or more, broadly convex when young, usually plane in age; surface 
dry, smooth or covered with flattened brown to pale brown or cinnamon-brown fibrils 
which only rarely break up into scales, but sometimes developing strong pink, lilac, 
purplish, ochre, or tawny-orange tones (see comments). Flesh very thick and firm, white, 
usually staining vinaceous or dark reddish (often slowly) when cut; odor mild to faintly 
sweet or fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close,. pallid or pale pinkish, soon becoming 
reddish- or purplish-brown, then chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 5-22 
cm long, (2) 3-6 (9) cm thick, equal or enlarged below, very firm and thick, white or often 
brownish-stained (but sometimes developing pink to purplish hues as on the cap), usually 
buried deeply in the humus; smooth or fibrillose (especially below), base often with 
yellow or ochre stains. VEIL membranous, fairly thick, underside sometimes white but 
very often yellow at first, with white to brownish patches that soon wear away; rupturing 
to form a skirtlike or sometimes flaring, superior ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate- 
brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface negative in KOH 
or staining very faintly yellow. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on ground under old cypresses 
(or occasionally other trees), or where cypresses have been cut down; known only from 
California. It is locally common in the fall and winter or whenever it is damp enough; I 
have seen large fruitings in Monterey and San Mateo counties. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice! It is one of the meatiest of all edible mushrooms, but 
like A. bitorquis and A. bernardii, it requires thorough cooking to render it tender. 
COMMENTS: This massive Agaricus has a rather interesting history. It was originally 
described as a lilac- or pinkish-hued species on the basis of specimens collected in Pacific 
Grove, California, in the 1930's. However, careful study by Rick Kerrigan suggests that 
it is typically a brown-capped species with reddening flesh, and only develops the brighter 
colors in certain localities (e.g., the Monterey Peninsula) and/ or under certain conditions 
(perhaps cold weather or refrigeration). In any event, it is easily recognized by its impres- 
sive size, thick hard stem, slowly reddening flesh, and frequently yellow-tinged veil (when 
unbroken). It is our heaviest Agaricus-not as broad as A. crocodilinus nor as tall as A. 
augustus, but much denser. As in many other species of Agaricus, soggy or weathered 
specimens will not necessarily display the "correct" staining reactions, but are usually 
323 
324 
AGARICACEAE 
recognizable by their size, stature, and color. The common brown-capped form was provi- 
sionally called A. "/uteove/atus" by Rick Kerrigan until it became evident that it was 
actually A. lilaceps. Another large edible cypress-lover with reddening to barely reddening 
flesh, A. pattersonae, has a scalier, darker brown cap. Its veil is brownish on the underside 
rather than yellow, and frequently separates into two distinct rings. It is slightly smaller 
than A.lilaceps(stalk2.5-4cm thick) and sometimes grows with othertrees(e.g., redwood). 
Agaricus fuscovelatus (Purple-Veiled Agaricus) 
CAP 3-9 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped to convex when young, plane in age or with a 
slightly uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with brown to cinnamon-brown or dark 
reddish-brown fibrils or scales on a white to dingy, gray, or violet-gray background. Flesh 
thick, firm, white, staining slightly or slowly yellowish-orange to pinkish-orange or reddish 
when cut (especially in stalk); odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS pallid or grayish-pink 
becoming pale brown, then chocolate-brown or darker; close, free or nearly free. ST ALK 
4-12 cm long, 0.7-2 (2.5) cm thick, equal or enlarged slightly below, smooth or slightly 
scaly near base; white, discoloring somewhat in age; stuffed or hollow. VEIL thin, mem- 
branous; underside at first with a layer of white felty patches, soon becoming purplish- 
gray to purple-brown or chocolate-brown to nearly black and scaly; veil often not 
breaking free from the cap until the cap has completely expanded, then forming an apical 
or superior, fragile, skirtlike, striate ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; 
spores 6.5-8 )( 5-6.5 microns, broadly elli ptical, smooth. Ca p surface not yellowing in K 0 H. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered under cypress or sometimes other 
trees such as cedar and Cryptomeria (an exotic bushy conifer); known only from coastal 
California. It is sometimes common in the fall and winter, less so in the spring, but does not 
seem to fruit every year. Under a single cypress tree in a cemetery I have seen more than 
300 fruiting bodies mingled with dozens of A. bisporus! 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rather tough (especially the stem). 
COMMENTS: The most peculiar feature of this most peculiar Agaricus is the chocolate- 
brown to purplish-gray or "fuscous" color of the unbroken veil. Its overall appearance 
is also distinctive, but hard to describe: the stalk tends to be straight and cylindrical and 
the veil, which is close to the top of the stem, remains intact for an unusually long time 
before rupturing (it sometimes stretches over the gills like a piece of tissue paper even after 
the cap has fully expanded and spores are being produced!). The staining reaction is best 
seen by cutting the stalk in half crosswise. A. /i/aeeps and A. pattersonae (see comments 
under A. lilaceps) are somewhat similar but much larger. 
Agar;cusfuscovelatus. Note the dark color of the unbroken veil and the more or less equal (cylin- 
drical) stalk. The flesh turns orange or reddish when cut. 
.. 
.,. 
.. . /110 . _ 
:  ..., 
, 
... .( 
. , 
" 
. , 
. 
.; 
. 
'..' 
AGARICUS 
325 
Agaricusfuscofibrillosus (Bleeding Agaricus) Color Plate 74 
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, smooth, with flattened brown to reddish- 
brown fibrils which only rarely break up into scales. Flesh thick, firm, white, quickly 
staining red when cut or bruised; odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS close, free at maturity, 
pinkish becoming reddish-brown, finally chocolate-brown or darker. ST ALK 4-10 (14) cm 
long, 0.8-2 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker below, hollow or stuffed; smooth and white above 
the ring, whitish below or with brownish to vinaceous fibrils or scales, or in one variant 
sheathed by a "boot" of brownish to vinaceous fibrils; staining red quickly when bruised. 
VEIL membranous, white or becoming brownish in age; forming a superior, skirtlike ring 
on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-6 (7) x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under cypress or rarely other 
trees; sporadically common in our area in the late fall and winter, but probably more 
widely distributed (in habitats other than cypress). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and "rich" according to Shalom Compost, who put it in a soup. 
Reddish-staining Inocybes (e.g., T. pudica) are poisonous but smaller, with paler spores. 
COMMENTS: This Agaricus is easily recognized by its "bleeding" flesh and brown to 
reddish-brown fibrillose cap. It is one of several "bleeders" that have traditionally been 
lumped under the names A. haemorrho;dar;us and A. s;/vat;cus. (The "true" A. haemor- 
rhoidarius has distinct fibrillose scales on the cap and is said to be fairly common in the 
forests of eastern North America, but has not yet been found in California; A. si/vaticus 
has been reported from the Pacific Northwest.) A.fuscofibrillosus, on the other hand, has 
an innately fibrillose cap that does not normally become scaly, and grows almost exclu- 
sively with cypress ( in our area). There are several other red-staining species, including: 
A. benesi(=A. a/bosangu;neus}, cap pure white or tinged grayish to pale cinnamon, widely 
distributed but rare except in our area, where it is fairly frequent under cypress; A. patter- 
sonae, a larger, thicker-stemmed species (see comments under A./ilaceps);A. rubronanus, 
a very small species (cap 2-3 cm broad, stalk 3-6 mm thick); and a large, stately, delicious 
but unidentified species with dark reddish-brown fibrils or fibrillose scales and minute 
spores ( 4-5 microns long). I have found the latter several times in mixed woods, but it is not 
common. A. arorae also "bleeds," but usually grows with oak and stains yellow in KOH. 
Agaricus arorae 
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, with brownish to reddish-brown 
fibrils or fibrillose scales, at least at the center, on a white to reddish background; staining 
reddish when rubbed. Flesh white, reddening when cut (usually quickly, but sometimes 
slowly); odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close, pinkish becoming 
purple-brown, then chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 5-14 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm 
thick, equal or enlarged at base, hollow in age; white, sometimes with scaly zones, staining 
reddish when bruised and often aging reddish-brown or vinaceous. VEIL membranous, 
thin, white (or dingy in age), forming a median to superior, skirtlike, fragile ring on stalk. 
SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4-5.5 x 3-4 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. 
Cap surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in mixed woods and 
under oaks, fruiting mainly in October and November, sometimes common. It is known 
only from Santa Cruz County, California, but probably has a wider distribution. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This odd species appears to be a compromise or"bridge" between the red- 
staining and yellow-staining (rufescent and lutescent) sections of Agaricus. The flesh when 
326 
AGARICACEAE 
fresh bruises red quite dramatically, but the surface of the cap turns yellow in potassium 
hydroxide! In the field it can be separated from other" bleeding" species such as A.fusco- 
Jibrillosus by its slimmer build (see photo on p. 311) and fondness for oak. A. am;cosus 
also reddens when cut and yellows in KOH; it is common under mountain conifers in the 
Southwest and southern Rockies, and is edible. A. sp;ss;caulis has a stocky stature like A. 
bisporus (and is sometimes mistaken for that species) and slowly reddening flesh, yellows 
somewhat in KO H, has a slight almond odor, and is widely distributed but rare. 
Agaricus subrutilescens (Wine-Colored Agaricus) Color Plate 75 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex or with a somewhat flattened top, becoming broadly 
umbonate to plane or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with brown to 
purple-brown or wine-colored fibrils or fibrillose scales (sometimes only at the center) ona 
whitish to dingy background. Flesh white, firm, not staining when bruised; odor mild or 
slightly fruity. GILLS close, free at maturity; at first whitish, then pinkish, then darkening 
slowly to pinkish-brown and finally chocolate- or blackish-brown; when pinkish usually 
bruising brighter rosy-pink when cut. ST ALK 5-20 cm long, 0 .5-1.5 (4» cm thick, equal or 
thicker below, smooth and white or reddish above the ring, sheathed with soft cottony 
white scales below which break up into fibrillose patches in age or wear away; stuffed or 
hollow, often fragile in age. VEIL membranous, white, forming a thin, usually superior, 
skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Ca p surface usually staining greenish-olive in KO H (sometimes slowly). 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods, usually under conifers; 
common in the fall and winter along the west coast, also reported fromJ apan. I n our area it 
favors redwood, but occurs in Oregon under alder, in northern California under Sitka 
spruce, in southern California under oak, and in the Sierra foothills in mixed woods. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, but has been known to cause rather severe gastric upsets 
in some people. It is not as meaty as many Agaricus species, but it is delicious. 
COMMENTS: The dark purple-brown cap and shaggy white stem distinguish this hand- 
some mushroom from other Agaricus species. Along with A. hondensis, it is our most 
common Agaricus of deep, undisturbed woods. A. hondensis, however, has a paler cap 
and smooth (not shaggy) stalk. Because of the greenish KOH reaction and a number of 
other chemical peculiarities, A. subrutilescens is something of an anomaly. It does not 
fit well into any of the existing "sections" of Agaricus, but the rosy-staining gills suggest 
a possible relationship to the red-staining species (section Sanguinolenti). It is usually 
a rather tall and slender mushroom, but robust individuals can be found, particularly 
under pine. A small Texan species, A. v;naceo-umbr;nus, also stains greenish in KOH. 
Agaricus hondensis (Felt-Ringed Agaricus) 
CAP6-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, smooth, whitish or with pale 
pinkish-brown to pinkish-gray to fawn-colored flattened fibrils or fine fibrillose scales 
(at least at center), the fibrils often darkening in age to brown, reddish-brown, or reddish- 
gray, but in one northern form darker brown from the beginning. Flesh thick, white, 
unchanging or staining pale yellowish when bruised, then often slowly discoloring 
pinkish; odor of crushed flesh mild or faintly phenolic, but usually distinctly phenolic in 
base of stalk. GILLS pale pinkish to pinkish-gray becoming brown, then chocolate-brown 
or darker; free at maturity, close. STALK 7-20 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick but witha thicker or 
bulbous base; firm, smooth, without scales, white or discoloring dingy pinkish or brownish 
in age or after handling; flesh in extreme base usually staining pale yellowish when bruised. 
VEIL membranous, white, forming a thick, feltlike, superior ring on stalk; ring skirtlike 
 ' 
., 
\ 
......e.. 
,. 
,. 
. 
. 
" 
,. 
. ). 
Agar;cus hondens;s. A common woodland species with a large, thick, felty ring, smooth stem, and 
pale brown to reddish-brown fibrils on the cap. Tempting, but not edible! 
but often flaring outward instead of collapsing against stalk. SPORE PRINT 
chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining 
yellow in KGH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups, troops, or rings in woods, particularly where there are 
thick accumulations of fallen twigs and other debris. Very common in our area in the late 
fall and winter under both hardwoods and conifers; like A. subrutilescens, which grows 
in similar habitats, it is apparently restricted to the west coast. The main fruiting typically 
follows close on the heels of A. praeclaresquamosus. It was originally described from 
La H onda, California. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to many people, causing stomach distress, vomiting, etc. It's 
difficult to imagine a more delicious-looking mushroom, but it has an unpleasant, astrin- 
gent-metallic taste even when cooked. 
COMMENTS: This handsome, alluring woodland Agaricus is distinguished by the pale 
cap fibrils which often darken in age, the thick felty annulus( ring), smooth naked stalk, and 
chocolate-brown spores. The phenol odor is often absent in the cap but usually quite 
pronounced when cooked or if the base of the stalk is broken open and crushed. It is 
frequently mistaken for edible species, particularly A. subrutilescens and A. augustus, 
both of which have cottony scales on the stem when young. It has also been confused 
with A. silvaticus, a species with reddening flesh (see A.fuscofibrillosus). 
Agaricus calijornicus (California Agaricus) Color Plate 72 
CAP 3-9 (12) cm broad, at first convex or marshmallow-shaped, the margin inrolled 
and often somewhat lobed, then expanding to broadly convex or plane or broadly umbo- 
nate; surface dry, smooth or with fibrils or small scales; color variable: most often white to 
silvery gray with a brown center, but sometimes entirely white and at other times with 
brown to grayish-brown fibrils or scales throughout; usually darker in age and often with a 
metallic luster; often pinkish- or reddish-stained in wet weather; margin often extending 
beyond gills. Flesh thick, white, unchanging or staining slightly yellowish when crushed, 
then eventually sordid reddish or brown; odor of crushed flesh phenolic but often faint. 
GILLS close, free at maturity, usually pallid until the veil breaks, then bright pink to 
pinkish-brown, finally chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 
0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base, stuffed or hollow, smooth, without 
scales; white, but often discoloring pinkish to dingy brown in age or after handling. VEIL 
membranous, thick, white, often with felty patches on underside; forming a persistent, 
327 
\ 
, 
r 
,\ 
 'I .."'.. 
k 
. J \ 
\ 
.( 
Agar;cus ca/iforn;cus is often confused with A. campeslr;s and A. b;sporus. Note how the gills are 
whitish in the button stage, and how the veil forms a thick persistent annulus (ring) on the stalk. Also 
compare the shape of the young caps to that of A. campeslr;s and A. b;sporus. 
superior to median ring on stalk or occasionally clinging to cap margin; ring skirtlike or 
intermediate. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KGH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious (but not often in rings) on ground, 
growing anywhere and everywhere, but especially abundant in suburbia-on lawns, 
in gardens, parks, under trees (eucalyptus, acacia, oak, cypress, etc.), also in the woods, 
but only rarely in pastures (except under trees). Found year-round in our area, but most 
abundant in the fall, when it often mingles with Lepiota naucina and other Agaricus 
species. It is known only from the west coast, but may very well have a wider distribution. 
EDIBILITY: Mildly poisonous to some people (causing stomach upsets), and frequently 
mistaken for the common meadow mushom (A. campestris), with which it often grows. 
COMMENTS: This ubiquitous mushroom gives my students more trouble than any 
other, not only because it closely mimics edible species, but also because of the endless 
variation it exhibits. "Typical" forms-if they can be said to exist-do not stain bright 
yellow like A. xanthodermus, but yellow slightly in cooking, in addition to giving off a 
phenol odor. The persistent membranous ring, modest size, rather long stalk, slight 
phenol odor when fresh (often not evident to those unfamiliar with the odor) and whitish 
(not pinkish!) gills in the button stage (i.e., before the veil breaks) help distinguish it from 
A. campestris, A. cupreobrunneus, and A. bisporus. The cap varies tremendously in color 
and scali ness, but is usually brownish at least at the center, and often somewhat shiny. As 
a rule, specimens growing in sheltered situations (such as under oak) are paler or even pure 
white, while those growing in the open can be quite dark. Specimens on lawns are usually 
rather firmly rooted in the ground and often have to be dug up to avoid breaking the stem. 
F or a comparison with A. campestris, see that species and the key to Agaricus. Since it is 
the most ubiquitous Agaricus in coastal California (one quickly tires of finding it), the 
name A. californicus is certainly appropriate. It has also been called the ""Fool's Agaric," 
but I don't care for this name because fools aren't the only ones to be fooled by it! 
328 
AGARICUS 
329 
Agaricus praeclaresquamosus (Flat-Top Agaricus) Color Plate 76 
CAP 5-25 em broad, at first convex or somewhat marshmallow-shaped, then broadly 
convex or plane; surface dry, covered with flattened inky-gray to grayish-brown or brown 
fibrils or fibrillose scales (at least at center) on a whitish background, but often developing 
reddish or pinkish stains in wet weather; in one form bruising yellow. Flesh thick, white, 
unchanging or staining slightly yellow when bruised and then slowly discoloring brownish 
or vinaceous; odor of crushed flesh phenolic (especially in base of stalk). GILLS close, free 
at maturity, at first pallid, then grayish or light pink, becoming reddish-brown to 
chocolate-brown and finally blackish-brown. STALK 7 -18 em long, 1-3 (4) em thick, equal 
or enlarged below or sometimes ta pering to a point if growing in clusters; stuffed or hollow, 
smooth, without scales; white, but often discoloring reddish-brown to dingy brown in age 
or upon handling; flesh in extreme base usually (but not always) staining bright yellow 
when cut. VEIL membranous, white, thick, feltlike, somewhat rubbery, often splitting at 
the margin; rupturing to form a persistent, superior, skirtlike or intermediate ring on stalk. 
SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4-6.5 x 34.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap 
surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clusters in woods orundertrees,especiallyalongroads 
and paths; widely distributed, but especially common along the west coast. It is frequent 
in our area in the fall and winter, and occasional in the early spring. The main crop is usually 
in November or December, but I have seen gorgeous fruitings of the large form (see 
comments) under redwood in Humboldt County, California, in September. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to many, causing vomiting and diarrhea, but some people eat it 
with impunity. Like A. hondensis. it is tempting, but has an unpleasant metallic taste. 
COMMENTS: Better known as A. meleagr;s, this beautiful omnipresent Agaricus can 
be told by the inky to grayish-brown fibrils on the cap, plus the thick veil, smooth stem, 
and phenolic odor of the crushed flesh. I n addition, the base of the stalk often bruises bright 
yellow when nicked, as in A. xanthodermus. The above description embraces two forms: 
one medium-sized (but generally larger than A. californicus) and sometimes clustered, the 
other very large and strikingly beautiful (about the size of A. augustus) and often gre- 
garious but rarely clustered. The latter is especially tempting for the table(see color plate!), 
but can be distinguished from A. augustus by the smooth stem, grayer cap, and different 
odor. The larger form is usually found under redwood, whereas the medium-sized form 
grows under various trees, including redwood and oak. Other species: A. placomyces, a 
common woodland mushroom in eastern North America, is very similar to the medium- 
sized form of A. praeclaresquamosus. but has a more fibrillose (less scaly) cap, a less 
rubbery veil, and often shows yellowish to brown droplets on the underside of the veil or 
on the stalk. Another eastern species, A. pocillator, closely resembles A. placomyces. 
but lacks veil droplets and often has a double ring, is usually smaller and slimmer, and 
sometimes has a rimmed ( cuplike) basal bulb. It is especially common in the South. Both 
of these species are eaten by some people, but are best avoided. 
Agaricus xanthodermus (Y ellow-S taining Agaricus) 
CAP 6-15 (20) em broad, round to somewhat marshmallow-shaped or convex, then 
expanding to broadly convex or plane; surface dry, smooth, pure white to gray or grayish- 
buff, or often whitish at the margin and buff to tan toward the center; often discoloring 
brownish in old age and sometimes breaking up into scales; typically staining bright yellow 
quickly when rubbed repeatedly, especially on the margin, but then slowly discoloring 
brownish or vinaceous; margin inrolled somewhat when young and often lobed. Flesh 
thick, firm, white, turning yellowish when crushed; odor phenolic (unpleasant). GILLS 
# 
I;'. , 
:1:. ; 
, 
. 
., 
.... , ' 
" t.41: 
,. .... 
'- 
Agaricus xanthodermus growing with Alyssum (the flowers) along a road. Note how the sliced speci- 
men at far right is stained yellow at base of stalk. Cap color ranges from white to grayish to buff. 
close, free at maturity, at first white, then pinkish or grayish-pink, finally chocolate- 
brown to blackish-brown. STALK 5-12 (18) cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or with an 
enlarged base, smooth, stuffed or hollow, without scales; white, usually bruising yellow, 
then brownish; in age often discolored brownish; flesh in very base turning bright yellow 
when cut. VEIL membranous, white or yellow-stained, usually with patches on underside; 
forming a large, thick, feltlike, median to superior ring on stalk; ring skirtlike or inter- 
mediate, often flaring at first. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 )( 3-4.5 
microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious under trees and hedges, in yards, on lawns, 
along roads and paths, also in woods, pastures, and under cypress; widely distributed. 
Abundant in our area from fall through spring and even showing up in the summer. I have 
seen stupendous fruitings in an old olive orchard, under acacia and eucalyptus, and in 
numerous cypress plantations as well as with oak. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to many people-causing headaches, nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea. It is a very tempting, meaty mushroom but the unpleasant odor becomes 
unbearably obnoxious when the mushroom is cooked, and the taste is awful as well. 
Yet there is no accounting for taste. I know one person who gathers it-and nothing else! 
CO MMENTS: The tendency of all parts to stain bright yellow, the phenolic odor, and the 
white to grayish or tan cap plus the presence of a veil and chocolate-brown spores are the 
trademarks of this cosmopolitan and variable species. The yellow-staining is usually most 
dramatic on the margin of the cap, but is most reliable in the extreme base of the stalk, which 
turns bright chrome-yellow when nicked. The latter is perhaps the best field mark, since 
Agaricus xanlhodermus. Note yellow stains on cap and the prominent annulus in mature specimens. 
. r- 
." . 
" 
,.. 
, 
. 
" 
J . 
.' .: t 
," 
" 
., . 
'" 
(f 
':-. 
., 
,. 
-: .. 
:. 
}. 
These handsome white examples of Agaricus xanthodermus might easily be mistaken for Agaricus 
arven.sis or another edible species. Their phenolic odor, however, is usually quite pronounced and the 
very base of the stalk turns bright yellow when cut. 
only the equally poisonous A. praeclaresquamosus stains so brilliantly in the base of the 
stalk. Several edible Agaricus species, such as A. augustus and A. albolutescens, stain 
yellow on the cap, but do not subsequently discolor brownish. The edible horse mushroom 
(A. arvensis) and giant horse mushroom (A. osecanus group) superficially resemble A. 
xanthodermus, but do not stain yellow at the base of the stalk and do not smell like phenol. 
Agaricus pinyonensis* (Pinyon Agaricus) 
CAP 6-20 cm broad, convex or shaped like an inverted bowl, expanding slightly in age but 
not normally becoming plane; surface smooth or occasionally breaking up to form a few 
small scales; entirely white orwitha tan-to buff-tinged center, often discoloring buff to very 
pale tan overall in old age; sometimes yellowing when bruised. Flesh very thick(at least 2 
cm) and firm, white, typically not staining; odor mild or merely mushroomy. GILLS 
pinkish when young, then darkening to purple- or chocolate-brown and finally blackish- 
brown; close, free at maturity; narrow in relation to the flesh. ST ALK 5-20 cm long, 2-5 cm 
thick or more, often swollen below Uust above the base); white and smooth or nearly so, 
sometimes discoloring like the cap in old age; firm; solid, stuffed, or with a hollow center. 
VEIL thick, membranous, white, usually with patches on underside when young; typically 
forming a median to superior skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; 
spores 6.5-8 x 4-5 (?) microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KGH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on ground under pinyon and juniper; known only from 
New Mexico, but probably occurring throughout the Southwest in the appropriate 
habitat. It fruits mainly in August and September, but does not appear every year. 
EDIBILITY: Delectably delicious-a favorite of fungus-fanciers in the Southwest. Its 
discoverers and namers, Bill Isaacs and Chuck Barrows of Santa Fe, New Mexico, rate it 
among the best in the genus ("firm like A. bitorquis and milder than A. campestris"). 
COMMENTS: This magnificent white mushroom is remarkable for its thick flesh, firm 
texture, and fine flavor. It is somewhat reminiscent of A. bitorquis, but its veil is quite 
different and it apparently grows only with pinyon and juniper. Its name (which has yet to 
be officially published and may actually turn out to be A. "barrowsii") is therefore apt, 
but its affinities within the genus Agaricus are rather unclear. It may be related toA. arven- 
.Provisional name by Isaacs & Barrows 
331 
II 
\ 
\ 
, 
, 
'\ 
..\.... . 
" 
. \ 
II 
Left: Agaricus pinyonensis is a robust whitish species of the Southwest. Note how thick the flesh is! 
Right: Agaricus arvensis is a sweet edible species with a distinct anise odor and a tendency to discolor 
yellow in age. For close-up of unbroken veil in this species, see photo on p. 312. 
sis, but does not normally smell sweet and does not necessarily stain yellow when bruised. 
Other species: A medium-sized to fairly large (cap 4-14 cm) whitish species, A. sequoiae. 
grows solitary to gregarious or in large clusters in the redwood and mixed forests of 
coastal northern California, usually near rivers or at least in bottomlands. It has a longer 
(8-30 cm) and more slender stem that is usually equal, and it does not stain yellow when 
bruised or in KO H, but sometimes has a yellow-tinged veil. It has a mild odor and is edible 
according to Rick Kerrigan, who named it. 
Agaricus arvensis (Horse Mushroom) 
CAP (4) 7-20 cm broad, oval or convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface dry, 
smooth or sometimes cracking into small scales, especially at the center; white to creamy, 
buff, or yellowish (especially toward center), usually bruising yellow if rubbed (especially 
when young); margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, firm, white, 
unchanging or yellowing slightly when crushed; odor sweet (like anise or almond extract) 
when young, often somewhat musty in age. GILLS close, free at maturity, pallid becoming 
grayish (rarely pinkish), then chocolate-brown or darker. ST ALK5-12(l7)cmlong, 1-3 cm 
thick, equal or slightly enlarged below, stuffed or hollow, smooth or with small cottony 
scales below the ring; white, sometimes bruising or aging yellowish, but extreme base not 
bruising yellow when cut. VEIL membranous, white ortinged yellow, with cottony patches 
on underside that often split to form a starlike or cogwheel pattern; forming a fragile, 
superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 7-8.5 x 5-6 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in grassy areas-lawns, pastures, etc.; 
common and widely distributed. It is frequently encountered in our area on lawns and in 
cemeteries in the spring, summer, and fall, but seems to be replaced in our pastures by the 
giant horse mushroom (A. osecanus group). 
EDIBILITY: Edible (for most people) and excellent. Buttons have a slightly sweetish 
flavor intermediate between that of A. campestrisand A. augustus. Be sure not to confuse 
it with the deadly white Amanitas, which have white spores, white gills, and a volva. 
COMMENTS: The white to pale yellowish cap, sweet odor when young, well-developed 
membranous veil which often has a cogwheel pattern of patches on its underside (see photo 
on p. 312), chocolate-brown spores, and growth in grass typify this beautiful, cosmopoli- 
tan mushroom. The cap will often age or stain yellowish-more so than that of A. croco- 
332 
AGARICUS 
333 
dilinus and A. osecanus. However, the base of the stalk does not stain bright yellow when 
cut-an easy way to distinguish it from the poisonous, yellow-staining A. xanthodermus. 
The stature of A. arvensis is generally more robust than that of A. si/vicola, its smaller- 
spored sylvan look-alike, but it is not nearly as ponderous as that of the giant horse mush- 
room (A. osecanus group) or A. crocodilinus. The growth in grass is quite characteristic, 
though a swamp-inhabiting form (var. palustris) has been described. There are numerous 
variants around A. arvensis that have not been critically evaluated, including a small, 
slender form (cap only 3-9 cm broad) that occasionally occurs in our area on lawns. 
A.fissuratus is a very similar coastal species with a frequently cracked (fissured), white 
to yellowish cap and slightly larger spores. It is common in the Puget Sound area of 
Washington, but probably has a wider distribution, and is edible. 
Agaricus osecanus group Color Plates 78, 79,81 
(Giant Horse Mushroom) 
CAP 7 -40 cm broad, rounded or convex, then broadly convex to plane; surface dry, often 
very smooth (like kid leather), but frequently with minutely cottony scales in youth and 
sometimes cracking into scales or warts in age or dry weather; white, or discoloring buff 
or yellowish in age (especially toward center); surface bruising slightly yellowish when 
young and fresh (but usually not staining in age). Flesh thick, very firm when young but 
quite soft in age, not usually bruising yellow; odor slightly sweet (like almond extract or 
or anise) when young, but often unpleasant (musty or like wet straw) at maturity. GILLS 
close, free in age, white becoming grayish or grayish-pink, then reddish-brown, finally 
chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 4-16 cm long, (1.5) 2.5-5 (8) cm thick, often 
spindle-shaped (swollen at or below the middle) but sometimes equal; firm, usually solid; 
smooth above the ring, often with small pointed but easily-obliterated scales below; white, 
sometimes aging yellowish or rusty-yellow; flesh in base not staining bright yellow when 
nicked. VEIL membranous, white, with patches on underside which form a cogwheel 
pattern or adhere to stalk as downward-pointing scales; rupturing to form a median to 
superior, skirtlike or collapsed ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 
(5) 6-7)( 4.5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups or rings in pastures, lawns, and other grassy 
areas; distribution uncertain, but extremely abundant at times in our coastal pastures 
(when they are "popping" it is not unusual to pick 100 pounds from a single pasture-along 
with some giant puffballs!) There is usually one crop in the fall and another, larger one in 
the spring, but it is also to be expected during warm spells in the winter. Its rangeextendsat 
least into northern California and Oregon, where the very similar A. crocodilinus (see 
comments) is also common. 
EDIBILTY: Edible (for most people), and very popular with my group of acquaintances. 
The young, hard buttons are best - ma ture specimens have very soft flesh and a musty od or 
and do better in the compost pile than the frying pan. 
COMMENTS: This fine and forthright fungus can be spotted from afar, shining like a light 
bulb when its spotless white skin catches the sun. It is essentially a larger, squatter, robuster 
version of the horse mushroom (A. arvensis), but differs in having a solid, often swollen 
stem and smaller spores. Also, the sweet odor and yellow bruising reaction of young spe- 
cimens are weaker than in typical A. arvensis (and may actually be non-existent), while 
the musty odor that develops in age is stronger. The appearance ofthecap-whether warty 
or smooth-seems to depend largely on age, exposure, and weather conditions (when 
growing in the open or exposed to the wind it is more likely to be warty or cracked). Be 
careful not to confuse it with the poisonous A. xanthodermus, which may also be large 
and white, but has a phenol odor, yellows more rapidly when bruised, and stains bright 
yellow in the base of the stem. 
- 
-- 
;" 
, 
.. 
. it. 
:) 
 
 
,. 
\ 
, 
Agaricus crocodilinus, mature specimens. It is common for the caps to be warty, but they can also 
be smooth. Note the squat stature. Each of these caps is about one foot across. (Bill Everson) 
yellow in the base of the stem. An equally edible but larger-spored species, A . crocodilinus 
("Crocodile Agaricus"-see photo above) is common in parts of northern California 
and the Pacific Northwest, and has also been reported from the prairies of eastern New 
Mexico and Colorado. It is just as large or even larger than the giant horse mushroom, and 
looks virtually the same. True, it is more apt to be warty or scaly and is often slightly 
browner in age, but it can also be perfectly smooth and pure white, so that in regions where 
both occur the two species can only be separated with certainty by measuring the spores 
(in A. crocodilinus they are 8-11 (14) microns long). Our giant horse mushroom, 
incidentally, may very well be an unnamed, endemic species. It belongs to a group or 
"complex" that is very confused taxonomically, and is listed here as a member of the 
A. osecanus group largely because of its spore size. However, it differs somewhat from the 
"true" A. osecanus of Europe, and could just as well be called A. n;vescens-another 
European species with a solid stem and a shade smaller spores. U ntiI a critical study of this 
group is completed, it is perhaps best to call it "giant horse mushroom," because its 
common name cannot be subsequently invalidated or proved "incorrect!" Since all of 
these species are equally and unequivocally edible, the exact (or inexact) differences 
between them needn't concern you. At least, they don't concern me! Other species: 
A. macros porus (=A. v;llat;cus) of Europe is a large-spored species very similar to, if not 
identical with, A. crocodilinus; the suggestive moniker A. urinescens has been given to still 
another large-spored variant-a fitting tribute to the indiscreet odor that frequently 
develops in old age. 
Agaricus silvicola group (W oodland Agaricus) 
CAP 5-12 (18) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, smooth or silky-fibrillose, 
sometimes obscurely fibrillose-scaly in age; white, usually aging yellowish, especially at the 
center, and staining at least slightly yellow when bruised, particularly on margin. Flesh 
firm, white, unchanging or yellowing slightly when crushed; odor sweet (like anise or 
almond extract), at least when young. GILLS close, free at maturity, white becoming gray 
or pinkish-gray, then brown and finally chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 5-14 (20) cm 
long, 1-2 (2.5) cm thick, usually enlarged below, stuffed or hollow, smooth or with small 
cottony scales below ring; white or pinkish at apex, white below, but often aging or bruising 
yellowish; base not staining bright yellow when cut. VEIL membranous, white or stained 
",. 
.... 
" 
.. ,.. 
. 
."  
.. . 
. '\" 
.. 
. 
, 
." - \.. 
. 
\' 
.. 
 
Left: This stately member of the Agaricus si/vico/a group is fairly common in our area under tanoak. 
Cap is white and stains yellow. Right: Agaricus a/bo/wescens, also common, resembles A. si/vico/a 
but is usually more robust, has a stronger odor, and stains more dramatically. 
yellow, with patches on underside that sometimes form a cogwheel pattern; forming a 
prominent, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 
5-6.5)( 3.54.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods; widely distributed and 
common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area it is fairly common in the fall 
and winter under oak, tanoak, and conifers; at higher elevations it fruits under conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible (for most people) and choice, with caution. Make sure there is no 
volva and that the mature gills are not white-I have seen it mix company with deadly 
Amanitas that were very similar in size. shape, and color! 
COMMENTS: Also spelled A. sylvicola, this species or species "complex" is recognized 
by its white cap, tendency to stain or age yellow, anise odor (sometimes faint, but usually 
detectable when the young flesh is crushed), skirtlike annulus (ring), chocolate-brown 
spores, and woodland milieu. It rather closely resembles A. arvensis. but is usually more 
erect and less robust, has smaller spores, and does not grow in grass. There are several 
variants in need of critical study. The "typical" A. si/vicola grows mainly under conifers, 
at least in the West, buta large, very stately and strikingvariety(see photo) is fairly common 
in our area under tanoak, while a form with an abruptly bulbous stem(=A. abruptibulbus) 
occurs in California as well as in eastern North America. None of these forms stain as 
dramatically as A. albolutescens, and they do not smell as strong nor are they as robust as 
that species. Other species: A. chionodermus looks similar, but has bright pink to reddish 
gills for a long time, a mild odor, and a white to silvery-white, often fibrillose cap. It grows 
mainly under conifers and is edible and apparently widely distributed- I have seen it in 
New Mexico. See also A. sequoiae (under A. pinyonensis), A. summensis (under A. 
augustus), and A. albolutescens. 
Agaricus albolutescens (Amber-S taining Agaricus) 
CAP 7-18 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or plane; surface usually dry, smooth or 
fibrillose, at first white but quickly staining amber to yellow-orange when bruised and 
often entirely yellowish to yellow-orange to amber or ochraceous in age; margin often hung 
with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, usually bruising yellowish if crushed; odor strongly 
sweet and aniselike or almondy. GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid becoming grayish 
or grayish-pink, then eventually chocolate-brown or darker; often bruising yellow when 
immature. STALK 5-14 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, usually enlarged below (up to 5 cm 
335 
-' 
,\ 
., ! 
..... ,... 
, . ."< . . 
.... -..; . 
.. 
. ) 
'..r 
\ 
. 
This squat fragrant Agaricus is common in the Sierra Nevada during the spring and early summer. It 
appears to be a form of A. a/bo/utescens. 
thick), firm, white or discoloring yellowish, smooth above the ring, smooth or slightly 
cottony-scaly below; flesh in base not usually bruising bright yellow, but exterior of base 
may. VEIL membranous, white or yellow-stained, with patches on underside that some- 
times form a cogwheel pattern; rupturing to form an ample, superior, skirtlike ring on 
stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 )( 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Cap surface staining yellow in KGH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; known only from the 
West. In our area it is quite common from late fall through early spring under oak( often 
in the company of A. hondensis). In the Sierra Nevada a vernal variant occurs. 
EDIBILITY: Delectably delicious, with a strong sweet flavor. As with most Agaricus 
species, some people are adversely affected by it. 
COMMENTS: This woodland species is reminiscent of A. silvicola. but is easily distin- 
guished by its squatter or more robust stature, much stronger odor, and amber-staining 
cap. It also tends to occur in larger numbers than A. silvicola. at least in my experience. 
(I have seen fairy rings containing nearly 100 specimens!) The rapid yellow-staining ofthe 
cap can lead to confusion with the poisonous A. xanthodermus. which eventually discolors 
brownish after staining yellow, smells like phenol, and stains bright yellow in the base of 
the stalk. A. arvensis is also somewhat similar but usually grows in open, grassy places. In 
the Sierra Nevada and other mountain ranges, what appears to be a variant of A. albo- 
lutescens is often common (especially in the spring). It has a fibrillose cap and its stem is 
tougher and more cylindrical (less bulbous) than the coastal version, but it is otherwise 
quite similar (see photograph above). 
Agaricus subruJescens (Almond Mushroom) Color Plate 82 
CAP (6) 8-25 em broad, round or marshmallow-shaped becoming convex to plane; surface 
dry, smooth but with fine flattened fibrils which may break up into minute scales except at 
the center (but in dry weather.sometimes cracking into large warts); fibrils pallid to buff to 
pale brown, pale pinkish-brown, orfawn-colored, often becoming browner or ruddier with 
age; background white to pinkish-buff, often becoming yellow in age or when bruised. 
Flesh thick, firm, white, not bruising yellow or only very slightly; odor strongly sweet (like 
almond extract), especially when young. GILLS free at maturity. close, whitish becoming 
grayish or pinkish, then reddish-brown and finally chocolate-brown or darker. ST ALK6- 
15 em long, 1.5-4 em thick, equal or with an enlarged base, smooth or with a few fibrils or 
scales below the ring; white, but often staining or aging yellow; base often staining yellow to 
yellow-orange but flesh in base not staining bright yellow when cut; base sometimes with 
white mycelial threads attached. VEIL thick, membranous, white, usually with patches 
(often obscure) on underside; forming a superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT 
chocolate-brown; spores 5.5-7 )( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining 
yellow in KGH. 
336 
" 
" 
1 
Agaricus subrufescens is a rare but remarkable species. The odorand flavor are stronglyalmondy, but 
the stalk is not nearly as shaggy as that of A. augustus, and the cap is paler. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in compost, manure, and rich 
soil; originally described from eastern North America and apparently widely distributed, 
but rare. I have seen it fruit by the hundreds in manure-filled trenches on a berry farm near 
Watsonville, California, in the late spring, summer, and early fall (sometimes accom- 
panied by Lepiota lutea and L. americana). It is easily grown at home in a vegetable garden 
(if you use compost) and mycelium from thejust-described "patch" is now being marketed 
for this purpose. It has the advantage ofliking it hot, meaning you can enjoy it at the same 
time as your other summer vegetables (A. bisporus is also grown easily in gardens, but 
likes it much cooler). 
EDIBILITY: Edible (for most people) and delicious! The almondy odor and taste is much 
stronger than that of A. augustus-so strong, in fact, that some people don't care for it. I 
put several specimens in a cream-of-mushroom soup and those who tasted it swore I had 
dumped in a bottle of almond extract! It was apparently cultivated around the turn of 
the century, but lost out to A. bisporus-which raises an interesting prospect: if it had 
become the "cultivated mushroom" instead of A. bisporus, would the word "mushroomy" 
have a completely different (sweet and almondy) connotation? 
COMMENTS: The strong almond extract odor and taste plus the robust stature, presence 
of an annulus, chocolate-brown spores, and light brownish cap make this a fairly easy 
mushroom to recognize. The cap is quite similar in color to that of A. hondensis, but the 
habitat and odor are completely different, while the paler color and smoother stem distin- 
guish it fromA. augustus. Other species: In eastern North America, an edible Agaricus with 
tawny scales on the cap (like A. augustus), a shaggy stalk, and weaker almond odor has also 
gone under the name A. subrufescens, apparently because of its similarly-sized spores. 
Whether it is a distinct species or merely an extreme form of A. subrufescens is for licensed 
Agaricus-experts to decide. 
Agaricus augustus (The Prince) Front Cover, Color Plate 77 
CAP 7-30 (40) cm broad, usually marshmallow-shaped but sometimes convex, slowly 
expanding to plane or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with numerous dark 
brown to warm brown or tawny-brown fibrils or fibrillose scales on a white background 
that usually becomes yellowish, buff, or ochre in age, giving an overall golden tone to many 
mature specimens; center often darker; surface sometimes breaking up into warts in dry 
weather and bruising yellow when rubbed, at least when young. Flesh thick, white, firm; 
odor sweet (like almond extract), especially when young. GILLS close, free at maturity, 
remaining pallid for a long time, finally turning grayish-brown (or very briefly pinkish), 
eventually chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 8-35 cm long, 1-4 (6) cm thick, 
equal or enlarged slightly below, the base usually buried deep in ground; white, but often 
aging or bruising yellowish; smooth above the ring, sheathed with white or brown-tipped 
337 
"., 
t - 
.. 
""t 
. 
... 
... ,.... 
-",," 
.......:... 
" . 
,. 
,.... . 
J 
.., 
. 
... 
l 
.., .  
I. F'. .' 
'C' 
Agaricus augustus. Note the marshmallow-shaped caps of these unexpanded buttons. In this stage 
they are delicious! See also Color Plate 79, photo on front cover, and photo on p. 311. 
scales below (but these often wearing away in age); rather tough and fibrous. VEIL 
membranous, with white to brown cottony patches on underside (but these sometimes 
disappearing); forming a large, ample, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT 
chocolate-brown; spores 7.5-10 )( 5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining 
yellow in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clumps on ground in the woods (especially under 
redwood), but usually near roads and paths, in clearings, and other places where the soil 
has been disturbed; sometimes also in flower beds, composted areas, under trees in towns, 
in arboretums, etc.; widely distributed, but frequent only along the Pacific Coast and 
perhaps more common in our area than anywhere else. It shows a definite preference for 
warm weather, fruiting in the spring, summer, and fall-or in the winter if it's mild enough. 
Several crops are prod uced each year, so visit your patches regularly. It is curious that such 
a large mushroom requires so little moisture to fruit-a little fogdrip is all it needs! 
EDIBILITY: Edible (for most people) and one of the very best! It's especially significant 
beca use it fruits in the spring and summer, when edible fungi are scarce in our area. It's like 
getting two mushrooms in one: delectably sweet and almondy when young, strong and 
mushroomy at maturity. Unfortunately maggots, slugs, sowbugs, and centipedes are fond 
of it too! 
COMMENTS: This prince of a mushroom is distinguished by its large size-caps of"LP" 
dimensions (one foot) are not uncommon-almond extract odor, yellow-staining cap with 
brown fibrils or scales, prominent annulus (ring), chocolate-brown spores, and shaggy 
stem (when young) which is usually buried in the ground. The veil is large and exquisitely 
constructed, and the marshmallow shape of the young caps (i.e., somewhat flattened on 
top) is also characteristic, though several other mushrooms (e.g., A. praeclaresquamosus, 
Lepiota rachodes) hae the same shape. The gills remain whitish for a long time-falsely 
suggesting that the spores are white- but eventually they will darken to brown and finally 
chocolate-brown. The poisonous A. praeclaresquamosus is often common in the same 
habitats, but has grayer cap fibrils, a smoother stem, and smells like phenol. A. hondensis 
also has a smooth stem, while the edible A. perobscurus has darker ca p fibrils when young, a 
smoother stem, and subtler odor. Other species: A. smithii (also called A. peTTQTus) is a 
338 
AGARICUS 
339 
similar but somewhat smaller, more slender version with an ochraceous to ochraceous- 
brown cap and almondy odor. It is common in northern California and the Pacific 
Northwest under coastal conifers, particularly Sitka spruce. A pale form of A. augustus 
also occurs, but is rare. It resembles the typical form but has pale yellow cap fibrils which 
give the cap an overall creamy-white appearance. Somewhat similar to this pale form isA. 
summens;s-a large, robust species whose cap is whitish with yellowish to ochraceous- 
tawny fibrils. It hasa thick, often bulbousstem(2.5 cm thick or more) and is rare. I have seen 
it in our area underf orest trees along roads. Finally, A. augustus hasa smaller-spored look- 
alike in eastern North America (see comments under A. subrufescens). All ofthe above 
species are edible and delicious. 
Agaricus perobscurus (The Princess) 
CAP 7-20 cm broad, convex or marshmallow-shaped becoming broadly convex to plane 
or with margin slightly uplifted; surface dry, at first covered with dark (grayish-brown 
to dark brown or blackish) fibrils which tend to break up in age to form scattered, sparse 
grayish-brown to dingy olive-brown fibrillose scales on a whitish to ochre-buff background 
(but center usually remaining dark); bruising yellow only slightly if at all. Flesh thick, white, 
not usually bruising yellow; odor typically of almond extract but often faint oreven absent. 
GILLS close, free at maturity, pallid becoming pinkish or pinkish-brown, then brown and 
finally chocolate-brown or blackish-brown. STALK 7 -15 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or 
more often enlarged at base; white or discoloring slightly in age, smooth above the ring, 
slightly scaly or fibrillose below, but often appearing smooth, especially in age. VEIL 
membranous, with cottony patches on underside (but these often disappearing), forming 
an ample, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6.5- 
7.5)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH. 
HABITAT: Solitary or in groups under or near trees (usually planted) or shrubs, some- 
times also at the edges of woods; known only from coastal California. It is fairly frequent 
in the San Francisco Bay region from late fall through spring or even summer, but uncom- 
mon to rare elsewhere (not nearly as numerous as A. augustus). I usually find it under pine, 
cypress, and acacia, but have never seen it in the red wood forests where A. augus tus thri ves. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-about as good as A. augustus. 
COMMENTS: This "sister" to A. augustus is likely to be mistaken forthat species, but has 
a subtler almond odor and less pronounced tendency to stain or age yellow, a smoother 
Left: Agaricus perobscurus is a smoother-stalked version of A. augustus. Note how cap is quitedarkin 
these young specimens. Right: Agaricus semotus (see comments under A. micromegathus on p. 340) 
is a small woodland species with a distinct anise odor and pinkish to reddish to brownish cap fibrils. 
j' 
" 
. 
 
 \, 
.... 
. 
'\of- 
" 
 
, 
340 
AGARICACEAE 
(less shaggy) stalk, and consistently smaller spores. In addition, the gills pass through a 
more marked pinkish phase before turning brown, and the fibrils on the cap are much 
darker when young( the fibrils may be quite sparse in age, however, giving thecapan overall 
paler appearance). It is also likely to be mistaken for the poisonous A. praec/aresquamosus. 
but that species has a totally smooth stalk, a phenol odor, often stains bright yellow in 
the base of the stem, and is more common in habitats characteristic of A. augustus than 
those favored by A. perobscurus. 
Agaricus micromegathus (Anise Agaricus) 
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, with silky fibrils or fibrillose scales 
(sometimes very sparse toward margin); fibrils at first pinkish in one form, yellow-brown 
in another, but in both forms becoming brownish to grayish-brown in age on a whitish to 
buff background; yellow to orange stains often developing in age or upon handling. Flesh 
thin, fragile, white, unchanging or bruising yellowish; odor distinctly sweet (aniselike or 
almondy). GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid or grayish, then pinkish, finally chocolate- 
brown or darker. STALK 2-6 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base, 
white or staining yellow to orange upon handling (especially below); stuffed or hollow, 
fragile at maturity. VEIL membranous, thi; forming a fragile, superior to median ring on 
stalk, or disppearing entirely; ring skirtlike or intermediate. SPORE PRINT chocolate- 
brown; spores 4.5-5.5 )( 3.5-4 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining 
yellow in KGH. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious in lawns, pastures, fields, and other grassy 
or open places; widely distributed. Fairly common in ourarea in mild weather, especially in 
the fall, often in the company of A. campestris and A. cupreobrunneus. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but thin-fleshed and fragile. Its fragrance suggests that the flavor is 
good, but it doesn't often occur in enough quantity to invite collecting. Chuck Barrows 
of Santa Fe, New Mexico, attained a small degree of notoriety by smothering an ice cream 
cone with raw A. semotus (a very similar species-see comments). 
COMMENTS: This is one of several puny, poorly-known species with an anise odor, slight 
annulus (ring), and fragile flesh. They have a tendency to become yellow or rusty-yellow 
in age, and can be distinguished from most other Agaricus species by their size alone. Simi- 
lar species with a distinct anise odor include: A. semotus (see photo on p. 339), with brown 
to reddish fibrils on the cap and slightly longer stalk, found in woods and under trees (espe- 
cially oak); and A. comtulus (also spelled A. comptu/us), with a white to yellowish cap 
that is usually tinged brown or buff at the center, found in grass. Both of these are edible 
and common, but rarely collected because of their small size. Also see A. diminutivus. 
Agaricus diminutivus group (Diminutive Agaricus) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad, oval or convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface dry , with 
flattened pink to purplish-pink to amethyst-gray to reddish-brown fibrils, at least at the 
center; margin often paler. Flesh thin, white, not staining; odor mild or faintly fragrant 
(like anise). GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid or pink becoming reddish-brown, then 
chocolate-brown or darker. ST ALK 2-7 cmlong, 2-6 mm thick, equal orwitha small basal 
bulb, w!1ite or pallid, but in age often stained yellowish or orange below the ring; stuffed 
or hollow, fragile. VEIL membranous, thin, white; forming a fragile superior to median, 
skirtlike ring on stalk which often disappears in age. SPORE PRINT chocolate-brown; 
spores 4.5-6 )( 3.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KGH. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups in humus in woods, widely 
distributed. The most common variant in our area fruits in the late fall and winter in mixed 
woods and under live oak, but farther north this group is common under conifers. 
.. 
. 
, 
\ 
" 
Agaricus diminwivus group. Note small size, slender stature, and fragile veil that mayor may not 
form a distinct ring on the stalk. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible, but too small to be of value and sometimes confused 
species of Inocybe (e.g., I. pudica), most of which are poisonous. 
COMMENTS: Members of this species "complex" are easily distinguished from other 
Agaricus species by their petite size, reddish-pink to purplish cap color, and woodland 
habitat. The form illustrated is the common one in our area. It has a beautiful amethyst- 
tinged cap and seems to fit descriptions of A. pUTpUTellus (a member of the A. diminuti- 
vus group) quite well. However, there are probably more names (e.g., A. dulcidulus, A. 
amethystina) in this group than there are species, so a critical study is necessary before 
any positive identifications can be made. 
COPRINACEAE 
&i/ 
c0' 
 
 spores 
THIS is a large family of fragile mushrooms with deep brown to black spores and a carti- 
laginous or fragile stem. The gills are not decurrent as in Gomphidiusand Chroogomphus. 
and those species with dark brown spores do not normally have free gills and an annulus 
(ring) on the stalk, as in Agaricus. The cap cuticle is cellular(composed ofround or pear- 
shaped cells) as opposed to filamentous as in the Strophariaceae, but since this distinction 
is microscopic, it is better to learn the characteristics of each genus than attempt to distin- 
guish the two families in toto (for instance, Coprinus has gills that digest themselves, and 
Panaeolus usually grows on dung or manure). As a rule, however, the fragile white to 
brown species with a dry or only slightly tacky cap belong to the Coprinaceae, while those 
with a viscid and/ or brightly colored cap belong to the Strophariaceae. Both families 
should be checked when in doubt. There are three common genera in the Coprinaceae, 
keyed below. 
Key to the Coprinaceae 
l. Mature gills (and often the cap) digesting themselves, i.e., either turning into an inky black 
fluid or withering away ........................................... Coprinus, p. 342 
I. Gills not digesting themselves ................................................... 2 
2. Spore print black; sides (faces) of gills often mottled; growing in grass, dung, or manure .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Panaeo/us, p. 353 
2. Not as above; growing in humus, wood chips, on wood, etc., or ifin grass then spore print dark 
brown or purple-brown; not normally growing in dung .............. Psathyrella, p. 361 
341 
342 COPRIN ACEAE 
COPRINUS (Inky Caps) 
Minute to medium-sized or sometimes large, ephemeral, saprophytic mushrooms. CAP usually 
oval, cylindrical, or conical when young, usually striate at maturity in the smaller species and often 
translucent or deliquescing. GILLS free or attached, gray to black and autodigesting at maturity. 
STALK usually white and hollow, thin and fragile. or if thick. then cartilaginous. VEIL present 
or absent, sometimes forming an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A typically absent (but a rudimen- 
taryone present in some species). SPORE PRINT typi('allyblack (but deep brown in a few species). 
Spores mostly elliptical, smooth or roughened, with a germ pore; discoloring in concentrated 
sulfuric acid. Cap cuticle usually cellular. 
MEMBERS of this genus are called inky caps because the gills and often the cap digest 
themselves at maturity, turning into an inky black fluid that drips to the ground. The auto- 
digestion or deliquescing of the gills plus the black spore print are the main diagnostic 
features of Coprinus. In Bolbitius the gills sometimes liquefy but the spore print is rusty- 
brown, while in Psathyrella and Panaeolus the spore print may be black but the gills do 
not deliquesce. 
The autodigestion process is a unique method of spore dispersal that should not be 
confused with the normal process of decay that occurs in most mushrooms. Rather than 
maturing at an even rate, the spores near the margin of the cap ripen first. Enzymes are 
simultaneously released which dissolve the surrounding tissue, causing the edge of the cap 
to spread out and curl back. This pulls the gills apart, enabling the spores to be discharged 
into the air. If you look at the gills of a shaggy mane (Coprinus comatus), you'lJ see that 
they are crowded together like the pages of a book. If autodigestion did not occur, the 
spores would be discharged onto adjoining gills and their dispersal would be greatly 
impeded. Of course, many spores are trapped in the inky liquid that drips to the ground, 
but millions more are successfully discharged into the air. 
In the larger inky caps, both the cap and gills dissolve, leaving nothing but a few rags of 
tissue stuck to the top of the stalk. This phenomenon was undoubtedly the inspiration for 
Shelley's memorable lines: 
Their mass rotted off them flake by flake 
Til the thick stalk stuck like a murderer's stake. 
Where rags of loose flesh yet tremble on high 
Infecting the winds that wander by. 
In the smaller species, such as C. plicatilis. an inky fluid is not necessarily formed. There 
is so little substance to the gills that they wither instead ofliquefying, and the cap maybe so 
thin that it is trL"Dslucent-striate (the gills can be seen through it as radiating lines). 
Inky caps frequent areas inhabited by livestock and human beings. They fruit whenever 
it is moist and mild enough, and are among our most common urban and suburban 
mushrooms. The smaller types are especially prevalent on dung and manure, while the 
larger ones crop up in gardens, celJars, along roads, on or around stumps, in disturbed 
soil, and humus. A few grow in the woods. As we alter the environment and create new 
"niches," we can expect new species to evolve. One winter, following three weeks of rain, 
an unidentified Coprinus sprouted from the orion carpet of my leaky '67 RolJs Canardly 
(it rolls down one hill and canardly make it up the next). My friends naturally assumed it 
was the result of carrying around so many mushrooms in my car, yet it was a species I had 
never seen before! 
Several of the larger inky ca ps are good edibles, and the shaggy mane, C. comatus, is a 
popular and unmistakable favorite. Most species, however, are much too thin and insub- 
stantial to warrant collecting. A few are said to be poisonous, and the common inky cap, 
C. atramentarius, contains a compound which reacts with alcohol in the body to produce a 
very peculiar set of symptoms (see p. 896). Coprinus species should be eaten before they 
: 
"- 
. . ....... - 
.. .. 
l 
( 
J \ J. 
 
, .. . t , . 
I,."  \,'t>   
t"" 
, . ..... 1 " 
. · 1"1' 
" .. ',-.6- . 
". "....: 
....... ' -  
.\\.  
\ 
Autodigestion in Coprinus comalus. Left: The gills have just begun to blacken and liquefy at the 
cap margin. Right: Dry weather has caused the autodigestion process to cease with a few rags oftissue 
left. In wet weather it continues until only the stalk remains. (Rick Kerrigan) 
deliquesce, and consequently should not be kept overnight. They are among the most easily 
digestible of all fungi, but their high water content makes them unsuitable for some dishes. 
As they frequently occur in large numbers, you may wish to preserve them for later use. 
This is best effected by marinating, drying, or sauteeing and then freezing. The "ink" from 
the fleshier species, incidentally, makes a very passable ink if diluted with a little water. 
Coprinus is a large genus, with over 200 species known. It is a difficult group to study 
because the fruiting bodies are so ephemeral (sometimes lasting only a few hours) and 
because many species fruit where you don't normally look for mushrooms. Consequently, 
the North American species are not well known. As their favored habitats {dung, asphalt, 
etc.) are ubiquitous, most inky ca ps are widely distributed and likely to occur in California. 
The smaller ones are especially difficult to identify-even with the aid of a microscope. A 
few distinctive and/ or common types are presented here. 
Key to Coprinus 
I. Growing on dung, manure, straw, or compost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 
I. Growing on ground, wood chips, wood, or indoors ................................. 9 
2. Partial veil typically forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk ........................ 3 
2. Annulus absent or rudimentary .................................................. 5 
3. Cap minute (usually less than I em broad); annulus disclike or saucerlike, sometimes as large 
as the cap; common on horse dung ........................... C. ephemeroides, p.352 
3. Not as above; fruiting body larger ................................................ 4 
4. Cap 2-5 em high when unexpanded, at first entirely white or white with brownish scales ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. sterquilinus & others (see c. comalus. p. 345) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
5. Cap at first covered with white to buff or gray universal veil remnants (hairs, fibrils, or powdery 
or flaky scales) ............................................................... 6 
5. Universal veil absent; cap hairless or with only a few minute hairs ..................... 8 
6. Cap white or pallid with white to pale gray powdery or mealy scales ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. niveus & others (see C. radial us group, p. 351) 
6. Not as above (but cap may be covered at first with white fibrils or hairs) ................ 7 
343 
344 COPRINACEAE 
7. Cap minute (usually less than 8 mm high before expansion] ...... C. radiatus group, p. 351 
7. Cap usually larger than above ........ C.Jimetarius & others (see C. /agopus group, p. 350) 
8. Cap minute (1-5 mm high before expansion) ............. C. miser (see C. p/icati/is, p. 352) 
8. Cap small, but typically larger than above .......... C. ephemerus (see C. p/icatilis, p. 352) 
9. Cap cylindrical before expansion and 4-25 cm or more tall, usually at least somewhat shaggy, 
entirely white or with a brown center and/ or brownish scales; partial veil present when young, 
often forming a movable annulus (ring) that may drop off; cosmopolitan C. comatus, p. 345 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Stalk tough and woody. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see POdaxales& Allies, p. 724) 
10. Not as above .................................. '.' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. II 
II. Growing in deserts or arid regions, typically terrestrial (not on dung); cap usually with one or 
more thick, feltlike, persistent patches of universal veil tissue; stalk sometimes with a volva 
at the base ................................................................. 12 
11. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
12. Volval patch (veil tissue) on cap usually single and stellate (with starlike arms or points) . 13 
12. V olval patch or patches irregular, not stellate; base of stalk bulbous with a volva-like rim ... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. xerophilus 
13. Stalk typically with a volva-like basal bulb ............................ C. asterophora 
13. Basal bulb and volva lacking or rudimentary, at least at maturity. . . . . . . C. asterophoroides 
14. Gills with yellow edges; stalk with yellow hairs .......................... C. sulphureus 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Base of stalk or immediate vicinity with cinnamon to yellow-brown or yellow-orange mycelial 
threads or a woolly mycelial mat (oozonium); growing on wood (often indoors) .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. radians (see C. micaceus, p. 348) 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Cap typically 5 cm broad or more when expanded, dark brown (or becoming black) beneath a 
layer of whitish universal veil tissue which breaks up into discrete patches or flakes or ..spots"; 
stalk fairly thick (usually 0.5-1.5 cm); terrestrial .................... C. picaceus, p. 346 
16. Not as above (cap may have a coating of whitish hairs, but if so, then differently colored or stalk 
thinner) .................................................................... 17 
17. Cap at first clothed with white to grayish hairs (see Color Plate 86), gray to dark brown or black 
beneath the hairs; stalk typically long, slender, fragile ... C. lagopus group & others, p. 350 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap with large flaky patches or flat scales which may wear off in age; growing in clusters (occa- 
sionally scattered) on dead hardwoods (but wood may be buried) in eastern North America 
. C. quadrijidus, C. variegatus, & c. americanus (not good edibles-some variants are bitter) 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Cap whitish except at center; partial veil usually forming a membranous ring on stalk; growing 
on rotting wood ................................ C. alnivorus (see c. comatus, p. 345) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Cap at first with a dense coating of white universal veil fibrils, whitish to pale tawny beneath the 
fibrils or if darker then growing in ashes; stalk 3-10 mm thick C. domesticus & others, p. 349 
20. Not as above; cap bald or with whitish particles, or if with whitish fibrils then usually darker 
or brighter than above (beneath the fibrils) and not found in ashes; stalk thin or thick .. 21 
21. Stalk typically 6 mm thick or more; cap 2-8 cm broad and/ or high, brown to grayish ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. atramentarius, p.347 
21. Stalk typically 1-6 mm thick; cap up to 5 cm broad or high, but iflarger than 3 cm then typically 
buff to yellow-brown or reddish-brown when fresh ............................... 22 
22. Cap conspicuously pleated in age (see Color Plate 87) and often expanding to plane; usually 
growing scattered or at least not in clumps ......................... C. plicatilis, p. 352 
22. Not as above; often in clumps or clusters ......................................... 23 
23. Stalk typically 3-8 cm long and 2-6 mm thick ............... C. micaceus & others, p. 348 
23. Stalk typically 1-4 cm long and 1-2 mm thick ..................................... 24 
24. Gills crowded ............................... C. impatiens (see C. disseminatus, p. 352) 
24. Gills well-spaced or fairly close but not crowded .................. C. disseminatus, p. 352 
- 
-- 
.' 
:) 
 
"- 
tol , 
... c "'" ... .... 
, J 
I 
,", .... 
:, ,. ....r 
' j,  
.. 
"'t, .. 
A- 
," 
. 
:,,-:  \. 
41 
 
. 
.. 
 
.", 
. 
.J 
...,t 
.. 
t -. --' ," 
- 4 .. ..' -', , " 
... "';i. 'l.4. 
.. .. 
';..  
 w.... \f i 
-...t_ .J' 
\ ..... 
 
. 
t",. 
", . 
t 
,.. 
..{., ...... 
-II", . -:. L 
+ 
,,- 
'.1 
.. 
 
" 
" 
',. 
 
." 
... 
Shaggy manes in egg batter and bread crumbs, anyone? This beautiful cluster of Coprinus comatus 
is at the perfect stage for eating. How do they taste? See photo on p. 890 for the answer. 
Coprinus comatus (Shaggy Mane) Color Plate 85 
CAP 4-15 (25) cm tall, cylindrical or columnar, expanding somewhat as margin curls up 
until it is more or less bell-shaped, then deliquescing from the bottom up; surface not vis- 
cid, white with a brown to pale cinnamon-brown or buff center, soon breaking up into 
shaggy white to brown scales (universal veil remnants) which often recurve in age; margin 
striate in age and often tattered. Flesh soft, white. GILLS very crowded (like pages in a 
book), free or nearly so, at first white, then passing through delicate shades of pink, pinkish- 
red, or vinaceous; finally black and inky (deliquescing). STALK 5-20 (40) cm long, 1-2 cm 
thick, tapering upward or with an enlarged, more or less pointed base; smooth, white, 
hollow or stuffed with a pith, cleanly separable from cap. PARTIAL VEIL membranous, 
forming a small, white, movable, inferior ring which often drops to the base of the stalk or 
falls off. SPORE PRINT black; spores 10-16 (18) )( 7-9 microns, elliptical, smooth; with 
a germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Sometimes solitary but more often scattered to densely gregarious or in loose 
clumps on hard ground and grassy areas, rich or disturbed soil, etc. Common throughout 
the northern hemisphere, especially along roads and trails. In our area the major crop is 
in the fall or early winter, but it can be found most any time, In the Southwest I have seen 
troops of them crowding highway shoulders for miles-both in the spring and fall. For 
some reason "shags" seem to gravitate toward asphalt and often burst up through it. 
They've been known to ruin tennis courts, and one is reported to have lifted a 10 pound slab 
of concrete in a heroic attempt to proliferate its species. Alexander Smith describes a 
fruiting of over 1000 specimens on a baseball field, "extending in a line from first base 
to short left field." 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious-one of the best known and safest of all wild mush- 
rooms. The flavor is very delicate but the texture is marvelous-not slimy as in okra, but 
345 
346 
COPRINACEAE 
succulent as in octopus. For a delicious snack, slice them in half and dip them in egg batter 
and bread crumbs (or flour), then saute them briefly and serve hot! Use only young caps- 
darkened ones are mostly water-and don't pick more than you can eat in two meals unless 
you plan to preserve them, for they will deliquesce quickly. In rare instances they may 
react with alcohol in the body to produce effects similar to those of C. atramentarius. 
However, I have cooked them in wine many times with no ill effects. 
COMMENTS: Shaggy manes are the soldiers among mushrooms, the sentinels of the 
roads. Their tall, shaggy cylindrical heads are distinctive even in silhouette, and when inky 
individuals are found in the vicinity of young ones, there can benodoubtas to their identity. 
The poisonous Chlorophyllum molybdites can be similar when young, but expands in age 
and doesn't deliquesce. Podaxis pistil/aris is quite similar in shape and color, but lacks gills. 
"Shags" are as pleasing to the eye as to the palate, especially in the delicate reddish tints the 
gills assume as they mature. "Shags" also possess a special spontaneity-seemingly 
popping up overnight after a rain, while most mushrooms fruit several days after. Extreme 
aridity may arrest development so that the spores never mature and the gills remain white, 
or the gills blacken and then shrivel up rather than deliquescing. Several forms and varieties 
of the shaggy.mane have been described, including a small, oval one only 5-6 cm high. The 
height of the larger forms seems to depend partially on the depth of the humus they must 
transcend-I have found specimens in redwood duff by a road that were two feet tall-but 
the "normal" height is 6-20 cm. Other species: C. colosseus is a giant version of the shaggy 
mane with stalk 35-50 cm long and spores 17-20 microns long; it has been described from 
Washington by Fred Van De Bogart, but is rare. Several small (cap less than 5 cm high) 
versions of the shaggy mane also occur, including: C. palmeranus, terrestrial; C. alnivorus, 
wood-inhabiting; C. sterquilinus and C. umbrinus, on dung or compost piles, the former 
with large spores and the latter with a brownish stem base; and C. spadiceisporus, on the 
dung of wild animals (rabbit, deer, etc.). All ofthese have the ring (annulus) characteristic 
of the shaggy mane and are too small and rare to be worth eating. 
Coprinus picaceus (Magpie Mushroom) 
CAP (3) 5-8 cm broad, oval or cylindrical when young, broadly bell-shaped in age; surface 
at first covered with whitish universal veil material which soon breaks up into discrete 
patches, flakes, or "spots" on a dark brown to eventually black background; finely striate 
nearly to the center in age, and deliquescing. Flesh thin, fragile, soft. GILLS white, soon 
becoming reddish- or vinaceous-tinted, finally black and inky (deliquescing); crowded, 
more or less free. STALK 7-15 (25) cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, base usually enlarged and 
with woolly hairs; hollow or stuffed, white, smooth, fairly fragile. PARTIAL VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores (13) 14-20 x 10-13 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on ground in woods and along paths, etc.; widely 
distributed, but not common. I have found it only once in our area, but it is not uncommon 
in southern California when it is damp enough. In Europe it grows under beech and is said 
to be partial to alkaline soil. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous, at least to some people. 
COMMENTS: The mottled brown-and-white or black-and-white cap makes this one of 
the easiest of all inky caps to recognize. Large specimens are reminiscent of the shaggy 
mane in shape-but the resemblance ends there. Greg Wright of Los Angeles, who has 
had more experience with this species than I, says the odor is also distinctive-like that of 
"mothballs, a hot grass pile, or burnt hair, or rank." Other species: In my own pathetic 
excuse for a garden I ha ve found a somewhat smaller, mottled (black-and-white), unidenti- 
fied Coprinus with a distinct annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
y 
\ 
1 
'I \ \ 
\. 
.. 
" 
.. 
\ 
Coprinus atramentarius. the common inky cap. Note hollow stalk in the beautiful slice at bottom 
Coprinus atramentarius (Inky Cap; Tippler's Bane) 
CAP 2-8 cm high and/ or broad, round or oval and often somewhat lobed when young, 
becoming conical to bell-shaped, or in old age convex; deliquescing from the margin 
toward the center; surface dry, smooth or with silky whitish fibrils (universal veil tissue) 
when young, grayish-brown to grayish-tan when young (the center often browner or with 
small brown scales and the margin sometimes pallid), becoming lead-gray to inky-gray in 
age; margin striate or grooved, usually tattered OI splitting in age. Flesh thin, soft, pallid or 
grayish. GILLS free or nearly free, crowded, at first white, soon gray or with pinkish to 
vinaceous tints, finally black and deliquescing(becoming inky). ST ALK 4-15 (20) cm long, 
0.6-1.5 em thick, equal or with a narrowed or enlarged base; white or with grayish to brown- 
ish fibrils below; hollow. PARTIAL VEIL fibrillose and evanescent or leaving a median 
to basal ring or ridged zone on stalk, or sometimes even a rudimentary volva near base, 
SPORE PRINT black; spores 7-12 )( 4 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
Coprinus atramentarius usually grows in groups, tufts, or clusters. Left: These specimens have 
rounded smooth caps. Right: A large scaly-capped cluster. 
. 
. 
, 
.... 
,: ......... 
'\.. .. 
,.. 
. 
.. 
r.. 4 
J 
.,; .., " 
.., 
.:.r- ". 
''j 
. .. 
.., 
'. 
".. 
\' 
348 
COPRINACEAE 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or in massive clumps in cultivated areas, 
lawns, gardens, roadsides, around or on old stumps, etc., sometimes also in the woods; 
widely distributed and very common, fruiting in our area practically year-round. It used to 
be an unwanted intruder in cultivated mushroom beds, and is one of our characteristic 
"suburban" mushrooms. The largest fruiting I've seen in the wild was under aspen in New 
Mexico. Several crops are generally produced each year. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when young and fairly good-but sometimes reacting with alcohol 
in the body to produce a peculiar type of poisoning (see p. 896 for details). The grayish- 
brown caps look rather unappetizing-and precisely for this reason were the very first wild 
mushroom I ventured to eat. Inky cap-and-salami sandwhiches became a staple item in 
my teen-age diet until I discovered finer and more flavorful fungal foods, such as 
"s parassis Sole" and .. Agaricus Elegante." 
COMMENTS: The lead-gray to brownish, bell-shaped caps of this species are a familiar 
sight in vacant lots and gardens. Several varieties occur, including one with a pointed or 
umbonate cap (var. acuminatus) and one with a copious universal veil. The typical variety, 
however, has a non-umbonate cap and only slight universal veil remnants on the cap (if 
any). The young unexpanded buttons provide an unexpected visual treat when sliced open 
lengthwise, but true to their name, they turn into an unsightly inky black mess as they 
mature, suitable for writing but not biting. The inky cap sometimes rivals the shaggy mane 
in size and abundance and may even mix company. I have seen gigantic 1O-lb. clusters 
fruiting from an old cut stump in a field, but it does not necessarily grow in clumps. Other 
species. C. insignis (=c. alopecia) of eastern North America is a similar species with rough 
spores. It grows on hardwood stumps, especially maple, and is poisonous to some people. 
Coprinus micaceus (Mica Cap; Glistening Inky Cap) 
CAP 2-4 cm high when young, 1.5-5 cm broad when expanded; at first oval, soon bell- 
shaped, then expanding to convex; surface sprinkled at first with minute glistening whitish 
particles (universal veil remnants) which often disappear in age, otherwise tan to yellow- 
brown to ochre, buff, fulvous, or cinnamon- brown (margin often paler), becoming grayer 
in age, especially toward margin; striate at least half way to center, the margin usually 
tattered or split at maturity. Flesh thin, pallid or white, soft. GILLS crowded, adnate to 
adnexed or free, palllid soon becoming gray or brownish, finally black; deliquescing 
(sometimes partially, sometimes completely). STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 2-6 mm thick, 
more or less equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, white or discoloring buff. PARTIAL VEIL 
absent or rudimentary, but stalk sometimes with a slight basal ring (presumably formed 
by the universal veil). SPORE PRINT dark brown to black; spores 7-11 )( 4-6 microns, 
elliptical but often compressed (flattened) somewhat, smooth. 
Coprinus micaceus. Note white stalk, striate cap, and tendency to grow in clusters. Tattered specimens 
at right have autodigested. 
'" 
\ 
-I 
:..." 
.. \ \ 
I 
,} 
\. 
\ 
\ 
4 
, 
" 
,. 
., ,.. 
 . 
. 
 
, 
. .. 
. . . 
A clump of Coprinus micaceus glistening in the rain. Note how the cap is striate nearly to the center. 
The fine mica-like particles (veil remnants) often present on the cap have been washed off by the rain. 
HABIT AT: Gregarious, usually in clusters, on wood or woody debris, around stumps, 
or on roots or buried wood (thus appearing terrestrial); widely distributed and very 
common. It fruits practically year-round in our area. Like C. atramentarius, it is a common 
feature of suburbia but also occurs in the woods (on cottonwood, oak, alder, etc.). 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but thin-fleshed and watery. The flavor is said to be good, however, 
and since it often occurs in large numbers, it is easy to gather enough for a meal. It does 
not always digest itself completely, another point in its favor. 
COMMENTS: The cap color of this ubiquitous Coprinus varies considerably, but typi- 
cally falls somewhere between tan and rusty-yellow. It is striate, but not translucent as in 
the much smaller C. disseminatus. It might be mistaken for a Psathyrella if the gills do not 
liquefy, but old caps become very tattered as the margin gets eaten away. The mica-like 
particles responsible for its name are not always evident because they wear away quickly. 
Other species: C. silvaticus is a very similar species that lacks the particles when young 
and has larger spores. C. radians is also similar, but can usually be distinguished from 
C. micaceus by its deliquescing gills and the presence of a cinnamon-brown to yellow- 
brown or yellow-orange woolly mycelial mat or network of mycelial strands (oozonium) 
in the surrounding substrate. It often grows indoors (on wet wood in basements, bath- 
rooms, etc.), and bountiful crops sprout periodically from the woodwork of a popular 
cafe in Santa Cruz, California. Its employees are divided on how to respond: whether to 
advertise its presence as a unique organic addition to the existing decor, or whether to 
hush it up by organizing daily "search and squish" patrols. for fear of alienating the more 
squeamish members of their clientele. 
Coprinus domesticus (Domestic Inky Cap) 
CAP 1-5 cm high, oval to bell-shaped, expanding slightly in age; surface buff, pallid, or 
yellowish with a tawny to ochre or fulvous center, at first covered with silky white to buff 
fibrils or patches (universal veil remnants) which often disperse or disappear in age; conspi- 
cuously striate nearly to the center; margin often splitting in age. Flesh thin, pallid. GILLS 
crowded, free or adnexed, white becoming gray to reddish-gray, finally black and inky 
(deliquescing). STALK 3-8 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal or with swollen base, white, 
349 
. 
\\\ '. ' , 
 
,\ 
, ' \ 
\ 
\ .... ,. 
\ 
\ 
\. 
\ " , . 
. 
Left Coprinus domeslicus, immature specimens. Cap is grayish-buff to whitish and conspicuously 
striate. Right An unidentified charcoal-loving Coprinus (see comments under C. domeslicus). 
Note striations and prominent universal veil remnants on cap. 
hollow. PARTIAL VEIL evanescent or sometimes forming a ragged ring or ridged zone on 
stalk, or even a rudimentary volva at its base. SPORE PRINT black; spores 7-10 x 3.54.5 
microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Gregarious in small, scattered clumps on wood chi ps, compost, and vegetable 
debris in a large garden in Saratoga, California; probably widely distributed. Crops were 
produced in the above locality more or less continuously except in very cold weather. 
EDIBILITY:"Of very good flavor when cooked," says Greg Wright of Los Angeles- 
but I don't recommend it because of possible confusion with other species. 
COMMENTS: The name C. domesticus has apparently been applied to more than one 
species, so its use here must be regarded as tentative. However, our specimens compare 
favorably to the original (European) description of the species. It resembles C. micaceus, 
but has a somewhat paler cap with silky white fibrils (instead of particles) when young, 
and deliquesces to a greater degree. A rather similar but unidentified species with a darker 
(ochre to tawny) cap and a white fibrillose universal veil (see photo above) occurs in our 
area on ashes. 
Coprinus lagopus group (W oolly Inky Cap) Color Plate 86 
CAP 1.5-5 (7) cm high when unexpanded, 2-6 cm broad when expanded; at first oval or 
cylindrical to acorn-shaped or conical, then expanding to nearly plane with the margin 
splitting and often recurving (curling up and back); deliquescing in wet weather; surface 
dry, grayish to brownish-gray becoming blackish, but at first clothed with delicate white 
to grayish hairs or fibrils (universal veil tissue) which break up into patches and often wear 
away in age; striate nearly to the center beneath the hairs, at least at maturity. Flesh very 
thin, soft. GILLS more or less free, narrow, fairly close, pallid St>on becoming grayish, 
then black and inky (but in dry weather merely withering). STALK 4-15 (20) cm long, 2-5 
mm thick, equal or tapering upward, very fragile, hollow, white, at first clothed with 
minute white hairs (like cap); base with long woolly white hairs. PARTIAL VEIL absent 
or evanescent. SPORE PRINT blackish; spores 10-13 x 6-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in dense troops in leaf litter, woody debris, burned 
areas, etc. (usually in the woods); widely distributed. Along with closely related species 
( see comments), it is fairly common in our area in the fall, less so in the winter and spring. 
The fragile fruiting bodies last only a few hours before consuming themselves. 
350 
COPRINUS 
351 
EDIBILITY: Probably harmless-but also fleshless and flavorless. 
COMMENTS: The above description encompasses a "complex" of closely related inky 
caps that are one big headache for compulsive Coprinus-categorizers. In addition to the 
"true" C. lagopus. there is the very similar C. lagopides, which has smaller spores (7-10 
microns long) and appears to be fairly common in our area. There are also several look- 
alikes that are somewhat smaller and grow on dung, manure, or wet straw. These include: 
C. fimetarius and C. macrorhizus (the latter with a rooting stem base); C. macrocephalus, 
with large spores (11- J 6 microns long); and C. tectisporus, which grows in greenhouse soil 
and only partially deliquesces. To make matters more confusing, the name C. cinereus is 
often used, sometimes for a woodland species like C. lagopides but with a taller cap, and 
sometimes as a synonym for C. jimetarius and C. macrorhizus. You needn't know the 
exact names of these inky caps, however, to appreciate their beauty (see color plate!), and 
they are easily recognized as a group by their slender, fragile, white stalk and striate 
grayish cap that is clothed exquisitely with white hairs when young. The dung- and straw- 
inhabiting forms, incidentally, are often abundant in our area and are extremely ephemeral 
-the caps deliquesce within a few hours, leaving behind only the long, slender, fragile, 
bean-sprout-like stalks. (For a miniature dung-inhabiting version, see the C. radiatus 
group.) Other species: C. arenatus is also similar to C. lagopus. but grows in sand; C. 
narcoticus grows in manure and rich soil and has a strong, unpleasant odor. Finally, 
there is C. "chevicola," which fruited one season on the floor of my ramshackle '67 Chevy 
Nova Supersport. It superficially resembled C. lagopus, but was smaller and differed in 
several other respects, not the least of which was its choice of abode! 
Coprinus radiatus group 
(Miniature Woolly Inky Cap) 
CAP minute, 2-8 mm high, 14 mm broad before expanding, at first oval or cylindrical, 
then ex panding to plane or nearly plane (with the margin usually splitting and curling up), 
then deliquescing; surface gray or with a brownish center, but at first covered with long 
white to grayish hairs and/ or scales (universal veil tissue); striate nearly to the center 
beneath hairs. Flesh very thin, soft. GILLS narrow, well-spaced in age, free or nearly free, 
pallid soon becoming gray to black, deliquescing with the cap. ST ALK 1-5 cmlong, about 1 
mm thick, more or less equal, hollow, very fragile, white, with rooting, hairy base. 
PARTIAL VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores 11-14 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on dung, compost, and manure; widely distributed and 
fruiting whenever it is damp enough. It is one of our commonest dung fungi, especially on 
piles of horse manure mixed with straw. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? 
COMMENTS: The small size and dense white to grayish hairs on the cap distinguish this 
diminutive dung-lover. It is essentially a miniature version of the equally common C. 
cinereus-c. fimetarius-C. macrocephalus complex (see comments under the C. lagopus 
group), and is itself a "complex" of difficult-to-distinguish forms. Because of its small size 
and brief life span it is best observed in a "dung garden" (dung or manure placed in a moist 
chamber). Other dung lovers include: C. pseudoradiatus, very similar but with smaller 
spores and a non-rooting stalk base; C. niveus, larger, with a mealy snow-white cap (at 
least when fresh); C. semilanatus, like C. niveus. but with a slightly darker cap (beneath 
the veil remnants); and a host of small species which cannot be reliably identified without 
a microscope. Also see C. ephemeroides. which has a large annulus (ring), C. ephemerus 
and C. miser (under C. plicatilis), which have a bald or nearly bald cap, and comments 
under the C. lagopus group. 
352 
COPRINACEAE 
Coprinus ephemeroides (Ringed Dung Inky Cap) 
CAP minute, 1-5 mm broad, convex or in age nearly plane; surface with minute granules or 
particles (but may appear smooth), grayish or tinged yellowish to ochre at the center; 
practically transparent; striate. Flesh very thin (almost non-existent). GILLS usually 
adnexed or free, becoming grayish or black, narrow, soon shrivelling or deliquescing. 
ST ALK 0.5-6 cm long, about 1 mm thick or less, equal or with a small bulb at base, very 
fragile, whitish, smooth; base sometimes with a rudimentary volva (in one form). 
PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, forming a large, persistent, more or less median ring on 
stalk; ring disclike or saucerlike. SPORE PRINT black; spores 6-9)( 3-6 microns, angular 
(appearing almost triangular), smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary or in groups on dung and manure (especially of horses) and straw 
piles; widely distributed and common. Fruiting in our area whenever it is moist enough. 
EDIBILITY: Academic-a tremendous number would be needed for one mouthful! 
COMMENTS: One of our tiniest gilled mushrooms, this inky cap is easily recognized by 
its growth on dung and the large saucerlike annulus (ring) on the stalk. The ring is some- 
times as broad as the cap, giving the illusion of a stalk with two caps! The name C. ephemer- 
oides should not be confused with C. ephemerus, a slightly larger dung-lover that lacks an 
annulus (see comments under C. plicatilis). C. bulbilosus is a synonym. 
Coprinus plicatilis (Pleated Inky Cap) Color Plate 87 
CAP 0.5-1.5 cm high when young and 1-3 cm broad when expanded; oval or cylindrical 
to conical when young, broadly convex or plane in age; surface buff to yellow-brown, 
usually with a darker (cinnamon-brown or fulvous) center, in age becominggrayishexcept 
for center; deeply grooved (pleated) nearly to center; margin sometimes recurved in age. 
Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS free (but attached to a collar around stalk apex), well- 
spaced, narrow, soon gray and eventually black, but tending to wither rather than liquefy. 
STALK 3-7.5 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, very fragile, thin, smooth, white 
or buff, hollow. PARTIAL VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores 10-13 )( 6.5-10 
microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in lawns and other grassy areas, under 
trees, in woods, along paths and roads, etc; widely distributed and fairly common in our 
area, especially in the fall and early winter. I have seen it fruit prolifically with the similarly 
named Marasmius plicatulus in grass under eucalyptus. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inconsequential due to its thin flesh. 
COMMENTS: The exquisitely pleated cap, small size, and terrestrial habit distinguish 
this petite, parasol-like inky cap (see color plate!). The free collar to which the gills are 
attached is also distinctive, but is not evident in one form (perhaps a distinct species). It is 
larger than C. disseminatus and occurs in smaller numbers, and its cap lacks the white 
patches or hairs (universal veil remnants) typical of C. lagopus and most other inky caps. 
Other species: C. ephemerus also lacks hairs on its cap, but is slightly smaller and grows in 
dung, straw, and compost; C. miser is a minute species (cap 1-5 mm high, reddish-brown 
to orange-brown when fresh, but fading) that it also common on dung. 
Coprinus disseminatus (Little Helmet; Fairy Bonnet) 
CAP 5-10 mm broad, oval soon becoming bell-shaped, then sometimes convex; surface 
minutely scurfy when young, then smooth; pallid or buff with a cinnamon-brown to honey- 
brown center, becoming grayish toward the margin in age; deeply striate or pleated to the 
... 
'\ 
. 
..... 
\ 
 
..' 
'-- 
Coprinus (=Pseudocoprinus) disseminalUs. This minute attractive mushroom usually grows in 
swarms and does not deliquesce. Note the bell-shaped striate cap and widely spaced gills. 
center and translucent at maturity. Flesh very thin, soft. GILLS adnate to adnexed or 
appearing free,- fairly well-spaced, at first white but soon gray, finally black or slightly 
paler; not deliquescing. ST ALK 1.54 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, white or buff, hollow, 
fragile, smooth, often curved. PARTIAL VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT dark brown to 
black; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. with a large apical germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Densely gregarious (sometimes hundreds) on or near decayed wood and 
debris, or on buried wood; usually found in woods or grassy areas, widely distributed. 
It fruits throughout the mushroom season in our area, but is not particularly common. 
In eastern North America it is often abundant. 
EDIBILITY: Too small to be of any value. 
COMMENTS: This dainty little fungus grows in troops that do indeed resemble "little 
helmets" or "fairy bonnets." Because the gills do not deliquesce, the ""splitters" have 
rewarded it with the name Pseudocop,inus disseminatus. It has the general aspect of C. 
micaceus, but is much smaller. The translucent, pleated cap separates it from Psathyrella, 
(to which it has also been assigned); it is also reminiscent of Mycena, but the spore print is 
black or nearly black, not white. Other species: C. impatiens is a similar but slightly larger 
species with crowded, at least somewhat deliquescent gills; it usually occurs in smaller 
groups of up to one dozen individuals. 
PANAEOLUS 
Small to medium-sized. fragile. dung- or grass-inhabiting mushrooms. CAP usually bell-shaped or 
conical when young (but sometimes convex). GILLS typically attached. gray to deep brown to black 
when mature; sides (faces) often mottled. STALK typically thin. brittle or fragile. VEIL present or 
absent. but not usually forming an annulus (ring). VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT typically 
black (but dark brown in P. foenisecil). Spores mostly elliptical. with a germ pore; retarning their 
color in concentrated sulfuric acid. Cap cuticle cellular. 
THIS is a small genus oflittle brown mushrooms r"LBM's") with a bell-shaped to conical 
cap and thin, brittle stalk. The sides (faces) of the gills often have a mottled appearance 
(see photograph on p. 356) due to uneven maturation of the spores, but they do not deli- 
quesce as in Coprinus. Psathyrellas are similar but do not typically grow in dung, and those 
that grow in grass tend to have a convex cap and/ or dark brown spores. Psilocybe and 
Conocybe are common in dung, but do not have black spores. 
353 
354 
COPRINACEAE 
Panaeo/us is abundant in pastures, lawns, dung, and manure heaps, fruiting whenever 
it's moist. It often mixes company with other nondescript"LBM's"( Conocybe. Agrocybe. 
Stropharia. etc.), and would rapidly be relegated to the ranks offungal forgetability were 
it not for the fact that some of its members contain traces of psilocybin and other pupil- 
dilating (the term "mind -ex panding" being open to de bate) compounds. However, in their 
search for a more promising and less painful reality, people will stoop to anything, even if 
it grows on cow patties and is only two inches tall. Thus, after every rain, our pastures are 
marred by hordes of "magic mushroom" hunters, inevitable plastic bags in hand. 
Actually, there is considerable confusion as to which species are pupil-dilating. Traces 
of psilocybin have been isolated in virtually every species, but its presence and concentra- 
tion is contingent upon a number of genetic, geographic, and environmental factors. My 
own experience with the P. campanu/atus-P. sphinctrinus complex indicates thatasizable 
amount may produce mild hilarity, oreven a transitory state of pseudoeroticeffervescence. 
More often, however, it will produce a queasy stomach and if gulped down too eagerly, 
hiccups. It hardly seems worth the effort to harvest and digest the necessary number of 
fungal fructifications (30-50), but some people will do anything to "alter" reality, and it can 
be argued, I suppose, that doing anything is better than doing nothing. 
Indiscriminate sampling of "LBM's" is foolish, of course, since some are poisonous, so 
care must be taken to identify your Panaeo/us correctly. Six species are described here. 
Key to Panaeolus 
1. Cap and/ or stalk staining blue to blue-green when bruised or in age ................... 2 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
2. Fruiting body staining blue to blue-green only at base of stalk (or mycelium) and only faintly- 
common in temperate regions .......................... P. subbalteatus group. p. 358 
2. Fruiting body staining blue to blue-green in most parts (cap, stalk, flesh); largely tropical and 
subtropical .......................................... P. cyanescens & others, p. 358 
3. Cap striate or pleated and/ or very tiny (less than 5 mm broad or high) . (see Coprinus, p. 342) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Partial veil present (covering the gills when young), either forming an annulus (ring) or fibrillose 
zone on stalk or leaving toothlike remnants on cap margin .......................... 5 
4. Veil absent (check several specimens in different stages if possible) .............. .., . . .. 7 
5. Veil usually forming a distinct annulus on stalk; cap pale (white to buff or pale tan), often viscid 
when moist ................................................. P. semiovatus, p. 355 
5. Veil typically leaving remnants on cap margin (but stalk sometimes with a black ring of spore 
dust); cap usually darker than above, not viscid ................................... 6 
6. Cap reticulate (netted) or coarsely wrinkled (see photo at bottom of p. 357) ............... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. retirugis (see P. campanu/atus group, p. 356) 
6. Not as above ........................................ P. campanulatus group. p. 356 
7. Mature gills and spore print dark brown; growing in grass but not on dung P.Joenisecii, p. 360 
7. Mature gills and spore print black (gills may be brown when young); in dung, grass, etc. .. 8 
8. Cap whitish to buff or dingy yellowish when fresh, 4-10 cm broad; stalk solid, usually at least 
4 mm thick ................................................... P. solidipes, p. 355 
8. Not as above (but cap may fade to whitish as it dries out) ............................ 9 
9. Fruiting body very small; stalk whitish or nearly translucent; on dung (seePsathyrella, p. 361) 
9. Not as above; common............ .................... ........................ 10 
10. Cap typically bell-shaped or conical, even at maturity ................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. acuminatus & others (see P. campanu/atus group, p. 356) 
10. Cap typically convex to plane, at least in age ...................................... 11 
11. Gills brown before becoming black; cap often with a darker marginal band as it begins to dry 
out; often but not always growing in small clusters; common P. subbalteatus group. p. 358 
11. Not as above; not common .............. P.Jimicola (see P. campanu/atus group, p. 356) 
PANAEOLUS 
355 
Panaeo/us so/idipes 
(Solid-Stemmed Panaeolus) 
Color Plate 83 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, rounded to convex or broadly bell-shaped; surface smooth or 
wrinkled, not viscid or only slightly so, buff to whitish, or dingy yellowish in age (or gray 
from spore dust); sometimes breaking up into small scales as it matures. Flesh fairly thick, 
whitish. GILLS adnate to adnexed, close; edges whitish; faces pallid becoming mottled 
with gray and black, and finally entirely black. STALK (4) 8-20 cm long, (3) 5-15 mm thick, 
equal or thicker below, solid, rather tough, smooth or longitudinally twisted-striate; often 
beaded with droplets when young and moist, especially at apex; white to buff or tinged 
gray from spores. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores 14-22 x 9-14 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on dung (especially of horses), manure, and straw; 
widely distributed. In my experience it is not particularly common, but often prolific when 
it fruits. I have seen large numbers near Saratoga, California, in January, and near 
Flagstaff, Arizona, in September. O.K. Miller says it is common during the summer in 
Alaska and the Yukon. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. I haven't tried it, but McIlvaine says, "it is one of the best of the 
toadstools." The relatively large size makes it the only non-hallucinogenic Panaeo/us 
worth eating. 
COMMENTS: The large size and solid stem are remarkable for a Panaeo/us. Along with 
the black spores, pale cap, absence of a veil, and growth on dung, these features make it 
easy to recognize. P. pha/aenarum and P. sepu/chra/;s are synonyms, and it has also been 
placed in the genus Ane//aria(along with P. semiovalus, to which it is closely related). The 
latter species, however, has a veil which usually forms a ring (annulus) on the stalk. 
Panaeo/us semiovatus (Ringed Panaeolus) 
CAP 2-6 (9) cm broad and 2-6 cm high, oval at first, then bluntly conical or parabolic; 
surface viscid when moist, often shiny when dry, smooth or slightly wrinkled, pale tan 
becoming buff or whitish in age, or tinged gray from spores; margin sometimes hung with 
veil remnants. Flesh soft, pallid. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding; edges whitish, 
faces pallid becoming brown or grayish, then mottled with black, and finally entirely 
black. STALK (5) 8-15 (18) cm long, (3) 5-10 (12) mm thick, equal or with enlarged base, 
stuffed or hollow, whitish to buff, apex often striate. VEIL membranous, usually forming 
a superior to median ring on stalk which is blackened by falling spores, but sometimes 
merely leaving a fibrillose zone. SPORE PRINT black; spores 15-22 x 8-12 microns, 
elliptical to somewhat pip-shaped, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on dung and manure, especially of horses; widely 
distributed and fairly common in mild, wet weather. It is not uncommon in our area, but 
the largest fruitings I've seen were in New Mexico, in the summer. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, according to most sources. However, there is one dubious report 
of psilocybin-containing specimens from Colorado. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Panaeo/us separatus and Ane//ar;a separata, this species 
is easily recognized by its white to buff cap, presence of an annulus (ring), and growth in 
horse dung (see photograph at bottom of p. 357). Since the cap is slightly viscid, it might 
be mistaken for a Psi/ocybe or Siropharia. The mottled gills, however, signify Panaeo/us. 
Specimens without a distinct annulus (ring) resemble P. so/idipes, but that species has a 
thicker solid stem and lacks a veil even in the button stage. The paler cap color helps dis- 
tinguish P. semiovalus from the P. campanu/alus group, which can have a "ring" of black 
spore dust on the stem. 
 
r 
.. 
 
." 
... 
'\ 
.. 
Panaeo/us campanu/atus group. This close-up clearly shows the mottled gills and tendency of the 
veil to break up into toothlike remnants that cling to the margin of the cap. 
Panaeo/us campanu/atus group (Bell-Shaped Panaeolus) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad and/ or high, bluntly conical or bell-shaped, scarcely expanding in 
age; surface not viscid, often shiny when dry, smooth or finely wrinkled or often cracking 
to form scales (especially in sunlight); some shade of brown, gray, or olive-gray when 
fresh (or in one form reddish-brown), paler (olive, tan, or buff) when faded, or dusted 
black by spores; margin hung with small, white, toothlike veil remnants, at least when 
young. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS adnate or adnexed but often seceding, fairly close; edges 
whitish, faces gray becoming mottled with black; entirely black in age. STALK 6-15 cm 
long, 1-3 (5) mm thick, equal or thicker at apex, often quite long and thin, very brittle or 
fragile, brown to grayish, minutely powdered. VEIL evanescent, usually seen in young 
specimens as flaps of sterile tissue on margin of cap, and sometimes in older specimens as a 
thin band of black spore dust on the stalk. SPORE PRINT black; spores 13-18 x 7.5-12 
microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in "families" on or near dung or in grass where cattle have grazed, 
sometimes also in compost; widely distributed and very common. It is often abundant in 
our coastal pastures in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Some strains ofthis species "complex" (see comments) have mild hallucino- 
genic effects when eaten raw in large quantities (see p. 354). More often, however, there 
is no effect. Traces of psilocybin as well as serotonin have been isolated. 
COMMENTS: The gray to brown, more or less bell-shaped cap, long thin brittle stalk, 
mottled gray to black gills, and toothlike veil remnants on the margin of the cap when 
young are characteristic of a closely-knit group of dung-lovers: P. campanulatus, 
356 
,. 
J 
\. 
f' 
- 
if' 
Panaeo/us campanu/atus group. Conical to bell-shaped cap, black gills, long brittle stalk, and growth 
on or near dung typify this common species. 
P. sphinetrinus, and P. papilionaeeus. Since even the experts cannot agree on the exact 
differences (if any) between them, it would be presumptuous to attempt to differentiate 
them here. At any rate, they are among our most common cow patty ("meadow muffin") 
mushrooms, along with Psilocybe coprophila and Stropharia semiglobata. The stalk is so 
fragile that it is difficult to bring home a specimen in one piece. Similar species include: P. 
retirugis, a smaller species with an often conspicuously veined or reticulate cap (see photo- 
graph),.also found in our area, but not nearly as common and seemingly partial to horse 
dung; the P. aeuminatus-P. riekenii group, with a conical to bell-shaped cap and no veil 
(check young specimens!); and P. jimieola, which also lacks a veil, but has a more convex 
or hemispherical (domed) cap. None of these are worth eating. 
Two common inhabitants of horse dung. Left: Panaeo/us retirugis (see comments above) is easily 
distinguished by its wrinkled or netted (reticulate) cap. Right: Panaeo/us semiovatus (=P. separatus) 
has a smooth, pale cap and a veil that usually forms a distinct annulus (ring) on the stalk (see de- 
scription on p. 355). 
# 
. 
..... 
. \ 
..-, 
. 
I 
, . 
t, -'<..' 
" 
... 
\ 
\ 
. , L 
........,,, .' 
.,t, 
."'" , 
t.' 
,..\. 
..,. 
. t). , 
... 
, 
\-' ... 
.." 
111'''' 
'"', .. 
;" 
358 
COPRINACEAE 
Panaeo/us cyanescens (Blue-Staining Panaeolus) 
CAP 1.54 cm broad, bell-shaped to convex; surface smooth or sometimes cracked, not 
viscid, brown when moist, fading to grayish or whitish as it dries; margin often wavy orsplit 
in age. Flesh thin, bruising blue or bluish-green. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, 
gray to black, the faces usually mottled. STALK 6-12cm long, 24 mm thick, equal or with 
a slight bulb at base, usually long and slender, smooth, pallid to yellowish, grayish, or 
pinkish, the base brownish or tinged flesh-color; bruising bluish at least somewhat when 
handled. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores 12-14 x 8.5-11 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or in groups on or near dung in pastures; 
widely distributed in the tropics and subtropics. It is fairly common along the Gulf Coast 
of the United States and also occurs in Mexico and Hawaii. Two similar species (see 
comments) have been reported from California. 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic-as might be expected of a blue-staining Panaeo/us. 
P. tropicalis (see comments) is also potent, and both species are gathered by "magic 
mushroom" hunters in Hawaii. 
COMMENTS: Blue-staining Panaeo/us species are largely tropical and subtropical in 
distribution. They can be distinguished from the blue-staining Psilocybes by their black 
spore print, non-viscid cap (unless very wet), and growth on dung. Other blue-staining 
species include: P. tropica/is, with smaller spores (10-12 microns long) and no pinkish 
tinge to the stalk; and P. cambodginensis, with an olive to ochre-brown cap when moist, 
and smaller spores. All of these are placed by some in a separate genus, Cope/andia. The 
latter two have been found in southern California on well-fertilized lawns. 
Panaeo/us subba/teatus group 
(Belted Panaeolus) 
CAP 2-6 cm broad, convex or bluntly conical becoming broadly convex to broad Iv 
umbonate to plane or with uplifted margin; surface smooth or wrinkled, in age some- 
times breaking into scales (fissured), not viscid; color variable: brown to reddish-brown or 
cinnamon-brown when moist, fading as it dries to tan, buff, or even whitish (or grayish 
from spores), often with a darker (reddish-brown to brown or dark gray) marginal zone 
when partially dry. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, close, 
Panaeo/us subba/teatus group growing on a lawn fertilized with horse manure. The cap is convex 
to plane or wavy rather than conical, and usually develops a dark marginal band (as shown at left) 
when it begins to lose moisture. 
"'" 
'" 
'" 
) 
\ 
, . II 
'. 
' 
 
\\ '/ 
 
-" 
---=- 
'1 
t 
, 
" 
'" 
';< 
-:::-- 
 --=:: 
.  ::--- 
- :...--- 
\- 
 
. .. 
'.. 
. "' 
:,.  
.. 
.. 
... 
 
, 
L 
Panaeo/us subba/teatus group. Note clustered growth habit, relatively thick stem (for a Panaeo/us), 
and convex cap. These were growing in a garden fertilized with compost from a mushroom farm. 
broad, at first pale watery brown or reddish-brown, darkening gradually to black; edges 
whitish, faces usually mottled in age. STALK 4-10 cm long, (I) 3-6 (10) mm thick, equal or 
tapered at either end, hollow but not fragile, brown to reddish-brown, but often appearing 
whitish from a fine powder, or dusted gray by spores; apex often paler; usually longitudi- 
nally striate throughout; base (and mycelium) occasionally staining faintly bluish when 
bruised. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT black; spores 10-14 )( 7-9 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. 
HABITAT: Scattered to densely gregarious-often in small clumps-in manure, com- 
post, and fertilized lawns; widely distributed. In our area it fruits practically year-round 
but is most common in warm weather. I've seen several hundred specimens in a garden 
overgrown with vetch and mulched with compost from a mushroom farm. (It is one of the 
major mushroom "weeds" in cultivated mushroom beds.) 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic-the psilocybin content varies from moderate to low, 
perhaps due to differences in the nitrogen concentration of the substrate. A middle-aged 
Santa Cruz woman who mistook them for cultivated mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) was 
hospitalized with hallucinations (a frightening experience if you're unprepared for them!), 
but recovered shortly. It is one ofthe more popular" recreational" species on the west coast, 
and is easily cultivated. 
COMMENTS: The above description encompasses what may be a single variable species 
or a complex of closely related forms. The key features are the convex to broadly umbonate 
to plane cap (not bell-shaped!), brown gills when young, rather firm stalk, absence of a 
veil, black spore print, and frequent presence of a darker marginal band on the cap as it 
dries out. The tendency to grow in small clusters is also unusual for a Panaeo/us. The black 
spores and non-viscid cap separate it from Psilocybe, and the larger size and black gills in 
age distinguish it from the common, lawn-inhabiting Panaeo/us foenisecii, which may 
also have a zoned cap. P. subba/teatus is the most common "psilocybin" mushroom in 
California, but does net normally stain blue. However, the base ofthe stalk mayoccasion- 
ally stain blue very slowly, and it is sometimes coated with cottony, bluish-tinged mycel- 
ium. One variant (also hallucinogenic) that is common on fertilized lawns in our area has 
a slimmer stalk (1-3 mm thick) and smaller cap. Whether it is a ..new" species or merely a 
diminutive form of P. subba/teatus is for the Panaeo/us-pundits to decide. 
'- 
" 
Panaeolus foenisecii often grows on lawns with Marasmius oreades and Conocybe lac/ea. Cap is 
dark brown when moist, paler when dry, and often features a dark marginal band (shown at left) in 
intermediate stages. Gills and spores are brown, never black, and there is no veil. 
Panaeolusfoenisecii (Haymaker's Panaeolus) 
CAP ]-3 (4) cm broad, bluntly conical to bell-shaped, expanding to convex, broadly 
umbonate, or nearly plane; surface smooth or cracking into scales in dry weather, hygro- 
phanous but not viscid; chestnut-brown to dark brown or cinnamon-brown when moist, 
fading as it dries to dingy buff or tan, often with a darker marginal band when partially 
dry. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, fairly close, brown be- 
coming deep brown, deep grayish-brown, or chocolate-brown, the faces often somewhat 
mottled and the edges paler or whitish. STALK 4-8 cm long, ] .5-4 mm thick, equal or with 
an enlarged base, fragile, more or less smooth, white to dingy brownish (often becoming 
brown from the base upward). VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT deep brown or purp]e- 
brown; spores ] 2-] 7 )( 6-9 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups on lawns and other grassy places; very common in 
warm wet weather (or on watered lawns) throughout the northern hemisphere. It is one 
of our characteristic spring, summer, and early fall lawn mushrooms, often mingling 
with Conocybe lactea. Marasmius oreades. Psathyrella candolleana. and the Agrocybe 
pediades group. In contrast to most Panaeolus species, it doesn't grow on dung, and in 
our area it doesn't even seem to grow in pastures. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless in small quantities, but potentially poisonous to toddlers in 
the "grazing" stage, since chemical analysis has revealed traces of psilocybin in some 
collections. However, western material is apparently "inactive." 
COMMENTS: This pixieish Panaeolus is one of our very common lawn-inhabiting 
""LBM's." Its small size, thin fragile stem, absence of a veil, growth in grass (not on dung!), 
and dark brown spores and gills distinguish it. Because the gills and spore print are not 
black as in other Panaeolus species and the spores are not smooth, the""sp]itters"(seep.lO) 
have erected a special genus for it, Panaeo/ina. Alexander Smith, on the other hand, 
dumps it into Psathyrella in his voluminous testament to that genus (his arguments for 
placing it in that genus are actually quite persuasive, but he has the weight of tradition 
against him in this case). Other species: P. castaneifol;us is a similar diminutive lawn 
lover with a slightly thicker (3-6 mm) stem, purple-black gills, and purple-black, slightly 
roughened spores; I have not seen it in our area but it may occur. P. subbaltealUs is also 
simi]ar, but has black gills at maturity and black spores and is usually larger. P. acum;natus 
(see comments under P. campanulalUs group) also grows on lawns, but has smooth black 
spores and lacks the marginal band on the cap. 
360 
361 
PSATHYRELLA 
Small to medium-sized mushrooms found mostly on wood or in humus. CAP conical to convex or 
plane, often hygrophanous, not usually viscid, typically some shade of brown, buff, or gray. Flesh 
marked(v fragile. GILLS typically dark brown to black at maturity, usually attached but not de- 
current. STALK usually slenderJragile. and white or pallid. VEIL absent or present, usually not 
forming an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT deep brown to purple-brown 
or blackish, or rarely reddish. Spores smooth or rough, with a germ pore; discoloring in concen- 
trated sulfuric acid. Cap cuticle cellular. 
FEW fleshy fungi have less to offer the average mushroom hunter-not to mention the 
average human being-than the Psathyrellas. They constitute an immense, monotonous, 
and metagrobolizing multitude of dull whitish, buff, grayish, or brownish mushrooms with 
a fragile stem, fragile flesh, and purple-brown to blackish spores. Psathyrellas are so 
nondescript and unassuming that it's much easier to define what they are not than what they 
are: their gills do not deliquesce as in Coprinus, their flesh never bruises blue as in Psilocybe, 
their cap is not colorful as in Stropharia and Naematoloma, and only rarely is it viscid; and 
they don't grow in dung like Panaeolus. Some Psathyrellas are quite attractive, however, 
and all have their indispensable "roles" to fulfill. 
Psathyrellas are largely wood inhabitors, but often appear terrestrial because they feed 
on wood in the final stages of decay, after all the other wood-lovers have had their fill. 
Some species, such as P. candolleana, are ubiquitous, but most favor damp, shady situa- 
tions, especially along trails or streambeds. In California, a very good place to look for 
them is in stands of willow and alder, and a very good time to look forthemisin the late fall 
or early winter, but I can't think of a very good reason to look for them. 
Psathyrellas are listed in older books under several different genera, including Psathyra 
and Hypholoma. Several are edible, but most have not been tested and few are fleshy or 
distinctive enough to warrant collecting. Alexander Smith has authored an abstruse 
monograph in which he describes more than 400 North American species. Most of them 
can only be identified if one has a microscope plus a special fondness for esoteric under- 
takings. My advice is to leave the Psathyrellas to professional psathyrellologists, who 
are paid to wrestle with such matters. A mere seven species are described here. 
Key to Psathyrella 
I. Growing either in sand dunes or on burnt ground or burnt debris or on other mushrooms 2 
I. Not as above; growing in grass, humus, wood chips, on wood, dung, etc. ............... 5 
2. Growing on shaggy manes (Coprinus comatus); northern in distribution ...... P. epimyces 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Growing in sand dunes or sand, often barely poking above ground . P. ammophila & others 
3. Growing on burnt ground or debris .............................................. 4 
4. Cap with whitish fibrils when young (but these soon wearing away) ... P. carbonicola, p. 366 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Stalk usually with a membranous, well-defined ring (annulus) after veil breaks ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. longistriata & others, p. 362 
5. Not as above; ring absent or fibrillose and evanescent ............................... 6 
6. Cap (2) 5-10 em broad and distinctly fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, at least when young, yellow- 
brown to rusty-brown or sometimes dark brown to blackish-brown; stalk typically at least 
5 mm thick .............-............................... P. "elutina & others. p. 366 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Cap distinctly striate or pleated nearly to the center; usually growing in groups or clusters ... 
.. . .. . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Coprinus, p. 342) 
7. Not as above; if growing in clusters then not striate or striate only near margin when moist 8 
8. Clustered on ground or wood chips, each cluster arising from a buried "tap root"; stalks usually 
at least twice as long as widths of caps ......... P. multipedata (see P. hydrophila, p. 364) 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
362 
COPRINACEAE 
9. Typically growing in clusters on or near wood, stumps, etc. ......................... 10 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
10. Spore print distinctly reddish-tinted P. sublater;t;a& P. con;ssans(see P. hydrophila. p. 364) 
10. Spore print some shade of gray, brown, or black .................................. II 
II. Veil present when young, but often disappearing in age ............................. 12 
II. Veil absent .................................... P. spad;cea (see P. hydrophila. p. 364) 
12. Cap yellowish to honey-colored when moist, fading to buff or whitish as it dries; especially 
common on lawns and in towns.... .. ..... ... .......... P. candolleana& others, p. 363 
12. Cap rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown when fresh, fading to tan as it dries; found mainly in the 
woods ..................................................... P. hydrophila, p. 364 
13. Stalk 0.8-1.5 cm thick, white;cap4-IOcm broad, rounded becomingconvexorevenplane,atfirst 
pallid from silky fibrils, but dark gray to grayish-brown in age; found under aspen in the Rocky 
Mountains, oak in California (see photo at bottom of p. 363) .............. P. ul;g;n;cola 
13. Not as above; stalk generally less than I cm thick .................................. 14 
14. Growing in grass, dung, or manure .............................................. 15 
14. Not as above (may occasionally grow in grassy places, but not associated with grass) .... 17 
15. Growing in dung; not common ................................ P. stercorar;a & others 
15. Growing in grass; common .................................................... 16 
16. Cap yellowish or honey-colored when moist, fading to buff or whitish as it dries; veil present 
when young but often disappearing in age ............... P. candolleana & others, p. 363 
16. Not as above ............................................... (see Panaeolus, p. 353) 
17. Odor typically fruity or pungent (like root beer, cat urine, etc.); cap often radially wrinkled 
and striate; cap and/ or stalk often vinaceous- or purple-tinged ................ P. b;pell;s 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Veil present when young (covering the gills when very young), usually leaving remnants on 
or near the cap margin ....................................................... 19 
18. Veil absent or rudimentary and quickly disappearing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 20 
19. Cap soon becoming broadly convex to plane, honey-colored or paler when moist, fading to 
buff or whitish as it dries out .......................... P. candolleana& others, p. 363 
19. Not as above; cap remaining broadly conical to bell-shaped or becoming convex only in old 
age and/ or differently colored ...................... P. longipes group & others, p. 364 
20. Cap white or whitish .................... P. sp. (unidentified)(see P. carbonico/a. p. 366) 
20. Cap not white; stalk usually at least twice as long as cap width P. grac;l;sgroup& others, p. 365 
Psathyrella longistriata (Ringed Psathyrella) 
CAP 2.5-8 (10) cm broad, conical to convex becoming broadly convex to plane or 
umbonate in age; surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, with whitish veil fibrils when very 
young, not viscid; some shade of brown, but sometimes fading in age. Flesh thin, fragile. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, close, pallid becoming dark brown or purple- 
brown. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal, pallid or white, fragile, hollow, with 
scattered whitish scales (veil remnants) below ring. VEIL membranous, white, forming a 
persistent, superior, usually striate ring on stalk which is eventually darkened by spores. 
SPORE PRINT deep brown to nearly black; spores 7-9 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in woods, particularly under conifers; 
fairly common in the Pacific Northwest, less so in California-I have found it but a few 
times in our area, in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The persistent ring on the stalk is unusual for a Psathyrella. and helps to 
distinguish this western species. Panaeo/us semiovatus and Stropharia semig/obata are 
somewhat similar but grow in dung or grass, not in the woods. Another Psathyrella with 
a prominent ring, P. kauffmanii, occurs under hardwoods in eastern North America, and 
is quite common in the aspen forests of the Rocky Mountains and Southwest. 
. 
. 
Psathyrella candolleana is a common suburban species with a convex to plane or wavy cap and very 
fragile flesh. The cap is usually honey-brown to yellowish when fresh but fades as it dries. Note the 
dark spore dust on cap at upper right and the slight veil remnants on margins of caps at left. 
Psathyrella candolleana (Suburban Psathyrella) 
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, bluntly conical or convex when young, becoming broadly convex 
to plane or broadly umbonate in age; surface smooth or with a few scattered patches of 
whitish fibrils (veil remnants) when young; hygrophanous but not viscid; brown, honey- 
colored, or yellowish when moist, fading quickly as it dries to buff or whitish (the 
center often remaining darker); margin often hung with veil remnants, at least when 
young. Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS close, adnate but sometimes seceding, at first 
whitish, soon grayish or grayish-purple, finally dark brown. STALK 4-10 cm long, 2-7 
(10) mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile, white or whitish, often silky or scurfy. VEIL white, 
usually disappearing, but sometimes forming a fibrillose ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT 
deep brown; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or tufted in lawns, gardens, on or about old hardwood 
stumps, on buried roots or debris, etc.; widely distributed and very common in urban 
and suburban settings, sometimes also in the woods. It fruits year-round in our area but 
is most common in the late spring, summer, and early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. Some authors describe it as delicious, but it is very fragile, insub- 
stantial, and not particularly easy to identify. Its main asset is its easy availability. 
COMMENTS: The fragile, usually convex cap that is more or less honey-colored when 
fresh and pallid in age, plus the fragile white stalk, deep brown spores, and fondness for 
suburbia mark this ubiquitous but boring mushroom. The cap color is so variable that it is 
more of a hindrance to identification than a help. The situation is complicated by the 
presence of some very similar suburbanites, including P. hymenocephala, with a more 
cinnamon-colored cap when young, and P. ;ncerta (formerly Hypholoma ;ncertum and 
often listed as a synonym for P. candol/eana), with smaller spores and a pale yellowish cap. 
All of these are so fragile that getting them home in one piece is difficult! 
Left: Psathyrella uliginicola or a similar species (see couplet #13 on p. 362) occurs under oak in Cali- 
fornia; it is unusually robust for a Psathyrella, with a convex to plane cap that is striate in old age. 
Right: A cluster of Psathyrella candolleana with clearly visible universal veil remnants. (Greg Wright 
" 
",'" 
- 
" 
ill 
"- 
, 
., 
... 
, 
. 
Psathyrella hydrophi/a commonly grows in clusters on wood. Left: A large clump growing from an 
old (buried) stump. Right: Close-up showing the white stalk, dark gills, and fragile veil remnants 
on margin of cap. 
Psathyrella hydrophila (Clustered Psathyrella) 
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, bluntly conical or more often convex when young, expanding to 
nearly plane in age; surface smooth, hygi-ophanous but not viscid, dark reddish-brown 
to orange-brown or rusty-brown when moist, fading as it dries to pale tan or sometimes 
grayish; margin often darker brown and/ or hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, fragile. 
GILLS crowded, buff to pale brown, becoming chocolate-brown or dark brown in age; 
adnate to adnexed. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile, 
smooth, white to faintly grayish or sometimes brownish in old age, especially below. VEIL 
fibrillose, evanescent, leaving remnants on cap margin and occasionally an obscure zone 
of hairs on stalk. SPORE PRINT deep brown; spores 4-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious, usually in tufts or large, dense clusters on hardwood stumps, logs, 
and buried wood; widely distributed. Common in our area from fall through early spring. 
ED IBILITY: Not recommended. Reportedly harmless, but some collections are bitter and 
closely related species haven't been tested. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several Psathyrellas that grow in attractive, often large 
clumps on decaying wood. The principal field marks are the white or pallid stalk, dark 
brown spores, fragile texture, and smooth, hygrophanous, usually convex cap. It is likely 
to be mistaken for a Naematoloma. but is much more fragile and not as brightly colored, 
or for a Galerina or Pho/iota. which have paler brown spores. Other clustered Psathy- 
rellas include: P. spad;cea, similar, but with a thicker (4-10 mm) stalk and no veil, growing 
mainly on Populus (poplar, cottonwood, aspen); P. JuscoJolia, also lacking a veil, but 
with stalk only 2-4 mm thick, on decaying wood; P. circellat;pes, also slender-stemmed, 
with spores 12-15 microns long, favoring aspen; P. multipedata, with clusters originating 
from a common, deeply rooted base or "pseudorhiza"; P. sublater;t;a, with a reddish- 
hued spore print (rather unusual for a Psathyrella); and P. con;ssans, with a pinkish-red 
spore print (highly unusual for a Psathyrella). 
Psathyrella longipes group 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly conical or bell-shaped, expanding slightly in age (rarely plane); 
surface smooth, hygrophanous, brown to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown when moist, 
fading to tan, buff, or whitish as it dries; margin often adorned with widely spaced, tooth- 
like veil remnants. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS close, adnate but often seceding, at first 
whitish, soon darkening to brown, finally dark brown to blackish. STALK 6-16 cm long, 
2-8 mm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at base, fragile, hollow, white. VEIL white, 
364 
,.. 
\ . 
\' 
J 
"""-- . 
Left: Psathyrella /ongipes group, mature specimens. Note relatively large size (for a Psathyrella) and 
widely spaced veil fragments on margin of cap. Right: Psathyrella gracilis, or one of its numerous 
look-alikes. Note hygrophanous bell-shaped cap and long, slender, fragile stem. 
somewhat membranous, but soon disappearing except for remnants on margin of cap. 
SPORE PRINT deep brown to blackish; spores 10-15 x 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or debris in woods; found 
mostly in the West. Fairly common in our area from fall through early spring, under both 
hardwoods and conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The broadly conical to bell-shaped cap, long white fragile stalk, small veil 
remnants on the cap margin, relatively large size (for a Psathyrella), and dark brown to 
almost black spores are characteristic, but there is a multiplicity of Psathyrella look-alikes 
that are best identified with a microscope. In the "true" P. longipes, the spores are slightly 
flattened in end view; in the very similar but more common P. elwhaensis, they are not. 
Other species include: P. atroJol;a, widely distributed and common, cap honey-brown 
fading to buff, with veil remnants on the margin (but not widely spaced or toothlike) and 
spores 8-10 microns long; P. subnuda, slightly larger, with a more cinnamon-colored 
convex cap when moist and practically no veil; and P. conopilea, with a reddish-brown to 
orange-brown conical cap that fades to buff, and spores 14-18 microns long, especially 
common in southern California under oaks and in gardens, but widely distributed. All of 
the above species tend to grow scattered to gregarious on the ground or in lignin-rich 
humus, rather than in clusters on wood. They do not grow in dung or manure like 
Panaeolus. See also P. gracilis, which lacks a veil. 
Psathyrella gracilis group (Graceful Psathyrella) 
CAP 1.54 (5) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped becoming convex or nearly plane; surface 
smooth, not viscid, brown to dull yellowish-brown when moist, paler (or with a pinkish 
tinge) as it dries, and sometimes grayish from spore dust; translucent-striate when moist. 
Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS close, broad, adnate but often seceding, pallid becoming 
grayish to brown and then dark brown. STALK 6-12 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less 
equal, straight, fragile, thin, white or stained darker by spores. VEIL absent or rudimen- 
tary (and quickly disappearing). SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown to nearly black; 
spores 10-15 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups or troops on ground, debris, and wood chips in woods, 
parks, under trees, etc.; common and widely distributed. I have seen colossal fruitings on 
wood chip mulch in a park at regular intervals throughout the mushroom season. 
366 
COPRINACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Too thin and fragile to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: This species lacks the veil remnants on the cap margin characteristic of 
the P. /ongipes group. The long, thin, straight, whitish stalk, brown to grayish cap that is 
so thin as to be translucent-striate when moist, absence of a veil, dark spores, and terrestrial 
growth habit are the main field marks. There are many similar Psathyrellas which can only 
be differentiated microscopically. 
Psathyrella carbonicola (Charcoal Psathyrella) 
CAP 1.5-6 cm broad, bluntly conical to convex; surface dry, at first covered with a dense 
coating of whitish fibrils, these eventually wearing away to reveal the chocolate-brown to 
brown background; fading in age. Flesh rather thin. GILLS close, adnate but sometimes 
seceding, pale brown becoming dark brown in age. STALK 3-7 cm long, 2-6 mm thick, 
more or less equal, rather fragile, sheathed with white fibrils or scales below the veil, at 
least when young; base often brownish in age. VEIL white, evanescent or forming a slight 
fibrillose superior ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT dark brown; spores 6-8 x 34 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on charred soil and wood, 
common after forest fires in northern and western North America. In our area I have seen 
large fruitings in the winters following controlled burns. It is often accompanied by Pho- 
/iota high/andensis. P. brunnescens. and Myxompha/ia maura. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The whitish fibrillose coating on the cap and stalk when young plus the 
growth on burnt ground make this one of the easiest of all Psathyrellas to identify. Other 
species: P. canoceps is one of several small species with a coating of silky white fibrils on 
the cap, but it does not grow in burned areas; a small, unidentified, whitish-capped 
species with black spores is common in our area in woods and under trees. 
Psathyrella velutina 
CAP (2) 5-10 cm broad, obtuse to convex or broadly umbonate, becoming nearly plane; 
surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly but sometimes nearly smooth in age; dull 
yellow-brown to tawny to rusty-brown or sometimes darker brown; margin often paler, 
splitting in age, and hung with veil remnants. Flesh rather thick, brownish to ochre. GILLS 
crowded, adnate to notched or seceding, pale yellowish becoming light brown to rusty- 
brown, finally deep brown as spores mature; faces usually mottled in age, edges white and 
sometimes beaded with droplets. STALK 5-15 cm long, (0.3) 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, equal or 
swollen at base, fibrillose or scaly, dry, whitish above, light brown to dingy tawny or ochre 
below. VEIL fibrillose-cottony, usually forming an obscure superior hairy or cottony ring 
or zone on stalk which is darkened by spores. SPORE PRINT blackish-brown; spores 
8-12 x 5-8 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened, with a prominent snoutlike germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or small clusters in grassy places, roadsides, around 
sawdust and compost piles, on gravelly ground, or sometimes in the woods; widely dis- 
tributed, but infrequent in our area. I have found it in the fall and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Lacrymar;a velut;na, this species is unusually large and 
sturdy for a Psathyre//a. and is likely to be looked for in another genus. The fibrillose to 
fibrillose-scaly cap and stalk, obscure hairy annulus (ring), and blackish-brown spores 
are distinctive. P. lacrymabunda is often listed as a synonym, but has smooth spores 
according to Smith. Both species are sometimes placed in a separate genus, Lacrymaria. 
Other species: P. maculata is somewhat smaller, has blackish- to grayish-brown fibrillose 
patches on the cap, and grows in clumps on alder in the Pacific Northwest. Also see 
P. u/iginico/a (couplet # 13 of the key) and P. carbonico/a. 
367 
 . q. @) 
uw e:ff5) 
spores 
STROPHARIACEAE 
THIS is a fairly common family of saprophytic mushrooms with brown to purple-brown 
to purple-black spores and attached gills. A veil is usually present, but does not necessarily 
form an annulus (ring) on the stalk. The gills are not normally decurrent as in Gomphidius 
and Chroogomphus. nor are they usually free as in Agaricus, nor do they deliquesce as in 
Coprinus. The small, fragile species resemble Psathyrella and Panaeolus. but tend to ha ve a 
viscid and/ or brightly colored cap. (For a comparison of the brown-spored species with 
genera in the Cortinariaceae, see comments under the genus Pholiota.) The mushrooms in 
this family also share several anatomical (microscopic) characteristics: the cap cuticle is 
usually filamentous rather than cellular (see p. 19), the spores are smooth and often have a 
germ pore, and the gills frequently feature special sterile cells (chrysocystidia) which have a 
highly refractive golden content when mounted in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
Four genera are recognized here, all of which intergrade to some extent: Pho/iota has dull 
brown to rusty-brown spores and is consequently placed in the Cortinariaceae by some 
mycologists; Stropharia. Psilocybe. and Naematoloma have deep brown to purplish 
or black spores, and are sometimes lumped together (by the ".umpers," of course) in a single 
giant genus, Psilocybe. The latter three genera are differentiated largely on microscopic 
characteristics such as the presence or absence of chrysocystidia, but can usually be told in 
the field by the combination of characteristics outlined in the key. 
This is not an important family from a gastronomic standpoint. However, it is the most 
significant group for "magic mushroom" hunters, because Psilocybe is the principal genus 
of hallucinogenic or "pupil-dilating" mushrooms. The active principles are psilocybin 
and psilocin (see p. 895 for details, and also read comments on pp. 31-32). 
Key to the Strophariaceae 
l. Spore print dull brown to cinnamon-brown or rusty-brown .............. Pholiota, p. 384 
l. Spore print purple-brown to purple-gray, purple-black, or black ...................... 2 
2. Lower portion of stalk and/ or other parts offruiting body staining blue or green when handled 
(sometimes slowly) .............................................. Psilocybe, p. 368 
2. Not as above (but cap may be blue or blue-green to begin with) .........:............. 3 
3. Growing on dung or manure .................................................... 4 
3. Not as above (but may grow in grass) ............................................. 6 
4. Cap white to yellow, yellow-brown, or pale tan ..................................... 5 
4. Cap darker (orange-brown to reddish-brown, grayish-brown, dark brown) Psilocybe, p. 368 
5. Spore print black; cap white to buff or very pale tan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (seePanaeolus, p. 353) 
5. Spore print purple-brown to purple-black; cap usually yellowish or darker Stropharia, p. 374 
6. Veil membranous or cottony-membranous, usually forming a distinct ring (annulus) on stalk 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Stropharia, p. 374 
6. Veil absent, or if present then fibrillose and disappearing or merely forming a fibrillose zone 
on stalk which may subsequently be darkened by falling spores ...................... 7 
7. Cap small (usually less than 4 cm broad), viscid when moist, some shade of brown, gray, dull 
olive, buff, or if whitish then usually narrowly conical or bell-shaped .... Psilocybe, p. 368 
7. Not as above; cap white or brightly colored (yellow, red, green, etc.), or if dull-colored then 
not viscid, even when wet; cap usually 2 cm broad or more .......................... 8 
8. Cap viscid or slimy when moist; veil present at least when young; growing solitary to scattered 
or gregarious, but not usually clustered ............................ Stropharia, p. 374 
8. Cap usually not viscid; veil absent or present; often (but not always!) growing in tufts or clusters 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Naematoloma, p. 381 
368 
STROPHARIACEAE 
PSILOCYBE 
Small to medium-sized, saprophytic mushrooms found in a variety of habitats. CAP smooth, with 
a viscid (when moist). often separable pellicle (skin); usually some shade of brown. gray. 
yellow-brown. or buff GILLS typically attached. dark at maturity. STALK usually slender, often 
turning blue or green when handled. VEIL often present. but not usually forming a distinct annulus 
(ring) on stalk (except P. cubensis). VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT purple-gray to purple-brown 
to nearly black. Spores mostly elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia typically absent 
on the gills. Cap cuticle filamentous. 
PSILOCY BE enjoys a notoriety grossly disproportionate to its visibility, for it embraces 
some of the most exalted and sought-after of all mushrooms-as well as some of the most 
mundane. The exalted ones are the hallucinogenic ("pupil-dilating") species popularly 
known as "magic mushrooms." They contain psilocybin and/ or psilocin, and cause 
startling changes in one's perceptions and sensations if consumed in sufficient quantity. 
The changes are similar to those provoked by LSD (see p. 895). The mundane ones are 
those that don't contain psilocybin or psilocin-and since most Psilocybe species don't 
contain those compounds, it follows that most Psilocybes are mundane. 
The Psilocybes as a group are difficult to characterize: the majority are listless little 
brown mushroom ("LBM's") with a viscid cap (when moist) and dark (purplish to 
nearly black) spores. The hallucinogenic species usually turn blue or greenish when 
bruised, especially on the stem, but almost any "LBM" can be mistaken carelessly for a 
Psilocybe-with potentially disastrous results! A good spore print is crucial, as it will 
eliminate the brown-spored genera (Galerina, Inocybe, Conocybe. etc.), which contain 
many poisonous species. Among the dark-spored genera, Coprinus has deliquescing gills, 
Psathyrella typically has a non-viscid cap and never stains blue; Panaeolus species with 
a viscid cap grow on dung and have black spores; and Naematoloma and Stropharia 
species are usually brightly colored, while the cap color in Psilocybe (with the notable ex- 
ception of P. cubensis) is typically some shade of brown, gray, or buff. 
Contrary to popular belief, Psilocybes do not grow exclusively on that brown stuff that 
sounds like a bell. Rather, they occur in a wide variety of habitats: in grass, on wood chips 
and mulch in landscaped areas, on decaying wood, and in humus or beds of moss in forests 
and bogs. The hallucinogenic species are particularly abundant in two disparate locales: 
the Pacific Northwest and southern Mexico. In our area, alas, they are like solar eclipses- 
seemingly rare, though actually more common than anyone person's experience would 
indicate. In other words, they are not something you can really look for. It is more a matter 
of geography-being in the right place at the right time. (This situation may change, how- 
ever, as introduced species like P. cyanescens spread.) 
Since it was discovered that Native Americans near Oaxaca, Mexico, used certain 
mushrooms to induce altered states of consciousness, Psilocybes have received an inor- 
dinate amount of attention in the North American press. Underground newspapers and 
magazines are full of frivolous articles on "getting off," there is a glut of "magic mush- 
room" field guides and cultivation manuals available, and, as so often happens, it has be- 
come difficult to sort fact from fiction. Those wishing to pursue the subject should read the 
comments on pp. 31-32 and then invest in a responsible book on "psilocybin" mushrooms 
(e.g., Psilocybe Mushrooms and Their Allies by Paul Stamets), and use it in conjunction 
with a general field guide. 
Whatever you do, don't rely on shortcuts and don't sample Psilocybes indiscriminately! 
True, most ofthe hallucinogenic species exhibit a blueing reaction when bruised, but the 
"optimum" dosage varies greatly from species to species, and as with any hallucinogenic 
drug, there is no way to predict the specific effects it will have on you. Furthermore, I have 
PSILOCYBE 
369 
seen people mistake the staining reactions of other mushrooms (for instance, the black- 
ening of the flesh in Hygrocybe conica) for the blueing reaction in Psilocybe. All the more 
reason to develop a systematic knowledge of mushrooms' habits and characteristics 
before venturing into the realm of the "LBM's." 
Psilocybe is a fairly large and difficult genus. Only a few species are "pupil-dilating," 
and those that aren't are too small or too rare to be of food value. Five species are 
described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Psilocybe 
I. Some part of fruiting body aging or bruising blue to green (check cap, veil, stalk base, flesh) 2 
I. Not aging or bruising blue or green ............................................... 8 
2. Fruiting in warm, muggy weather; mainly tropical and subtropical .................... 3 
2. Fruiting in cool or cold weather; mainly temperate .................................. 4 
3. Growing on or near dung or manure; cap whitish to yellowish or yellow-brown ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. cubensis, p. 373 
3. Not as above ......................... P. caerulescens & others (see P. cubens;s. p. 373) 
4. Cap narrowly conical to bell-shaped and not expanding much, usually less than 2.5 cm broad; 
veil absent or rudimentary ..................................................... 5 
4. Not as above; cap usually expanding, at least in age; veil present, at least when young .... 6 
5. Growing mostly in grass ...................................... P. semilanceata, p. 370 
5. Growing mostly under conifers .... _ . . . P. pelliculosa & others (see P. semilanceata. p. 370) 
6. Growing on hardwood logs and debris in eastern North America; blueing only very slowly when 
bruised ........................................ P. caerulipes (see P. stuntz;;, p. 372) 
6. Not as above; found mainly on west coast ......................................... 7 
7. Most parts of fruiting body staining distinctly blue to blue-green when bruised; veil usually 
disappearing or forming only a very slight ring on stalk ..... P. cyanescens & others, p. 371 
7. Fruiting body blueing only slightly if at all; veil often forming a distinct (but small and fragile) 
ring on stalk that is sometimes greenish- or bluish-tinged ............. P. stuntzii, p. 372 
8. Growing on dung or manure .................................................... 9 
8. Not as above (but may grow in grass) ....................................... _ . . .. 10 
9. Veil absent or rudimentary .............................. P. coprophila & others, p. 370 
9. Veil present, often forming a slight fibrillose ring on stalk P. merdaria(see P. coprophila, p. 370) 
10. Cap convex to plane, 1.5-4 cm broad, dark reddish-brown to brown (but often paler toward 
margin or fading overall in age to pale tan); stalk 2-4 mm thick, usually with white mycelium 
at base; typically growing in dense groups or clusters on la wns or in other disturbed areas .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. castanella (=P. californica) 
10. Not as above; cap differently shaped and/ or habitat or color different ................ II 
II. Veil present, usually forming a small annulus (ring) on stalk ............ P. stuntzii, p. 372 
II. Not as above; veil absent or if present, usually disappearing ......................... 12 
12. Cap typically conical or bell-shaped and scarcely expanding; usually growing in grassy areas 
........... ....... ...... ................... ....... . . .. . .... P. semilanceata, p. 370 
12. Cap differently shaped and/ or growing in moss or wet places ........................ 13 
13. Growing in woods or grass in eastern North America (especially the South); cap dark brown to 
rusty-brown, fading to ochre or yellow-brown, bell-shaped to convex ................... 
.............................. (see Naematoloma ericaeum under N. d;spersum, p. 384) 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
14. Cap tawny to dull orange-brown; base of stalk with hairs; found in wet areas, especially common 
in the Pacific Northwest .................................... P. (=Galerinaj corneipes 
14. Not as above ............ _ . _ . . . _ . _ . . . . . . . . . . _. .. . _ . _ . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 15 
15. Growing in swamps or bogs; stalk very long (5 cm or more) and thin; cap reddish-brown to 
blackish-brown .................................................. P. atrobrunnea 
15. Growing in moss; stalk usually less than 6 cm long; cap dark reddish-brown to tawny or yellow- 
brown ............................................................. P. montana 
1 
, 
" 
 
 
"- 
Psilocybe coprophila is the most common and widespread member of its genus. Note small size and 
growth on dung. Cap is brown to red- or orange-brown and viscid when moist. 
Psilocybe coprophila (Meadow Muffin Mushroom) 
CAP 0.5-2 (3) cm broad, hemispherical toconvex or broadly bell-shaped, or at times nearly 
plane in age; surface viscid when moist, then dry, smooth or with minute white particles or 
patches at margin (when young), dark reddish-brown to cinnamon-brown, brown, or 
orange-brown, fading to tan or sometimes grayish-brown as it dries (or darker from spore 
dust); margin striate when moist. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS adnate to slightly de- 
current, fairly well-spaced, grayish-brown becoming deep purple-brown or black. ST ALK 
1-4 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, more or less equal, fibrillose, pallid to yellowish or brown, 
darkening in age but not bruising blue. VEIL absent or rudimentary and evanescent. 
SPORE PRINT purplish-brown to nearly black; spores 11-14 x 6.5-8.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small colonies on dung and manure (especially cow patties); 
widely distributed. It is one of our most common dung fungi, fruiting whenever it is damp 
enough. It can be "raised" by bringing home a "meadow muffin" and keeping it moist. 
EDIBILITY: Generally regarded as harmless, but some strains apparently contain enough 
psilocybin to be rewarded with the euphemistic label "active." A large number would be 
needed to produce any noticeable effects, however. 
COMMENTS: The small size, viscid brownish cap, purple-brown to dark brown spore 
print, and absence of an annulus (ring) distinguish this diminutive dung addict. Also found 
on dung is P. (=Strophar;a) merdar;a, which is similar, but has a dingy yellow to orange- 
brown or cinnamon-brown cap, and a veil which often forms a fibrillose annulus (ring) 
on the stalk. It is common also, and widely distributed. Other species: P. angust;spora is 
a minute conical brown inhabitant of the Pacific Northwest; it grows on the dung of elk, 
sheep, etc. 
Psilocybe semilanceata (Liberty Cap) 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad and high, narrowly conical to bell-shaped with a pointed umbo, 
scarcely expanding in age; surface smooth, chesnut-brown to brown or olive-brown and 
at least slightly viscid when moist, fading to tan, olive-buff, or even yellowish as it dries; 
margin sometimes with bluish or olive stains. Flesh very thin, pallid. GILLS adnate to 
adnexed or seceding, pallid, soon becoming gray, then finally dark purple-brown or 
chocolate-brown; edges whitish. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-2 (3) mm thick, equal, often 
370 
PSILOCYBE 
371 
curved or sinuous, pliant, whitish or with brownish base, sometimes with a bluish or blue- 
green tinge in age, especially at base. VEIL absent orrudimentary. SPORE PRINT purple- 
brown; spores 11-14 x 7-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious in pastures, tall grass, etc., but not on dung; 
widely distributed. It is especially common west of the Cascades from northern California 
to British Columbia. It fruits from late summer through early winter or sometimes in the 
spring. I have not found it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic (see p. 895), and often gathered for recreational use despite 
its small size. It is not as potent as P. cyanescens, but is much stronger than P. pe//icu/osa. 
COMMENTS: The liberty cap is one ofthe most distinctive "pupil-dilating" Psilocybes. 
The sharply conical or "peaked" cap, dark spore print, small size, and growth in grass 
(often tall) make it distinct. The flesh and stalk bruise blue only slightly, if at all, but may age 
olive or slightly bluish. Another "liberty cap," P. pe//;cu/osa, is often mistaken for P. semi- 
lanceata. It is common under conifers in the Pacific Northwest and northern California. 
In addition to its different habitat, it is not quite as conical and has a more pronounced 
tendency to bruise or age blue-green. It is only mildly hallucinogenic, with 20-40 caps 
constituting an "average" dose. A third species, P. s;/vat;ca, has spores less than 10 microns 
long; it also grows under conifers and occurs across the northern half of the continent. 
There are also a number of small to minute, more or less conical, brown or gray Psilocybes 
(e.g., P. montana) that do not contain psilocybin. They grow mostly in bogs or in beds of 
moss and are very d ifficul t to dis tinguish (see key to Psilocybe). All of the species discussed 
above, including the liberty cap, resemble Panaeo/us species, but have a viscid pellicle 
(skin) that peels easily from the cap, slightly paler spores, and do not grow in dung. 
Psilocybe cyanescens 
(Potent Psilocybe) 
Color Plate 88 
CAP 1.5-4 (5) cm broad, soon convex to broadly convex, then plane or with an uplifted, 
often wavy margin; surface smooth, viscid when moist, dark brown or reddish-brown 
becoming caramel-brown, then fading as it dries to tan, yellowish-brown, or paler; 
sometimes with blue or blue-green stains, especially near margin. Flesh thin, bruising blue 
or blue-green. GILLS typically adnate but sometimes seceding, fairly close, brown or 
cinnamon-brown becoming dark smoky-brown or sometimes bluish-stained; edges 
whitish. STALK 3-8 cm long, 2-6 (8) mm thick, equal or with an enlarged base, sometimes 
curved; dry, whitish, but staining blue to bluish-green when handled or bruised. VEIL 
fibrillose or cobwebby, copious but disappearing or at most forming a very slight ring 
or hairy zone on stalk. SPORE PRINT purple-brown to purple-gray or purple-black; 
spores 9-12 x 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills. 
HABITAT: Widely scattered to densely gregarious on wood chips, sawdust, mulch, and 
humus, and on lawns rich in lignin; partial to coniferous debris, but also fond of alder 
and eucalyptus. It is fairly common in the San Francisco Bay area in cold weather 
(December-February), especially in landscaped areas and mulched flower beds, and is 
also fairly common in Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. It is easily cultivated, 
and its aggressive mycelium responds readily to transplanting-given the proper 
conditions. 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic (see p. 895) and extremely potent, especially ra w. Along with 
P. baeocystis and P. stricti pes (see comments), it is the most powerful known hallucino- 
genic mushroom in the north temperate zone. Only one or two caps are needed to induce 
marked changes in perception and sensation. Psilocin is primarily responsible, with 
psilocybin and possibly other compounds contributing to the effects. Together they are 
said toconstituteO.6% ofthe mushroom on a dry weight basis-substantially more than the 
372 
STROPHARIACEAE 
better known P. cubensis. A six-year-old Washington boydied£!fteringestingan unknown 
quantity of P. baeocyslis along with other unidentified mushrooms However, effects on 
adults other than those typical of psilocybin- and psilocin-ingestion have not been 
reported. 
CO MMENTS: The dark spores, viscid caramel-brown cap that fades as it dries, evanescent 
veil, and blueing of the stalk and flesh are the fallible fieldmarks of this potent Psilocybe. 
There are two very similar, closely-related, equally potent species on the west coast: P. 
baeocyst;s, with a less copious veil and more conical cap that is usually olive-brown when 
young; and P. str;ct;pes, with a long, slender stalk (10-13 cm long, 2-3 mm thick). They may 
well occur in California, but earlier reports of P. baeocyslis from San Francisco were 
apparently based on P. cyanescens. Spore prints should be taken to distinguish all three of 
these species from deadly Galerinas and other "LBM's." 
Psilocybe stuntzii (Stuntz's Blue Legs) 
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, bluntly conical becoming convex to broadly umbonate, plane, 
or with an uplifted margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: deep 
olive-brown to chestnut-brown when young, but often fading as it ages or dries to dingy 
yellow-brown or yellowish-buff; margin striate when moist and often tinged greenish. 
Flesh thin, pallid to brownish. GILLS adnate or adnexed, pallid soon becoming grayish 
or brownish; close or fairly well-spaced. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1.5-4 mm thick, equal or 
thicker at either end, often curved, yellowish to brown or sometimes with darker or bluish 
stains, especially below; not viscid, often with mycelial threads at base. VEIL membranous 
but thin; forming a fragile ring or fibrillose zone on stalk which is often blue or bluish- 
green but eventually may be darkened by falling spores or may disappear. SPORE PRINT 
dark purple-brown; spores 8-12 )( 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent 
on gills. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on wood chips, mulch, etc., in 
lawns, gardens, and landscaped areas; also under conifers and in fields. It is known only 
from the west coast and is especially common in the Puget Sound region of Washington in 
the fall, early winter, and spring. (The appearance of large numbers in wood chip mulch on 
Psilocybe SlUnlzii growing in a flower pot mulched with fir bark. Note the annulus (ring) on stalk 
and the viscid cap (at least when moist). The white globules are fertilizer pellets. 
. 
'. 
" 
..... 
. 
."t 
 
PSILOCYBE 
373 
the University of Washington campus in Seattle more than a decade ago helped spur the 
"magic mushroom" craze that subsequently swept the Pacific Northwest.) In our area I 
have found it in mulched flower pots. 
EDIBILITY: Weakly hallucinogenic (see p. 895), but popular with "magic mushroom" 
hunters because it often fruits in large numbers. Be sure not to confuse it with deadly 
Galerina species, which can look quite similar, but have rusty-brown spores-they will 
even grow intermixed with P. stuntzii! 
COMMENTS: Like the liberty cap (P. semilanceata), this "LBM" contains psilocybin, 
but bruises blue only weakly if at all. However, the dark spore print and ring on the stalk 
plus the viscid cap when moist are distinctive. It is named after the late, great Dr. Daniel 
Stuntz of the University of Washington, who was the first person to collect it-or more 
precisely, the first to collect specimens for the herbarium rather than for consumption! 
The common name, which was coined by Gary Lincoff, is apparently a reference to the 
tendency of the stalk or "leg" to stain bluish, though it often won't stain. Other species: P. 
caerulipes of eastern North America also blues only slightly if at all; it has a more or less 
evanescent veil and grows on hardwood logs and debris. Like P. stuntzii, it is weakly 
hallucinogenic. 
Psilocybe cubensis (Magic Mushroom) 
CAP 1.5-8 (10) cm broad, broadly conical or oval or bell-shaped (often with an umbo) when 
young, gradually expanding to convex, broadly umbonate, or plane; surface smooth or 
with small whitish veil remnants when young, viscid when moist, soon dry, color variable: 
whitish with a brown to yellowish center, or entirely yellow to yellowish-buff to yellow- 
brown, or sometimes cinnamon-brown when young and sometimes dingy olive in old age; 
bruising and aging bluish; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh firm, white, 
staining blue or blue-green when bruised. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or seceding to 
free; pallid, soon becoming gray, then deep purple-gray to nearly black; edges whitish. 
STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-1.5 cm thick, equal or more often thicker below, dry, white or 
sometimes yellowish to yellow-brown, aging or bruising blue or blue-green; smooth. VEIL 
membranous, white or bluish-stained, usually forming a thin, fragile, superior ring on stalk 
which is blackened by falling spores. SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown to blackish; 
spores 11-17 x 7-12 microns, elliptical, smooth, thick-walled, with a large apical germ pore. 
Cystidia present on faces of gills, but chrysocystidia absent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on dung and manure, especially in cattle pastures; widely 
distributed in the tropics and subtropics-Colombia, Central America, Mexico, etc. -and 
in the Gulf Coast region of the United States. Since it is being cultivated on a widespread 
basis, it may eventually turn up in the warmer parts of California-as it did in Santa Cruz 
during muggy summer weather (on compost from a "magic mushroom" farm). It can be 
cultivated on a variety of simple grain or compost mediums, but strict temperature control 
and sterile conditions are necessary to induce growth and prevent contamination. 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic (see p. 895). It is not as powerful on a dry weight basis as 
P. cyanescens, but is larger. At one time the demand for "magic mushrooms" far out- 
stripped the supply, with the result that many of the "psilocybin" mushrooms sold on the 
street were actually grocery store mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus ) laced with LS D or other 
substances (one sample I examined proved to be a soggy chanterelle soaked in ammonia!). 
Now that cultivation procedures have been refined, you're much more likely to get the real 
thing. It is often sold dried, though drying decreases the potency. The mycelium is also 
"active." Ironically, natives of Oaxaca, Mexico, consider this species inferior to others, 
such as P. mexicana (perhaps because it was unknown to them until the Spaniards intro- 
duced cattle). Instead of using it themselves, they sell it to eager gringos! 
 . 
Psilocybe cubensis is best told by its shape, whitish to golden-brown cap color, and tendency to stain 
blue when handled, especially on the stalk. It is common on dung in tropical and subtropical regions. 
COMMENTS: This is the largest, handsomest, and best known of all the "psilocybin" 
mushrooms. The brownish to yellow or pallid cap, membranous ring on the stem, and 
tendency to bruise blue are the main fieldmrks-plus its growth in fields, usually on cow 
patties. It resembles the yellow-capped Stropharias (e.g., S. semiglobata) so closely that 
it is called Strophar;a cubens;s by many mycologists. The Stropharias, however, do not 
stain blue. In shape it resembles Agrocybe praecox, but the spore print is darker, and it 
has a decidedly different "aura"-or so I'm told by at least one certified fruitcake! Other 
species. The ""Landslide Mushroom," P. caerulescens, is another common, blue-staining, 
hallucinogenic species that occurs along the Gulf Coast as well as in Mexico. It has an 
evanescent veil, bitter taste, and an olive-black cap when young that may become redder 
(e.g., reddish-brown) in age. As its name implies, it grows in recent landslides, as well as on 
sugar cane mulch and other debris. P. tampanens;s, discovered in Florida, is a slender- 
stemmed hallucinogenic species that forms 1-2" underground ""tubers." 
STROPHARIA 
Small to medium-sized, saprophytic mushrooms. CAP usually viscid when moist and often brightly 
colored; typically convex to plane or umbonate. GILLS typicallyauached. dark brown to gray, 
purple-gray, or black at maturity. STALK often fleshy, but sometimes slender; central. VEIL 
present. usuallyforming an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT deep brown 
to purple-brown, purple-black, or black. Spores typically elliptical and smooth, witha germ pore. 
Chrysocystidia usually present on gills. Cap cuticle filamentous. Acanthocytes usually present in 
mycelium. 
THIS is a medium-sized genus of brightly colored mushrooms with a well-developed, 
persistent veil, attached gills, and dark (purple-brown to black) spores. The cap is 
usually viscid and some shade of yellow, yellow-brown, orange, red, green, blue, or white. 
In most cases the veil is membranous and forms a distinct annulus (ring) on the stalk, but 
in some species, such as S. semiglobata, it forms only a fibrillose zone (as in Naematoloma 
and Psilocybe), and in others, e.g., S. ambigua, it leaves copious remnants on the cap 
margin. An interesting and apparently unique microscopic feature of Stropharia is the 
presence of acanthocytes (needlelike calcium oxalate crystals) in the mycelium of many 
-if not all-species. 
Stropharia is most apt to be mistaken for Agaricus, which has chocolate-brown spores 
and free gills which are frequently pink when young, and for Agrocybe, which has a 
374 
STROP HARIA 
375 
browner (never purple-brown) spore print and dry to only slightly viscid cap. Stropharia 
intergrades to some extent with Psilocybe, but in the latter (as defined here) either the stalk 
bruises bluish-green or the veil does not form an annulus or the cap is brownish to buff. 
Most Stropharia species are found in humus, grass, or dung, but a few grow on decayed 
wood or wood chips. Woodland species can be mistaken for Naematoloma, but as a rule 
they rarely grow in the clusters typical of that genus, and their veil is more persistent. 
Many Stropharias are attractive, but only the large and distinctive S. rugoso-annulata 
is commonly eaten. Some species may actually be poisonous, though there are conflicting 
opinions on this point. Seven representatives of the genus are described here. 
Key to Stropharia 
1. Cap brick-red to reddish to orange and small (typically less than 6 cm broad) ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Naematoloma aurantiaca & others, p. 382) 
1. Differently colored and/ or larger ................................................ 2 
2. Cap and{ or stalk blue to green when fresh (or partially so), but often fading or developing 
yellowish tones in age ... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S. aeruginosa & others, p. 380 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Growing in dung, manure, grass, compost, or mulched or landscaped areas ............. 4 
3. Not as above; usually growing in woods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9 
4. Veil membranous, usually forming an annulus (ring) that is often striate or grooved (on upper 
surface); stalk generally 1-2 cm thick or ifthinner then usually rather short ...... _ . . . .. 5 
4. Not as above; stalk usually at least 5 cm long and slender . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
5. Cap 4-15 cm or more broad, wine-red to reddish-brown to tan, yellow-brown, or even grayish- 
brown; stalk at least I cm thick ............................ S. rugoso-annulata, p. 378 
5. Not as above; usually smaller and more slender; cap white to yellowish or yellow-brown .. 6 
6. Cap white or tinged yellowish to ochre at center .. S. melanosperma (see S. coroni//a. p. 377) 
6. Cap golden-brown to yellowish or creamy .......................... S. coronilla. p. 377 
7. Stalk viscid or slimy below the veil, at least when moist ..... S. semiglobata & others, p. 376 
7. Stalk not viscid ............................................................... 8 
8. Cap smooth (without scales) and white to yellowish when fresh, and usually less than6 cm broad; 
stalk neither cottony nor scaly ..... S. umbonatescens & others (see S. semig/obata, p. 376) 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Cap scaly or fibrillose and not viscid; stalk thick (at least I cm) and scaly below the ring 
(annulus) .................................................. S. kauffmanii, p. 380 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Cap small (less than 5 cm broad), without scales, chestnut-brown to olive-brown or olive-gray 
when moist, sometimes fading to yellow-brown or buff as it dries; stalk only 2-4 mm thick; 
annulus (ring) often greenish- or bluish-tinged ................... (see Psilocybe. p. 368) 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
11. Stalk slender, brownish, with small scales below the annulus (ring); cap tawny-orange to yellow- 
ish to brown or olive-brown, small (less than 8 cm broad), often umbonate and with small, 
often concentrically arranged scales (but these sometimes washed off); growing on rotten 
wood, sawdust, debris, etc.; especially common in the Pacific Northwest ................ 
........... ... .................. ....... . . .... S. squamosa (see S. kauffmanii, p. 380) 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Cap typically some shade of yellow or cream; veil typically shredding, most of it remaining on 
cap margin or forming only a slight annulus (ring) on stalk ......................... 13 
12. Not as above; veil usually forming a large annulus on stalk .......................... 14 
13. Stalk usually at least 0.6 cm thick, often cottony or shaggy; found in woods S. ambigua. p. 377 
13. Stalk more slender (less than I cm thick), not shaggy or only slightly so; growing in a wide 
variety of habitats ................................. S. riparia (see S. ambigua, p. 377) 
14. Cap yellowish, often with darker (brownish) spots; found under hardwoods and in lawns and 
other open places in eastern U.S. (especially the South) .. S. hardii (see S. coroni//a, p. 377) 
14. Cap dull brown or shaded with gray, purple, etc.; found in northern North America, usually 
under conifers ............................................. S. hornemannii, p. 379 
\ "- 
 
\ 
--  
Strophar;a sem;globata. Left: Small specimens. Right: A larger one. It resembles Psilocybe cubens;s. 
but does not stain blue. The veil does not always form a distinct ring on stalk. Note long slender stem. 
Stropharia semiglobata (Hemispherical Stropharia) 
CAP 1-5 (6) cm broad, hemispherical (rounded) or broadly bell-shaped, becoming 
convex or rarely plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, pale yellow to straw 
colored, yellowish-buff, or yellow-brown; margin often paler, sometimes hung with 
whitish veil remnants. Flesh pale or watery yellowish, thin. GILLS typically adnate but 
sometimes seceding, at first grayish, then dark purple-brown to black. STALK 5-8 (13) cm 
long, 2-6 mm thick, typically long and slender, equal or slightly enlarged at base; somewhat 
fibrillose above the veil, viscid or slimy below( when moist); white to yellowish. VEIL slimy, 
delicate, forming a fragile, superior, fibrillose ring or zone On stalk which is soon blackened 
by falling spores, or sometimes disappearing entirely. SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown 
to black; spores 15-19 )( 7.5-10 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on dung, manure, rich soil, straw, and grazed or 
fertilized grass; widely distributed, and one of our most common dung fungi. In our area it 
fruits whenever it is damp, often in the company of Psilocybe coprophila and the Pan- 
aeo/us campanu/atus group. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but slimy and mediocre according to most sources. As usual, how- 
ever, Captain Charles McIlvaine disagrees, stating that, "the caps are equal to any 
mushroom-tender, good, and harmless." 
COMMENTS: Our most common and uninteresting Stropharia. this species is sometimes 
mistaken for the considerably more interesting Psilocybe cubensis. which has a more 
prominent ring and stains blue or green when bruised. The viscid to slimy yellowish cap, 
slender viscid or slimy stem, and dark gills set S. semig/obata apart. The veil may form a 
slight ring, but is not as membranous as that of S. coronilla. There are several closely 
related species or variants which are difficult to distinguish, including: S. stercoraria, with 
cap usually plane at maturity, stalk not viscid or only slightly so, and spores larger; S. 
siccipes, with a dry, sometimes rooting stalk and smaller spores; S. (=Psilocybej umbona- 
tescens, with a conical to distinctly umbonate cap, dry stalk, and similarly-sized spores; 
and Psilocybe (=Stropharia) merdaria(seecomments under P. coprophila). All of these are 
partial to dung, manured ground, and grass, while S. albonitens, another similar species, 
grows on the ground in a variety of habitats. It has a whitish or yellow-tinged, often umbo- 
nate cap and a membranous but thin or evanescent veil. Agrocybe species are also similar 
in color and shape, but have browner gills and a brighter or browner spore print. See also 
S. riparia (under S. ambigua). 
"" 
" . 
... 
" ..:.. 
"'" ! 
l 
" 
-.. 
 
 
r 
'-  
.. . 
 -  l'  
.. 
, 
,  . 
 ... J 1 
\ .. .... "- . 
.,. 
...  q I\. 
\0 
',,- \ 
. 
 
 - 
Stropharia coroni//a. various stages of development. This grass-inhabiting species looks like a small 
Agaricus. but has attached gills and a striate or grooved annulus (ring). Note relatively short stalk. 
Stropharia coronilla (Garland Strop haria) 
CAP 2-6 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly uplifted in age; surface usually smooth (but 
in one form with small orangeish scales), slightly viscid when moist, golden-brown to 
yellowish, yellowish-buff, or creamy. Flesh soft, white. GILLSadnate or at times adnexed 
in age, close, pallid becoming grayish, then purplish or purple-gray to purple-black. 
ST ALK 2-5 cm long, 3-6 (10) mm thick, usually rather short, more or less equal, not viscid; 
whitish, minutely scaly or cottony above the ring, fibrillose to smooth below; base often 
with white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent, median to 
superior ring on stalk; ring usually striate or grooved on upper surface and soon darkened 
by spores (but in one form not striate). SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown to blackish; 
spores 7-11 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on la wns and base ball fields, also in pastures and other 
grassy areas; widely distributed but not particularly common, at least in our area. It fruits 
most any time but is most frequent in the fall. 
EDIBILITY: Dubious-poisonous according to some; hardly worth experimenting with. 
COMMENTS: This attractive little Stropharia is often mistaken for an Agaricus. but has 
attached rather than free gills and a frequently grooved or lined (striate) ring. It is shorter 
than S. semiglobata. the ring is more prominent, and the stalk is not viscid. Forms with a 
deeply grooved ring have been called S. hi/amellata. A similar, widespread species with a 
paler (whitish or tinged creamy to ochre at center) cap, S. melanosperma, grows on dung 
or in pastures. S. hardii is a slightly larger ( cap up to 10 cm broad) eastern species that grows 
in grass as well as in woods. Its veil is moreapttodisappearinageand it has smaller spores. 
Like S. coronilla. it is easily confused with Agaricus. but has attached rather than free gills. 
Stropharia ambigua (Questionable Stropharia) Color Plate 89 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, obtuse to convex, becoming plane or even uplifted in age; surface 
smooth, viscid orslimy when moist, yellow to yellowish-brown to yellowish-buff, tawny, or 
sometimes nearly white; margin hung with cottony white veil remnants. Flesh white, thick, 
soft. GILLS pale gray, gradually darkening to purplish-gray or purplish-black; close, 
typically adnate but sometimes seceding. ST ALK 6-18 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, more or less 
equal, often long; stuffed or hollow; silky and white above the veil, clothed with soft, dry, 
'177 
378 
STROPHARIACEAE 
delicate, cottony white scales below (but these sometimes wearing off); often yellowish 
toward base in age; base often with white mycelial threads attached. VEIL soft, white, 
cottony, leaving shreds or strands on the cap margin and sometimes a superior ring or 
ragged zone on the stalk. SPORE PRINT dark purplish to nearly black; spores 11-14 x 6- 
7.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups in rich humus, usually under conifers, but 
also with alder and other hardwoods; known only from the Pacific Coast. It is fairly 
common in our area from late fall through early spring, especially in dank, cold places (in 
rain forests, along woodland streams and gullies, etc.). 
EDIBILITY: Edible? According to one authority, it tastes "like old leaves:' As I do not 
make a habit of chewing on old leaves, I cannot attest to the validity of this comparison. 
COMMENTS: There is nothing ambiguous or questionable about this elegant, stately 
fungus. It is our most common woodland Stropharia and at its best is one of the most 
exquisitely beautiful of all mushrooms-well worth seeking out. The soft, delicate white 
scales that sheathe the stem and the strands of veil tissue on the cap margin are very striking. 
Amanita gemmata is somewhat similar in color but has white gills; S. hornemannii has a 
duller cap and more prominent ring. Other species: S. riparia (=S. magnivelaris?) is a 
somewha t similar but sligh tl y smaller and slimmer (stalk less than 1 cm thick) species that is 
fairly common in the West in a variety of habitats (under aspen and alder, along streams, 
under mountain conifers, etc.). I ts veil is thinner than that of S. ambigua and more kleenex- 
like, and often leaves remnants on the cap near the margin rather than dangling from the 
margin itself. Also, the stalk is not nearly so shaggy as that of S. ambigua, and the cap, 
although similar in color, is more apt to be slightly umbonate. 
Slrophar;a rugoso-annu/ala (Wine-Red Strop haria) 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate to 
plane; surface smooth, slightly viscid or dry, color variable: wine-red to purple-brown 
to reddish-brown when fresh, but fading to tan, stra w-color, or even gra yish as it ages. Flesh 
thick, fairly firm, white. GILLS adnate or notched (but sometimes becoming free in age), 
crowded, at first whitish but soon gray and finally purple-gray to purple-black with whitish 
edges. STALK 7-12 (25) cm long, 1-3 (7) cm thick, often enlarged at base, white ordis- 
coloring yellowish to brownish in age; base often with white mycelial threads attached. 
Left: Close-up of the shaggy veil of Stropharia ambigua. Right: Stropharia rugoso-annulata. Cap 
color ranges from wine-red to tan. The cultivated version is often much more robust. 
" , 
4. 
 
I 
,,{ 
\. 
, " 
.? 
" 
.. 
4IiI 
STROP HARIA 
379 
VEIl.. membranous, white; forming a thick, persistent, superior ring on stalk that is soon 
blackened by falling spores; ring grooved or lined ( striate) on upper surface and often split 
radially into segments. SPORE PRINT deep purple-brown to black; spores 10-15)( 6-9 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in mulch, wood chips, straw, lawns, gardens, and 
other cultivated areas; widely distributed. It is quite common in New England and has 
also turned up in Washington. I have yet to find it in our area, but it is bound to turn up 
sooner or later (probably sooner). 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and the best ofthe genus for the table. It is easily grown at home and 
widely cultivated in Europe (particularly eastern Europe). The flavor is fairly good- 
reminiscent of "undercooked potatoes soaked in burgundy," according to Rick Kerrigan. 
COMMENTS: This large, handsome Slropharia is easily recognized by its wine-red to tan 
cap, purple-black spores, and grooved, often segmented or clawlike annulus (ring). Its 
growth in planted areas suggests that it is an "alien," but its origin is unknown. The gills are 
never pink as in Agaricus. and they are attached to the stalk-at least when young-and the 
spores are purple-black rather than chocolate-brown. 
Stropharia hornemannii 
CAP 4-12 (15) cm broad, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface 
viscid or slimy when moist, smooth or with a few whitish scales (veil remnants) near margin; 
dull brown to dingy purple-brown, grayish-brown, grayish-purple, or smoky reddish- 
brown, often fading in age to yellow-brown or grayish-tan. Flesh thick, soft, white; taste 
rather disagreeable. GILLS typically adnate but sometimes seceding, broad, close, pale 
gray becoming purple-gray to dull purple-brown to nearly black. STALK 5-15 cm long, 
0.5-2.5 cm thick, more or less equal, silky-smooth above the ring, sheathed with soft, dry, 
delicate, cottony white scales below, at least when young; base often with white mycelial 
threads. VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent, flaring or skirtlike, superior ring 
on stalk which is darkened by falling spores. SPORE PRINT purple-brown to purple- 
black; spores 10-14)( 5.5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
Srropharia hornemannii has a shaggy stalk like that of S. ambigua. but its veil is much more mem- 
branous and forms a prominent annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
.. 
.... 
\ 
" 
380 
STROPHARIACEAE 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotting wood under 
conifers; widely distributed in northern North America. Like S. ambigua, it is quite 
common in the late summer and fall in the Pacific Northwest and northern California, but 
does not seem to range as far south as that species (I have yet to find it in our area). In Mt. 
Rainier National Park in Washington the two species can often be found growing together 
on the Longmire Trail. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but not worth experimenting with because of its poor taste. 
COMMENTS: This beautiful mushroom resembles S. ambigua, but has a duller (browner 
or grayer) cap, and its veil forms a prominent, well-developed annulus (ring) rather than 
leaving copious strands on the cap margin. S. depilata is apparently a synonym. Other 
species: Pholiota albivelata is somewhat similar, but smaller (cap 4-8 cm broad, pinkish- 
brown to vinaceous-brown), with a white stalk that is scurfy or scaly below the mem- 
branous, persistent, striate annulus. It is placed in Pho/iota because it has cinnamon- 
brown to dark yellow-brown spores; however, it has acanthocytes on the mycelium, 
suggesting that, like P. subcaerulea, it belongs in Stropharia. It occurs under conifers 
in the Pacific Northwest and northern California, but rarely fruits in large numbers. 
Stropharia aeruginosa (Blue-Green Strop haria) Color Plate 91 
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, broadly bell-shaped to convex becoming broadly umbonate or 
nearly plane; surface viscid when moist, smooth orwithafew whitish scales (veil remnants) 
near margin; bright green to blue-green when fresh, developing yellow tones in age. Flesh 
soft, white or tinged blue. GILLS typically more or less adnate (but may secede), fairly 
close, at first pallid but soon grayish, finally purple-brown or chocolate-brown. STALK 
3-8 cm long, 3-8 (12) mm thick, more or less equal, smooth and pallid above the ring, 
colored like the cap or paler below, and usually with small cottony scales; often slightly 
viscid when moist. VEIL membranous, white, soft,formingafrAgile,superiorringonstalk 
which often disappears in age. SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown to purple-black; spores 
6-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups in rich soil, humus, woody debris, or sometimes 
even in grass; widely distributed. I have not found it in our area, but it is quite common in 
southern California, especially in the winter under oak. In the Southwest I've collected 
it under aspen in the summer, and in the Pacific Northwest I've seen it under conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It is deemed poisonous by many authors, but is 
supposedly eaten in Europe. 
COMMENTS: This is one of the most distinctive of all the agarics, easily identified by 
its viscid, greenish to blue-green or yellow-green cap and gray to chocolate-brown or 
blackish-brown gills. Two similar species occur under conifers in the Pacific Northwest: 
S. albocyanea, with a paler (whitish to yellowish) cap and stalk tinged variously with 
blue or blue-green; and Pho/iota subcaerulea, with a bluish cap (when fresh) and paler 
(cinnamon-brown) spores and mature gills. 
Stropharia kauffmanii Color Plate 90 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface not viscid; covered with brown to yellow- 
brown or grayish-brown scales on a dull yellowish or tan background; margin some- 
times hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white. GILLS adnate or notched, narrow, thin, 
close or crowded, pallid becoming gray, then purple-gray to purple-black; edges often 
eroded. STALK 6-10 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or slightly swollen at base; whitish or 
creamy, with erect or recurved fibrillose scales, especially below the ring; base often with 
white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous, forming a fragile, white, superior ring on stalk 
STROP HARIA 
381 
which is soon darkened by falling spores, or often disappears in age. SPORE PRINT dark 
purple-brown to purple-black; spores 6-8 Ie 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, apical germ 
pore absent or minute. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in rich humus, around brush piles and decayed 
woody debris, etc.-usually under hardwoods such as alder, cottonwood, and aspen, 
spring through fall. It occurs in northern California and the Pacific Northwest, but in my 
experience is more common in the aspen forests of the Southwest and southern Rockies 
than anywhere else. There it fruits, like most other mushrooms, in the summer. 
EDIBILITY: A tempting mushroom, but I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: The dry (non-viscid) scaly cap is unusual for a Slropharia, and combines 
with the scaly stem and violet-gray gills to distinguish this beautiful species. Its closest 
relative is probably Pholiota Julvosquamosa, which differs in having brown gills and 
brown spores. Both species are in some respects more typical of Agaricus than of the 
Strophariaceae, but have gills attached to the stem (at least when young). Another species 
with a scaly stalk, S. (=Psilocybe) squamosa, has a smaller, viscid cap (see key to Slro- 
pharia). It is widely distributed, but particularly common in the Pacific Northwest. 
NAEMATOLOMA 
Small to medium-sized mushroomsfound mostly on wood. CAP smooth, often brightly colored. 
usually not viscid. GILLS attached, dark at maturity. STALK usually slender. more or less central. 
VEIL typically present but evanescent or forming only a slight annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A 
absent. SPORE PRINT usually deep brown to purple-brown. rarely cinnamon-brown. Spores 
typically elliptical. with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia present on gills. Cap cuticle filamentous. 
THIS is a small group of dark-spored mushrooms with a brick-red to cinnamon-brown, 
yellow, greenish-yellow, or orange-red cap. A veil is usually present in young specimens, 
but does not normally form a ring, and the cap is not usually viscid, thereby helping to 
distinguish it from Slropharia. Psalhyrella is often confused with Naemaloloma, for 
good reason-the two genera were once grouped together in the genus Hypholoma(a name 
now used interchangeably with NaemalOloma). However, Psathyrellas can be told in the 
field by their fragile flesh, white or pallid stalk, and brown to buff or whitish cap, and in the 
laboratory by their cellular cap cuticle. Pho/iola can also be confused with NaemalOloma, 
but as defined here has a brown to cinnamon-brown spore print. 
Naematolomas are partial to cold weather, but occur throughout the mushroom season. 
The common species in our area fruit in tufts or large clusters on decaying wood, but may 
appear terrestrial if the wood is buried. Some species, however, fruit in a scattered to 
gregarious pattern on the ground, usually in cold northern bogs or under conifers in lignin- 
rich humus. Naematolomas may also occasionally turn up on lawns, but none grow on 
dung. They are not choice edibles, and at least one, N. fasciculare, is poisonous. Four 
species are described here. 
Key to N aematoloma 
l. Cap more or less brick-red, the margin usually pallid; typically growing in clumps on dead 
hardwoods in eastern North America... . ..... N. sublaler;t;um{see N. aurantiaca, p. 382) 
l. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Cap orange to red or sometimes reddish-brown to brick-red; growing scattered to gregarious 
or tufted on ground, in wood chips, mulch, etc. ............ N. aurant;aca & others, p. 382 
2. Not as above (but cap may be orange or tawny at center and yellow at margin) .......... 3 
3. Stalk white; fruiting body fragile; cap cuticle cellular ............. (see Psathyrella, p. 361) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
382 
STROPHARIACEAE 
4. Typically growing in tufts or clusters on wood (sometimes buried) or roots, or occasionally 
densely gregarious on sawdust or wood chips ..................................... 5 
4. Typically growing widely scattered to gregarious (but not normally clustered) on ground or in 
bogs or moss, mainly under conifers ..................... N. d;spersum & others, p. 384 
5. Gills yellow to greenish when young ............................. N.fasciculare, below 
5. Gills pallid to grayish or grayish-brown when young ........ N. capno;des & others, p. 383 
Naematoloma aurantiaea (Orange Naematoloma) Color Plate 93 
CAP 1.5-5.5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface slightly 
viscid or dry, smooth, bright scarlet to red-orange or orange, or at times brick-red to rusty- 
reddish to reddish-brown; margin often hung with whitish veil remnants. Flesh pallid, not 
bruising blue. GILLS close, pallid or yellowish when young, then grayish-brown or gray- 
ish-olive and finally purple-brown to purple-black in old age; adnate or notched, some- 
times seceding. STALK (2) 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, equal or with the base 
slightly swollen or narrowed; white or tinged yellow above, developing bright orange to 
reddish-orange stains over the lower half; base sometimes with white to yellow mycelial 
threads. VEIL membranous but very thin, whitish, soon disappearing or forming a slight, 
easily-obliterated ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT dark purple-brown; spores 10-14)( 6-9 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on wood chips, sawdust, and humus rich in lignin, 
but often appearing on lawns, in gardens, etc.; distribution uncertain and erratic, but 
fairly common in California. It is common in the parks of the San Francisco Bay area. It 
also occurs in Los Angeles, and I have found it in Santa Cruz growing from fallen 
eucalyptus seed pods. It likes the same habitats as Psilocybe cyanescens, but has a longer 
season, fruiting from fall through spring, or even in the summer if it is wet enough. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Strophar;a aurant;aca, this bright, attractive little mush- 
room is easily recognized by its reddish-orange cap, dark spore print, and tendency to grow 
in parks or gardens. It is probably an introduced species, but its origin is unknown. Other 
species: Strophar;a thrausta (=S. squamosa var. thrausta) is a similarly colored species with 
a frequently umbonate cap and reddish to orange scaly stem. It is widely distributed (I 
have seen it in New Mexico), but does not occur in our area. N. sublater;t;um of eastern 
North America has a brick-red cap with a paler margin and much smaller spores. It fruits in 
clusters on dead hardwoods in the fall and early winter, and is edible and quite common. 
Naematolomafaseieulare (Sulfur Tuft) Color Plate 92 
CAP (I) 2-5 (9) cm broad, at first broadly conical or bell-shaped, soon becoming convex, 
then broadly umbonate to plane; surface smooth, not viscid, bright sulfur-yellow to 
greenish-yellow, or at times yellow-orange (especially when young), the center sometimes 
darker (orange-tan to orange-brown); margin often hung with small veil remrlants. Flesh 
thin, yellow; taste very bitter (rarely mild). GILLS close, typically adnate but sometimes 
seceding, at first sulfur-yellow, becoming greenish-yellow or olive, then finally dusted 
purple-brown to nearly black with spores. STALK 5-12 cm long, 3-10 (15) mm thick, equal 
or tapering downward, yellow to tawny, but often developing rusty or brownish stains from 
base upward; often curved or sinuous, dry, firm. VEIL thin, pale yellow, evanescent, or 
leaving slight vestiges on cap margin or an obscure fibrillose zone on stalk which is 
subsequently blackened by falling spores. SPORE PRINT purple-brown to deep purple- 
gra y; spores 6-8 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious, usually in tufts or dense clusters on decaying wood of both 
hardwoods and conifers, but sometimes growing from buried wood or roots and thus 
NAEMATOLOMA 
383 
appearing terrestrial; widely distributed. It is abundant in our area in the fall and winter, 
less so in the spring, and is one of the first woodland mushrooms you're liable to encounter. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous. In Europe and Asia it has caused several deaths; in America only 
gastrointestinal upsets have been reported. Fortunately, the bitter taste is a deterrent. 
COMMENTS: The yellow to greenish-yellow gills, dark spores, bitter taste, and clustered 
growth habit are the principal fieldmarks of this attractive, cosmopolitan mushroom 
Hypholomafasciculare is a synonym. In age the clustered caps often assume a grayish or 
purple-brown tinge from a coating of spore dust. N. capnoides is quite similar in cap 
color, but its gills are gray to purple-brown (never yellow), and it has a mild taste and grows 
only on conifers. Several similar Naematolomas grow on the ground (see N. dispersum). 
Other species: N. subviride is a small southern version of N.fasciculare; N. dispersum var. 
idahoense has a tawny to cinnamon-brown cap and bitter taste, and grows in clusters on 
conifers. For similar brown-spored species, see comments under Pho/iota malicola group. 
Naemat%ma capnoides (Conifer Tuft) 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex or slightly umbonate to plane; surface smooth, not viscid, 
yellow to tawny, orange-brown, rusty-brown, or cinnamon, the margin often yellower and 
hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, pallid; taste mild. GILLS close, usually adnate but 
often seceding, at first pallid, then grayish, finally dark gray to purple-brown. STALK 5-10 
cm long, 3-8 (lO) mm thick, equal or tapered downward, dry, slender, pallid or yellowish 
above, often rusty-brown to tan or brownish below. VEIL evanescent or leaving small 
patches of tissue on cap margin and sometimes an obscure fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE 
PRINT purple-brown to deep purple-gray; spores 6-7.5 )( 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious, usually in clusters, on rotting conifers; widely distributed, but 
especially common in the Pacific Northwest. I have seen it in our area in the fall and winter 
on Douglas-fir, but it is not common. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but thin-fleshed and not particularly tasty. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hypholoma capnoides, this nondescript Naematoloma 
resembles its ubiquitous relative, N. fasciculare. in cap color, but has a mild taste and 
grayish rather than yellow or greenish-yellow immature gills. The stalk is often quite long 
in relation to the cap. Several Pholiotas look similar (see Pho/iota ma/icola group), but 
have brown or cinnamon spores. Other species: A pale-capped version occurs under 
mountain conifers in the spring; it mayor may not be a distinct species; N. radicosum of 
eastern North America is similar in color but has a deeply rooting base and bitter taste. 
Naemat%ma capnoides. This slender-stemmed conifer-lover grows in tufts or clusters. It resembles 
N.fascicu/are(see color plate) but does not have yellow or greenish gills. 
, 
"- 
;.. 
, \..- 
384 
STROPHARIACEAE 
Naematoloma dispersum (Dispersed Naematoloma) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad, bell-shaped, but sometimes expanding to convex oreven plane with an 
umbo; surface smooth, not viscid, tawny to tawny-orange, fading to yellowish; margin 
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin; taste typically somewhat bitter. GILLS usually 
adnate, but sometimes seceding, close, pallid, becoming dingy olive or olive-gray, then 
finally purple-brown with paler edges. STALK 6- 12 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal, usually 
long and slender, rather tough and pliant but sometimes also brittle; yellowish above and 
brown to dark reddish-brown below. VEIL fibrillose or cobwebby, evanescent or leaving a 
fibrillose zone on upper stalk. SPORE PRINT purple-brown; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in humus and debris under conifers; wide- 
spread, but particularly common in logged-over areas of the Pacific Northwest from late 
summer through early winter. It occurs in northern California, but not in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hypholoma d;spersum, this is one of several Naemato- 
loma species that characteristically grow in a scattered to gregarious fashion rather than in 
clusters. The tendency of the gills to develop olive tints in age is one of its distinctive fea- 
tures, as is its tall slender stalk and purple-brown spore print. It may grow in small tufts, but 
not in the large clumps typical of N.fasciculare. and the stem is not white as in Psathyrella. 
There are a number of similar Naematolomas that are difficult to distinguish, but of little 
interest to the average collector since none are good edibles. Their ranks include: N. 
ol;vaceot;nctum, with a greenish-tinted cap (and often gills) in age; N. squal;dellum and 
N. polytr;ch;, with yellow gills that become greenish-yellow in age;N. er;caeum, a southern 
species with a slightly viscid brown to ochre cap; N. udum, with a browner cap and larger 
spores (14- I 8 microns long), ""growing on muck in bogs, especially along rabbit runways" 
(A.H. Smith); N. elongatum, with dull cinnamon spores; and N. myosot;s, growing in 
bogs, with a viscid cap and dull cinnamon spores (the latter two species are also placed in 
Pholiota). The above species are not as fragile as the Psathyrellas and do not have white 
stems. All tend to grow in groups on troops on the ground rather than in clumps on wood. 
PHOLIOT A 
Mostly medium-sized mushroomsfound on wood or woody debris or sometimes on ground. CAP 
usually viscid and/ or scaly. GILLS typically adnexed to adnate to slightly decurrent. STALK 
central to somewhat off-center but not lateral, usuallyfleshy but frequently slender; often scaly 
below the veil. VEIL present; membranous, slimy, or fibrillose, disappearing or oftenforming an 
annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT dull brown to cinnamon-brown or some- 
times rusty-brown. Spores mostly elliptical, smooth, usually with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia 
often present on faces (sides) of gills. Cap cuticle typically filamentous. 
P HOLIOT A is the largest genus of brown-spored, wood-inhabiting agarics. The fruiting 
body is usually larger and fleshier than in Galerina and Tubaria. a veil is always present 
in young specimens, and the stalk is well-developed and central to somewhat off-center. 
The veil can be fibrillose, cottony, slimy, or membranous, and in most cases leaves visible 
remains on the stem in the form of an annulus (ring) or a coating of scales over the lower 
portion of the stalk. 
Among the brown-spored wood-rotters, Crepidotus lacks both a veil and stem, Paxil/us 
has distinctly decurrent gills and lacks a veil, while Gymnopilus may have a veil but has a 
dry cap and brighter (rustier or oranger) spores. Naematoloma and Stropharia intergrade 
somewhat with Pholiota. but are traditionally separated by their darker (purple-brown 
to blackish) spore color, as is Psathyrella. A few Pholiotas are terrestrial, and these are 
PHOLIOT A 
385 
more difficult to distinguish. In the field they can usually be told from Cort;nar;us and 
Hebe/oma by their viscid or slimy cap, presence of a veil, frequently slender build (only 
rarely is the stalk bulbous), and sometimes clustered growth habit; microscopically they 
are distinct by virtue of their smooth spores. 
Many Pholiotas qualify as "LBM's" and are not likely to interest the average mushroom 
hunter. However, some are quite striking (e.g., P. squarrosa and the P. aur;vella group). 
As few are worth eating and several are mildly poisonous, the genus is best avoided by 
beginners. (Some species listed as edible in older books have since been shuffled to genera 
such as Roz;tes and Agrocybe.) In their monograph on North American Pholiotas, 
Alexander Smith and L.R. Hesler recognize over 200 species. Since microscopic exami- 
nation is required to determine the shapes or types of sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills, 
many of these species cannot be identified in the field. The coniferous forests of the West 
are uniquely rich in Pho/iola species, but for some reason our area is poorly represented. 
Key to Pholiota 
1. Growing on recently charred soil or wood (ashes) ................................... 2 
I. Not typically growing in ashes ................................................... 3 
2. Stalk typically 5-10 mm thick ................................. P. brunnescens. p. 393 
2. Stalk thinner (2-6 mm) P. highlandensis. P. carbonaria. & others (see P. brunnescens. p. 393) 
3. Cap blue to blue-green when fresh(but may discolor yellowish or tan in age); found in the West, 
usually under conifers ................ P. subcaerulea (see Slropharia aeruginosa. p. 380) 
3. Not as above (if blue or greenish-blue when young, then found in eastern North America) . 4 
4. Growing on wood (occasionally buried) or in wood chip mulch ....................... 5 
4. Growing on the ground ....................................................... 15 
5. Cap more or less bright orange-pink when fresh and lacking scales; taste bitter ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. astragalina. p. 387 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Growing on dead wood of mountain conifers in the spring( when or shortly after the snow melts); 
cap and veil viscid to slimy; cap and stalk lacking prominent scales; stalk typically at least 
6 mm thick; cap yellowish to rusty-tawny but not brightly colored; known only from the West 
. .. . . .. . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . P. sp. (unidentified) ("'Snowbank Pholiota"-see photo below) 
6. Not growing when the snow is melting, or if so then not as above............ ..... ..... 7 
Left: These young specimens of Pho/iota squarrosoides (see comments under P. squarrosa) are 
flagrantly scaly, but older caps are viscid and not as scaly (see color plate).Right "Snowbank 
Pholiota." This unidentified (and probably unnamed) species is common in the northern Sierra 
Nevada and Cascades on dead conifers soon after the snow melts. Theyellowish-buff to tawny or rusty 
cap is viscid or slimy and has few if any scales; the veil is also viscid. 
\ .; 
loa 
...""':- 
.. 
,,/ 
',.. 
". 
-., 
.. ....1 
.. ' 
1-" · 
. 
386 
STROPHARIACEAE 
7. Growing on poplar, cottonwood, aspen, or willow; stalk 14 em thick at apex, usually thicker 
at base, lacking large erect scales (but may have patches of tissue); cap white to creamy or 
buff when fresh (but may darken to ochre or brownish in age) ........ P. destruens, p. 395 
7. Not as above; color or habitat different or stalk thinner and/ or scalier ................. 8 
8. Both cap and stalk yellowish-brown to dark rusty-brown and covered with powdery or 
granulose scales when fresh (those on cap may wash off or disintegrate); cap 14 em broad 
and dry (not viscid!); stalk slender (1.54 mm thick); taste usually bitter or metallic; odor not 
distinctive ....................... Phaeomarasm;us er;naceellus (=Phol;ota er;naceella) 
8. Not with above features ........................................................ 9 
9. Cap bright yellow to orange, bright tawny, golden, or bright rusty-brown when fresh (but 
sometimes darker rusty-brown when very young); cap usually decorated with large scales, 
spots, patches, or "straps" of tissue (which may be darker and may wash off) .......... 10 
9. Not as above; if brightly colored then cap bald or with a few scattered fibrillose veil remnants 
(one species tawny to whitish with erect or recurved scales) ......................... 11 
10. Scales on cap and stalk bright yellow; cap dry to slightly viscid ........ P.flammans, p. 391 
10. Scales usually darker than background color; cap distinctly viscid to slimy when moist, often 
shiny in dry weather .............................. P. aur;vella group & others, p. 390 
11. Cap and lower stalk becoming reddish-brown to dark vinaceous-brown at maturity (but often 
orange-brown when young) and decorated with brown fibrillose scales; cap viscid; usually 
solitary or in twos or threes, mainly in eastern North America and the Southwest ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. albocrenulata, p. 392 
11. Not with above features ....................................................... 12 
12. Cap and stalk with prominent erect or recurved scales (which may be obliterated or flattened 
somewhat in age); stalk typically less than 1.5 em thick ............................ 13 
12. Not as above (but cap or stalk may have recurved scales and both may have flattened scales 15 
13. Cap never viscid; gills often (but not always) greenish-tinged in age; odor mild or garlicky; 
growing on hardwoods (especially aspen) and conifers. . . . . . . . .. . ... P. squarrosa, p. 389 
13. Cap often dry at first but a viscid layer beneath the scales usually evident in age; gills not greenish- 
tinged; odor mild or slightly fruity; on wood or ground ............................ 14 
14. Typically found on hardwood stumps or logs; cap and stalk very scaly when young, the scales 
tawny or paler ............................ P. squarroso;des(see P. squarrosa, p. 389) 
14. Usually growing on the ground, less commonly on wood; cap and stalk very scaly to only slightly 
so, the scales some shade of brown (darker than in above species) ..... P. teTTestris, p. 389 
15. Growing in deep moss, bogs, or mucky places; .stalk equal and usually hollow, long and thin 
(length usually at least 40 times the width); cap small, yellow or olive; mostly northern .. 34 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Lower stalk (i.e., below the veil) with distinct scales (at least in most specimens), the scales some- 
times recurved but often small ................................................. 17 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
17. Cap smooth (without scales) and hygrophanous: rusty-brown to reddish-brown or orange- 
brown and striate when moist, fading to yellowish, ochre. or buff as it loses moisture (often 
two-toned in intermediate stages); often found in large clusters ....... P. mutab;lis. p. 395 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Growing on ground or wood chips (often along roads or trails), usually in tufts or clusters; cap 
with scales at first (which may wash off or wear away), dark brown to light brown, grayish- 
brown, yellow-brown, or tawny; common ......................... P. teTTestris. p. 389 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Cap yellow to bright ochre or orange when fresh .................................. 20 
19. Cap some other color ......................................................... 23 
20. Cap distinctly viscid when moist ................................................ 21 
20. Cap not viscid ............................................................... 22 
21. Lower portion of stalk (i.e., below the veil) with distinct scales ....................... 23 
21. Not as above ..................................... P. mal;cola group & others, p. 388 
22. Fruiting body staining orange-brown when bruised P. multifol;a (see P. ma/ico/a group, p.388) 
22. Not as above ..................................... P. mal;cola group & others, p. 388 
23. Cap viscid or slimy when moist, often with adhering debris when dry, not hygrophanous . 24 
23. Cap dry or hygrophanous or sometimes slightly viscid (but if so, then soon drying out) .. 30 
PHOLIOT A 
387 
24. Veil membranous, typically forming a well-developed annulus (ring) on stalk ............. 
.................................... P. albivelata(seeStrophariahornemannii, p. 379) 
24. Not as above; veil typically disappearing or merely forming a slight ring or fibrillose zone 25 
25. Cap whitish to pinkish-buff, pinkish-gray, or even grayish P.lenta(see P. /ubrica group, p. 392) 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Cap shaded variously with green, olive, purple, brown, and/ or gray when young, often yellow to 
orange in age; found mainly in eastern North America (especially the South) . P. polychroa 
26. Not as above ....................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 27 
27. Stalk lacking scales, even when young; cap usually olive-brown to brown or ochre with a yellow 
to dingy greenish-yellow margin ................................. P. spumosa, p. 394 
27. Not as above; stalk cottony or with small scales below the veil (at least when young and fresh) 
and/ or differently colored ...................................... - . . . . . . . . . . . .. 28 
28. Cap usually with rows of concentrically-arranged veil remnants when young and often ap- 
pearing fibrillose or streaked in age ............. P. decorata (see P. /ubrica group, p. 392) 
28. Not as above ................................................................ 29 
29. Veil slimy or viscid in wet weather; cap bright to dark reddish-brown, vinaceous-brown, or 
brown and completely smooth (bald) ....... P. velaglutinosa (see P. /ubrica group, p. 392) 
29. Veil not slimy or viscid; cap brown to rusty-brown, orangish, etc., the margin often paler or 
even whitish ...................................... P. lubrica group & others, p. 392 
30. Veil usually forming a ring (annulus) on stalk or leaving skinlike fragments on cap margin 31 
30. Veil disappearing or leaving only a slight hairy zone on stalk (check several specimens!) .. 32 
31. Stalk thick or slender, lacking obvious scales or cottony material below the veil; cap smooth 
(bald), usually at least 4 cm broad when mature; white rhizomorphs (mycelial threads) often 
present at base of stalk or in surrounding humus; cap cuticle cellular (see Agrocybe, p. 467) 
31. Not as above; fruiting body usually small and stalk usually slender; cap cuticle not cellular 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
32. Cap and stalk pale yellow to pale cinnamon or pinkish-cinnamon; cap not translucent-striate 
when moist; cap convex to plane or slightly umbonate .. P. scamba (see P. spumosa. p. 394) 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
33. Stalk with scattered patches of veil remnants over lower portion; cap convex to plane at maturity, 
with an incurved margin when young; gills not decurrent; very common in the spring and early 
summer under mountain conifers (on rotten wood or in lignin-rich humus), but also occurring 
in other habitats ................................ P. vernalis(see P. mutabi/is. p. 395) 
33. Not as above ............................... _ . (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
34. Cap viscid when moist, olive or olive-tinged ......................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. myosotis (=N aematoloma myosotis) (see N. dispersum. p. 384) 
34. Cap not viscid, yellow to olive-yellow .............................. ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. elongatipes (=Naematoloma elongatum) (see N. dispersum. p. 384) 
Pholiota astragalina (Pinkish-Orange Pholiota) 
CAP 2-5 cm broad, bell-shaped or obtuse becoming convex, umbonate, plane, or with an 
uplifted, often wavy margin in old age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when wet but soon 
dry; bright reddish-orange to pinkish-orange, the margin sometimes paler, fading some- 
what in age and often developing blackish discolorations; margin often hung with veil 
remnants when young. Flesh thin, orange to yellow; taste bitter. GILLS typicallyadnexed 
or notched or even free, close, bright yellow or yellow-orange, discoloring where bruised or 
in age. ST ALK 5-12 cm long, 4-7 mm thick, equal or tapered toward base, fibrillose, with- 
out scales, hollow, sometimes sinuous, pale yellow, the base often oranger or discoloring 
brownish. VEIL yellowish, leaving remnants on cap margin or disappearing. SPORE 
PRINT brown; spores 5-7 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in small clusters on rotting conifers; widely dis- 
tributed. It is especially common in the Pacific Northwest and northern California in 
the late summer and fall; I have not seen it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible because of the bitter taste. 
388 
STROPHARIACEAE 
COMMENTS: The brilliant pinkish-orange cap plus the yellow gills, brown spores, and 
growth on conifers make this one of our most distinctive as well as beautiful Pholiotas. It 
is reminiscent of Naematoloma, but has paler (browner) spores and a viscid cap when wet. 
Pholiota malicola group (Forgettable Pholiota) 
CAP 3-8 (15) cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface viscid or 
dry, smooth or with a few veil remnants at margin, yellow to ochraceous-tawny, orange, or 
orange-buff, fading somewhat in age; margin often wavy. Flesh pallid or yellowish; odor 
mild or faintly fragrant; taste mild. GILLS close, adnexed or notched, yellowish becoming 
rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-1 (2.5) cm thick, equal or 
tapered downward or enlarged at base; solid, dry, fibrillose but not scaly; pallid or yellow- 
ish above, darker (tawny or colored like cap) below, becoming rusty-brown in age from 
falling spores. VEIL fibrillose, disappearing or forming a slight ring or zone of fibrils near 
top of stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7.5-11 )( 4.5-5.5 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, with an apical germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent. 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters on rotting logs and stumps, wood chips, etc.; widely 
distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This forgettable Pho/iota is a member of the so-called" P. alnicola com- 
plex"-a group of difficult-to-distinguish, scale-less(but not veil-less), yellowish to rusty or 
tawny, wood-inhabiting species. They are reminiscent of Naematolomas in their color 
and clustered growth habit, but differ in having rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown spores. 
They also approach Gymnopilus, but the species in that genus have oranger spores. 
Clumps growing in wood chip mulch might be confused with P. terrestris, but that species 
has small scales on the stalk below the veil. Closely related and/ or superficially similar 
Pholiotas include: P. flavida, with slightly smaller spores and a frequently fragrant or at 
least distinctive odor; the ..true" P. alnicola, with a mild to bitter taste and yellowish or 
olive-tinged cap; P. spinulifera and P. fibrillosipes, with smaller spores, a viscid cap and 
conspicuous cystidia on the gill faces, found in groups or clusters in soil, mulch, and saw- 
dust (veil remnants whitish in former, yellow to orange in latter); P. subochracea, with a 
viscid, pale yellow to ochre cap, long (5 cm or more) stem, chrysocystidia, and small 
spores (5-6 microns long), found in the Pacific Northwest;P.prolixa, like P. subochracea 
but larger-spored, common in eastern North America, often in large clusters in low 
hardwood forests or bottomlands; and P. multifolia, also eastern, with a dry yellow cap 
and tendency to bruise rusty-brown or orange-brown. None of these are worth eating. 
Pho/iota ma/ico/a group commonly grows in tufts or clusters on dead wood and in wood chip mulch. 
These rather small specimens have a yellow cap and practically smooth (scale-less) stalk. 
-- 
.. 
. .. 
....... 
--- 
"t ,: 
 
t 
... 
... 
Pho/iota terrestr;s is common on lawns and along roads and trails. It usually grows in tufts or clusters 
on the ground, rarely on wood. Note scaly stalk (the scales can be large or small); spore print is brown. 
(Joel Leivick) 
Pholiota terrestris (Terrestrial Pholiota) 
CAP (I) 2-8 (10) em broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or somewhat 
umbonate; surface usually with dry fibrillose scales, but viscid or slimy in wet weather 
beneath the scales, which sometimes wear off; color variable: dark brown to light brown, 
grayish- or yellow-brown, or tawny, the scales darker; margin sometimes streaked, often 
hung with veil remnants. Flesh white to watery yellow or brown, thin. GILLS attached 
(usually adnate), close, at first pallid to grayish, then dull brown to dull cinnamon-brown. 
ST ALK 3-10 (13) em long, (2) 4-10 mm thick, equal or narrowed below, slender, solid or 
becoming hollow, dry, pallid to buff, or brownish toward base; covered with brown scales 
or patches below the veil. VEIL fibrillose, whitish, forming a slight superior, fibrillose ring 
or zone on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 4.5-7 x 3.54.5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters on the ground, especially along roads, paths, and in other 
disturbed areas; also on lawns, lignin-rich debris, rarely on or around old stumps. It is 
widely distributed and especially common along the west coast (including our area) 
in the fall and winter. Single individuals are occasionally found. but tufts or clusters are 
the rule. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but thin-fleshed, insipid, and usually wormy to boot. 
COMMENTS: Our most common Pholiota, this is the only veiled, brown-spored mush- 
room that habitually grows in clusters on the ground (several dark-spored Psathyrellas 
also do). The scaly stem and evanescent veil are good secondary fieldmarks, but the color, 
viscidity, and degree of scaliness exhibited by the cap vary considerably according to age 
and weather conditions. The veil does not form a prominent ring as in the white-spored 
honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea), but after collapsing it traps falling spores and 
turns brown as in Cortinarius. P. squarrosoides (see comments under P. squarrosa) is 
very closely related to P. terrestris, but has paler scales and is not terrestrial. 
Pholiota squarrosa (Scaly Pholiota) Color Plates 96, 97 
CAP 3-10 (15) em broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly bell-shaped to slightly 
umbonate or plane; surface dry, pale tan to straw color, buff. or pale yellow-brown, or in 
age darker yellow-brown or sometimes greenish-yellow toward the margin; covered with a 
dense layer of upright or recurved, often darker (brown) scales; margin incurved at first 
389 
390 
STROPHARIACEAE 
and often fringed copiously with veil remnants. Flesh pale yellowish, rather pliant; odor 
mild in some forms, distinctly garlic- or onionlike in others; taste mild or rancid. GILLS 
crowded, adnexed to adnate to slightly decurrent, pale yellowish to buff or tinged gray, 
then often developing a greenish tinge before finally becoming brown or dull rusty-brown. 
ST ALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, solid, smooth above 
the veil, covered with erect or recurved scales below (like on cap); colored like cap or 
becoming darker brown or reddish-brown below. VEIL membranous-fibrillose, forming 
a fragile, often torn, superior ring on stalk or only leaving shreds on cap margin. SPORE 
PRINT dull rusty-brown; spores 5.5-9 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ 
pore. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
HABIT AT: In tufts or dense clusters on wood, usually at the bases of trees (both hard- 
woods and conifers); widely distributed. It is very common on aspen and spruce in the 
Rocky Mountains and Southwest during the summer. It is also common on aspen in the 
Sierra Nevada in the summer and fall, but I have never seen it on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some people eat it regularly but others have suffered 
severe stomach upsets and old specimens are often rancid-tasting. 
COMMENTS: A beautiful and memorable mushroom in its prime, the erect or recurved 
scales on the cap and stalk plus the tan to pale tan color and brown spore print set this 
species apart. The cap is not viscid as in most Pholiotasand the garlic odor, when present, is 
also distinctive. It is usually found on wood, whereas P. lerreslris. which is closely related, 
typically grows on the ground. Other species: P. squaTTosoides (COLOR PLATE 98) 
is a very similar and edible scaly species with a somewhat paler (whitish to pale tawny or 
yellowish or light brown) cap and mild odor. Its gills are never greenish and in age or wet 
weather the cap becomes viscid from a gelatinous layer beneath the scales. It occurs on 
hardwoods such as maple and alder, and is much more common than P. squarrosa in 
northern California and the Pacific Northwest. In addition to the color plate, a young 
cluster is shown on p. 385. Another similar but unidentified species with a very distinctive 
citrus fragrance occurs in New Mexico. 
Pholiota aurivella group (Golden Pholiota) Color Plate 95 
CAP (3) 5-16 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate or 
plane; surface very sticky-gelatinous or slimy when moist (but may dry out), pale to dark 
yellow, tawny, golden-orange, or rusty-orange (or sometimes rusty-brown when young), 
decoratd with darker scales (the scales large and flattened to slightly recurved and 
triangular to strap-shaped or spotlike) that sometimes wear away or wash off in age; 
margin often hung with veil remnants when young. Flesh pallid to yellowish, soft in age. 
GILLS close, adnate or notched, pallid to yellow becoming brown to rusty-brown or 
even brownish-orange in age. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-2.5 cm thick, equal or tapered in 
either direction, central or off-center, dry and more or less smooth above the veil, scaly 
below (the scales usually not viscid); yellow to pale yellow-brown or colored like the cap 
(but often paler). VEIL fibrillose, whitish or yellowish, forming a slight ring or fibrillose 
zone on upper stalk or disappearing. SPORE PRINT brown; spores8.5-1 0)( 5-6.5 microns 
(but see comments!), elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia often present. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious (often tufted or clustered) on living or dead hardwoods and 
conifers; widely distributed. I n our area this species "complex" occurs rarely on hardwoods 
in the fall and winter, but it is a very prominent fungal feature of the coniferous forests 
of the Rocky Mountains, Southwest, Sierra Nevada, and Pacific Northwest, especially in 
the summer and fall. In the Southwest I have also seen large fruitings on aspen. 
. 
. 
.. 
_. 
t; ",., 
''''''tr. 
"-,II 
'. 
fill 
. -".; . 
l,. A, . 
Pho/iota aurivella group. Note extremely slimy cap with large scattered scales. Cap color ranges from 
yellow to bright tawny- or rusty-orange. These specimens, which have bright rusty caps, were growing 
on a dead oak; they are probably P. /imonella or P. squarroso-adiposa (see comments below). 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. Some books list it as edible, but many people have suffered 
gastric upsets after eating members of this species "complex." The texture is rather soft 
and gelatinous anyway, and it is said to taste "like marshmallows without the sugar." 
COMMENTS: This striking mushroom and its look-alikes (see below) are easily recog- 
nized by their scaly stalk, brown spores, and yellow to orange, viscid cap with large 
spotlike darker scales. The honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea) is somewhat similar, 
but is not as brightly colored and has white spores. Distinguishing species within the 
P. aurivella "complex," however, is not so easy. Many variants have been described (e.g., 
P. connata, with a thinly viscid stalk and P. ab;et;s, with pale brown immature gills), but 
recent cultural studies have revealed the presence of three widespread, non-interbreeding 
species which differ principally in spore size: P. aurivella, with spores 8.5-10 )( 5-6.5 
microns, P. limonella (=P. squarroso-adiposa), with spores 6.5-9.5 )( 3.5-5.5 microns 
and apparently the most common of the three in North America; and P. ad;posa, a hard- 
wood-lover with even smaller spores (5-6 )( 3-4 microns) and often viscid scales on the 
stalk. To complicate matters, there are some other closely related species, including: 
P. aur;vello;des, with even larger spores than P. aurivella;P. hiemalis, found on northern 
conifers usually late in the fall, with viscid scales on the stalk and pallid, yellow-edged gills 
when young; and P. filamentosa, with a lemon-yellow to greenish-yellow cap and a thick, 
persistent annulus (ring) on the stalk, also found with conifers. Whew! 
Pholiotaflammans (Flaming Pholiota; Yellow Pholiota) 
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming broadly umbonate to nearly plane; 
surface brilliant yellow or at times dark yellow or tawny at the center, covered with bright 
yellow scales which may wear off in age; dry or in wet weather sometimes viscid beneath 
the scales; margin usually fringed with veil remnants. Flesh fairly firm, yellow. GILLS 
usually adnexed or notched, bright yellow becoming rustier in age, close. ST ALK (3)5-10 
cm long, 4-10 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at base, bright yellow or the base slightly 
darker; smooth above the veil, sheathed with a dense layer of recurved yellow scales below; 
not viscid. VEIL bright yellow, disappearing or forming a slight superior ring or fibrillose- 
cottony zone on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 3-5 )( 2-3 microns, oblong to ellip- 
tical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills. 
391 
392 
STROPHARIACEAE 
HABIT AT: Solitary or tufted on conifer logs and stumps; widely distributed in northern 
North America, not common. In California it fruits in the fall and winter, but is rare. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice (see comments on edibility of P. aurivella). 
COMMENTS: The brilliant yellow color sets apart this beautiful mushroom. It is most 
likely to be confused with the P. aurivella group, but the cap is dry to only slightly viscid and 
the scales on the stalk and cap are yellow rather than rusty, cinnamon, or brown. P. adiposa 
(see comments under the P. aurivella group) is somewhat similar, but favors hardwoods. 
Pholiota albocrenulata 
CAP 3-10 (15) cm broad, broadly conical or convex becoming broadly umbonate to nearly 
plane; surface viscid or slimy when moist, orange-brown to dark rusty-brown or reddish- 
brown, becoming dark vinaceous-brown in age, and adorned with scattered brown fibril- 
lose scales (veil remnants); margin often fringed with veil remnants. Flesh thick, whitish; 
taste mild or bitter. GILLS close, notched or adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish be- 
coming grayish and finally brown, the edges finely scalloped and white or beaded with 
tiny white droplets. ST ALK3-10(15) cm long,0.5-1.5 cm thick, more or less equal, rather 
fibrous, stuffed or hollow; pallid or grayish above, brown to reddish-brown (like cap) 
below, with scattered brown scales below the veil; often curved. VEIL fibrillose-cottony, 
forming a slight superior fibrillose ring or zone on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE PRINT 
brown; spores 10-15 (18»( 5-8 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups( twos and threes) on stumps, logs, and living trees, 
usually of hardwoods (especially maple and elm); widely distributed, but seldom found 
in quantity and apparently absent on the west coast. I have collected it twice inN ew Mexico 
in August-once on a ponderosa pine and once on an aspen. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be harmless, but seldom eaten. 
CO MMENTS: Though not often encountered, this is a striking mushroom by virtue of 
its reddish-brown to dark brown, scaly, viscid cap and white-edged gills. Microscopically 
it is close to Stropharia. and is placed in that genus by some mycologists (along with 
several other Pholiotas, e.g., P. subcaeru/ea and P. a/bive/ata). 
Pholiota lubrica group (Lubricous Pholiota) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or sometimes with an uplifted, wavy margin; 
surface viscid or very slimy when moist, smooth (but see comments), color variable: dark 
reddish-brown to rusty-brown, rusty-orange, or ochraceous-tawny at the center, often 
paler (yellowish or even whitish) toward the margin, which is often hung with veil remnants 
when young. Flesh fairly thick, whitish to watery yellow or greenish-yellow. GILLS adnate 
to adnexed, close; whitish, yellow, or sometimes greenish-yellow, becoming brown or dull 
cinnamon as the spores mature. ST ALK 5-10 cm long,(0.4)0.8-1.5 cm thick, more or less 
equal, smooth above the veil, usually with small scales below which may wear off; white or 
yellow, the scales often darker; sometimes brownish-stained in age. VEIL fibrillose to 
somewhat membranous, forming a slight superior ring or fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE 
PRINT brown; spores 5.5-7)( 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus and on woody debris in woods; 
widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the late fall, winter, and early spring, 
especially under pine. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
. ) 
.'" ., 
..... , 
... 
. 
,. 
. 1 
- 
Left: Pho/iota velaglutinosa has a vinaceous-brown cap and slimy veil. Right: Pho/iotaferrugineo- 
lutescens has a rusty-orange cap, dry veil, and scaly stalk. Both species are discussed under the 
Pho/iota lubrica group. 
COMMENTS: The above description will more or less fit a large number ofPholiotas with 
a viscid-slimy cap and scaly stalk that grow solitary to gregarious (but not often clustered) 
in humus Or on rotting wood. They are particularly prevalent under conifers but also occur 
with hardwoods, and their identification is best left to pholiotologists. The "true" P. 
/ubrica is said to have a dark brown to reddish-brown cap with a paler or whitish margin. 
Some of the other commoner species or variants are: P. ferrug;nea, with an oranger cap; 
P. ferrug;neo-/utescens, occasional in our area, with a slightly oranger cap and a thicker 
white stem that stains yellow; P. sub/ubr;ca, with brownish veil remnants on the cap and 
a thicker (1-1.5 cm) stem; P. ve/ag/ut;nosa, with a bright to dark reddish-brown Or brown 
cap that lacks veil remnants and a viscid or glutinous veil, sometimes abundant in our 
coastal pine forests (see photograph);P./enta, with a pale cap (whitish to buff or sometimes 
tinged ochre or gray or pinkish) that features whitish veil remnants; andP. decorata, with 
a fibrillose-streaked cap that is dark vinaceous-brown to reddish-brown with a paler 
margin and has rows of concentrically-arranged veil remnants when young, common in 
the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains. Also see P. spumosa, which lacks scales on 
stalk, and P. a/bive/ata (under Stropharia hornemannil), which has a membranous ring. 
Pholiota brunnescens (Charcoal Pholiota) 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex to plane or with an uplifted, often wavy margin; surface viscid 
or very slimy when moist, smooth or with small scattered whitish veil remnants; 
chestnut-brown to dark reddish-brown to orange-brown, tawny, or dark yellow-brown, 
sometimes fading in age to dull orange; margin often paler. Flesh rather soft, dingy 
brownish; odor usually mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed, crowded, narrow, whitish or 
grayish or pale yellowish, becoming dull cinnamon-brown to brown in age. ST ALK 4-6 (9) 
cm long, (4) 7 -10 mm thick, equal, whitish to pale yellow, often darkening somewhat below 
in age or staining tawny when handled; covered with numerous small yellowish, fibrillose 
scales (usually arranged in concentric belts) below the veil. VEIL fibrillose, lemon-yellow, 
usually disappearing or forming only a slight superior ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT 
brown; spores 6-7 x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on wood or soil in recently burned 
areas; locally common in its favored habitat throughout the mushroom season. It is 
known only from the West, but the similar P. high/andensis(see comments) is widespread. 
393 
\ 
. . 
t, 
":' 
. t 
. 
, 
Pho/iota brunnescens is one of several charcoal-loving Pholiotas. Note slimy cap and the scales 
on the stalk. The scales are yellow when young but turn brown as they trap discharged spores. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several closely-related Pholiotas that fruit only on charred 
soil or wood. It is distinguished by its sticky-slimy, tawny to orangish to dark reddish- 
brown cap, scaly stem, brown spores, and yellow veil. The other common ash-lovers 
have slimmer stems (2-6 mm thick). They include: P. h;gh/andens;s (=P. carbonar;a of 
Europe), widely distributed, with a whitish veil and slightly smallercap;P. carbonar;a, with 
a rusty-red to reddish veil; P. Ju/vozonata, with an orange-brown or russet-colored veil; 
and P. subangu/ar;s, with a small cap that is only slightly viscid (if at all) and a pallid veil. 
Pho/iota spumosa 
(Slender Pholiota) 
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming umbonate or plane; surface 
smooth or appearing fibrillose or streaked, viscid or slimy when moist; color variable but 
usually olive-brown when young becoming brown to tawny or tawny-ochre at the center 
and yellow to dingy greenish-yellow toward the margin. Flesh yellow or greenish-yellow, 
soft, thin; odor mild. GILLS close, adnate or notched, yellow to pale greenish-yellow, 
becoming grayish or tawny and finally brown. ST ALK 3-7 (10) cmlong,4-6(8) mm thick, 
more or less equal, fibrillose but not scaly, yellow to pale greenish-yellow above, becoming 
sordid brownish below or from the base upward. VEIL pale yellowish or whitish, delicate, 
fibrillose, disappearing or leaving slight remnants on cap margin and stalk. SPORE 
PRINT brown or dull rusty-brown; spores 6-9 )( 44.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chryso- 
cystidia absent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered to gregarious or tufted on ground and debris under 
conifers, widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the fall and winter under pine, 
but rarely fruiting in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species belongs to a complex group of Pholiotas with yellow to 
greenish-yellow flesh and gills, a viscid to slimy cap, and an evanescent veil. The veil is not 
slimy as in P. velaglutinosa, nor is the stem scaly below the veil as in the P. lubrica group. 
Other species: P. graveo/ens is similar but has a strong odor. In our area I have also found 
P. scamba, a small species (cap 1.5-3 cm broad) with a whitish to pale yellow or cinnamon- 
tinged cap and thin (1-3 mm) fibrillose or woolly stalk. It grows in groups or small clusters 
on dead conifer logs, sticks, etc. Also see comments under the P. lubrica group. 
394 
PHOLIOT A 
395 
Pholiota destruens (Destructive Pholiota) 
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or rarely plane; surface slightly 
viscid when moist, white to creamy, buff, or at times ochre to brownish, covered with soft 
or cottony, whitish to buff scales or patches which may be come matted or washed off in 
age; margin often shaggy from veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, firm. GILLS adnate or 
notched, close, white becoming dull brown todeeprusty-cinnamoninage.ST ALK(3)5-15 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, central or off-center, solid, hard, white, but 
often developing brownish stains below in age; smooth above the veil, at first clothed with 
whitish to buff scales and patches below. VEIL cottony, white, forming a slight superior 
ring on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores 7-9.5 )( 4-5.5 
microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or clusters on dead cottonwood and poplar or sometimes 
aspen or willow, especially on the cut ends of logs; widespread. It is particularly com- 
mon in the valleys and bottomlands of the West, where Lombardy poplar and cotton- 
wood are so prevalent. I have seen it in Oregon, New Mexico, and the Sacramento Valley 
in California, but not on the coast. It usually fruits late in the season. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rather tough and poorly-flavored. 
COMMENTS: This large Pho/iota is distinct by virtue of its pale overall color, soft whitish 
veil remnants (scales or patches) on the cap, thick hard stalk, brown spore print, and 
occurrence on poplar (or sometimes willow). Its name refers to the fact that it rapidly 
destroys the wood on which it feeds. 
Pholiota mutabilis (Changeable Pholiota) 
CAP 1.5 cm broad, obtuse becoming convex,_broadly umbonate, or even plane; surface 
smooth, lubricous or slightly viscid when wet, hygrophanous: rusty-brown to orange- 
brown, reddish-brown, or tawny when moist, fading from the center outward to yellowish- 
brown, ochre, or yellowish-buff as it dries (often two-toned: yellowish at center and 
browner toward margin); margin translucent-striate only when moist. Flesh thin, white 
or tinged brown. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, pallid soon becoming brown or 
dull cinnamon. STALK 3-10 cm long, 2-10 (12) mm thick, equal or tapered toward base, 
stuffed or hollow, smooth and whitish above the ring, becoming brownish below and 
covered with numerous small, often recurved scales (at least when fresh); base sometimes 
blackish-brown in age. VEIL whitish, forming a small membranous or fibrillose superior 
ring on stalk, or sometimes disappearing. SPORE PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores 
5.5-7.5 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent. 
HABITAT: Typically in clusters-often large-on logs, stumps, or occasionally buried 
wood; widely distributed and very common, late summer through early winter, but I have 
not seen it in our area. Although it is said to prefer hardwoods, I usually find it on conifers 
in northern California and the Pacific Northwest. The fruitings are sometimes so massive 
that the substrate (log or stump) is hidden from view. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. Experienced collectors sometimes harvest 
the large clusters, but it is easily confused with the poisonous Ga/erina autumna/is and 
numerous other "LBM's" of unknown edibility. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Kuehneromyces mutabilis and Galerina mutabilis, this 
brown-spored "LBM" is best recognized by it smooth, hygrophanous, often two-toned 
cap, scaly stalk with a ring, and penchant for growing in dense clusters. The poisonous 
Ga/erina autumna/is is quite similar, but lacks scales on the stem, has roughened spores, 
and does not usually grow in large clusters. Several N aemat%ma and Psathyrella species 
'''<! 
Pho/iota mutabilis is a nondescript "LBM" that usually fruits in clusters. Note how the cap is striate 
when moist and becomes two-toned as it loses moisture. Also note how stalk is scaly below the ring. 
are also similar but have darker spores. Other species: P. verna/is is closely related and 
similar, but lacks scales on the stem (or has only a few patches) and does not grow in such 
large clusters. It is common in the mountains of western North America shortly after 
the snow melts in the spring, but occurs elsewhere also. 
CORTINARIACEAE 
@ 
% .  c." 
000 C' C. .... 
.. .-. " 
spores . 
ALMOST every brown-spored, terrestrial, woodland mushroom you find will belong to 
the Cortinariaceae, and many wood-inhabiting ones will also. Like their white-spored 
counterparts, the Tricholomataceae, they are a vast, diverse, and baffling group-with 
even more species, but fewer genera. The gills are not deeply decurrent and/ or poroid as in 
the Paxillaceae, and the cap cuticle is typically filamentous and the spores pore-less, in 
contrast to the Bolbitiaceae. The latter characters are microscopic, but with a little practice 
the two can be distinguished in the field. The Cortinariaceae are primarily woodland fungi, 
a dominant fungal feature of cool temperate forests, whereas the Bolbitiaceae are warm- 
weather fungi found mostly in grass, gardens, and dung. Also, with the exception of 
Ga/erina and Tubaria. the Cortinariaceae tend to be larger, fleshier, and/ or less fragile 
than the Bolbitiaceae. 
As applied to the Cortinariaceae, the term "brown-spored" is somewhat misleading. The 
spore color actually ranges from orange or bright rusty-orange (Gymnopilus) to rusty- 
brown (Cortinarius) to dull brown, ochre-brown, or yellow-brown. Mushrooms with a 
filamentous cap cuticle and purple-brown to purple-black spores are traditionally placed 
in the Strophariaceae. However, the difference between "brown" and "purple-brown" is 
not always clearcut, and the two families seem to intergrade via Pholiota(a brown-spored 
member of the Strophariaceae that is keyed out here in the Cortinariaceae) and Ga/erina. 
Another family, the Crepidotaceae, is recognized by some authorities; it is largely tropical 
and composed almost entirely of"LBM's" included here under the Cortinariaceae. 
CORTINARIACEAE 
397 
There are very few esteemed edibles in the Cortinariaceae The gypsy mushroom 
(Rozites caperata) is perhaps the best known and most widely collected, but there are many 
more species that are definitely known to be poisonous (particularly in Galerina. 
Cortinarius. Hebeloma. and Inocybe), and hundreds of others have yet to be tested. 
Identification is very difficult in this family, and having access to a microscope does little 
to expedite the tedious and labyrinthine identification process, because so little has been 
published on the family and so many species are poorly known or still unnamed. Several 
representatives from each common genus are included in this book. 
Key to the Cortinariaceae 
I. Typically growing on wood (may be buried!), wood chips, bark mulch in nurseries, sawdust, 
fabrics, or ashes (on burnt ground or wood); neither the flesh nor the gills lilac or violet .. 2 
I. Typically growing on the ground (but occasionally on very rotten wood); gills and/ or flesh 
violet or lilac in some cases ..................................................... 8 
2. Stalk poorly developed (lateral to off-center) or absent at maturity; on wood or various fabrics 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Crep;dotus, p. 405 
2. Stalk well-developed, central to somewhat off-center but not lateral; not found on fabrics . 3 
3. Spore print rusty-orange to bright rusty-brown; cap not normally viscid or slimy; gills usually 
yellow to orange or rusty-orange; stalk fleshy though sometimes slender Gymnop;lus, p. 407 
3. Not as above; spore print different colored (including duller rusty-brown or ochre-brown) 4 
4. Fresh fruiting body small and dark red to wine-colored .. Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Veil absent ................................................................... 6 
5. Veil present (check young specimens because it may disappear) ....................... 7 
6. Gills free at maturity; spore print pinkish-cinnamon .............. (see Pluteaceae, p. 253) 
6. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
7. Stalk fleshy, or if thin then not particularly fragile and sometimes scaly below the veil; cap 
usually larger than 5 em broad (but sometimes smaller), sometimes dry but more often viscid 
and usually not translucent-striate when moist; cap sometimes brightly colored, sometimes 
growing in large clusters ................................. (see Strophariaceae, p. 367) 
7. S talk thin (less than 5 mm), usually hollow and fragile and without scales; cap small (usually 
less than 4 em) and dry, or if viscid then typically also hygrophanous and translucent-striate 
when moist; cap usually dull-colored, not typically growing in large clusters . _ . . . . . . .. 25 
8. Spore print reddish or with a greenish or olive tinge when moist; gills reddish when young; cap 
powdery and small (up to 5 em broad) and dull grayish to brownish; not common ........ 
.. . .. . .. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. (see Agaricaceae, p. 310) 
8. Not as above; very common ..................................................... 9 
9. Membranous veil present when young, usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk . 10 
9. Veil absent, or if present then cobwebby, silky, hairy, or slimy but not membranous ..... 13 
10. Stalk thick and fleshy (at least 8 mm thick, usually more) and/ or gills purplish when young II 
10. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
II. Veil covering the gills well into maturity ortending to shred radially ratherthan break away from 
the cap; fruiting body tending to develop underground (occasionally surfacing in wet weather); 
associated with mountain conifers ............................... Cort;nar;us, p.417 
II. Not as above; developing above the ground ............... R oz;tes & Phaeolepiota, p. 411 
12. Cap distinctly viscid or slimy when fresh, sometimes with scales; stalk often scaly or cottony or 
shaggy below the veil ................................... (see Strophariaceae, p. 367) 
12. Cap not viscid or only slightly so and not scaly; stalk not normally cottony, shaggy, or scaly 
(but may be fibrillose) ............................. Galer;na, Tubar;a, & Allies, p. 399 
13. Stalk tapered below to form a "tap root" that extends deep into humus; veil absent; spore print 
typically rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Phaeocollyb;a, p. 413 
13. Not as above; "tap root" absent, or if present then a veil also present(when young) andj or spores 
differently colored ........................................................... 14 
398 CORTINARIACEAE 
14. Gills brightly colored (yellow, orange, red, blue, green, purple), at least when young; cap not 
typically translucent-striate when moist ..................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 15 
14. Gills not brightly colored (but may be dingy yellow, tawny, etc.) and/ or cap translucent-striate 
when moist ................................................................. 17 
15. Cobwebby, silky, or hairy veil present when young; cap viscid or dry; spore print rusty-brown 
to cinnamon (but not rusty-orange); gills variously colored; common .. Cort;nar;us, p. 417 
15. Veil absent; cap not typically viscid; spore print orange to rusty-orange or dull brown to yellow- 
brown or olive-brown; gills yellow to orange or rusty-orange; not very common ....... 16 
16. Spore print orange to rusty-orange or bright rusty-brown ............. Gymnop;lus, p. 407 
16. Spore print brown to olive-brown ............................. (see Paxillaceae, p. 476) 
17. V olva present at base of stalk; spore print reddish or pinkish-cinnamon (see Pluteaceae, p. 253) 
17. Not as above; volva absent or spore color browner or rustier ........................ 18 
18. Cap typically viscid or slimy when moist, usually smooth (bald) or with a few scattered scales 
or veil remnants ............................................................. 19 
18. Cap typically not viscid, but sometimes slightly tackyin wet weather; cap surface smooth or silky 
to fibrillose, woolly, scaly, or powdery .......................................... 24 
19. S talk distinctly viscid or slimy from the remains of a slimy veil; spore print typically rusty-brown 
to cinnamon .................................................. Cort;nar;us, p. 417 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Cap usually small (up to 4 cm broad) and striate when moist; stalk thin, i.e., 1-3 (5) mm thick; 
fruiting body fragile; often found in moss . _ . . . . . . . . . . Galer;na, Tubar;a, & Allies, p. 399 
20. Not as above .......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 21 
21. Veil present, at least when young (check several specimens if unsure), usually but not always 
leaving traces on the stalk in the form of hairs, scales, or an annulus (ring) ............ 22 
21. Veil absent in all stages ........................................... H ebeloma, p. 463 
22. Spore print typically rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown; veil cobwebby or silky; stalk usually 
lacking scales below the veil, usually (but not always) at least I cm thick; spores roughened 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Cortinar;us, p. 417 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
23. Odor often radishlike or spermatic and/ or taste bitter; gill edges often whitish; stalk apex often 
powdery, scurfy, or with small flakes; cap viscid but not often slimy; spore print dull brown 
(not cinnamon- or rusty-brown); not typically growing in large clusters from a common base 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Hebeloma, p. 463 
23. Not as above; sometimes growing in clusters ................. (see Strophariaceae, p. 367) 
24. Spore print yellow-brown to tan to dull brown, orifrusty-brownorcinnamonthenfruitingbody 
often tawny or yellowish, translucent-striate when moist, and often growing in moss; spores 
smooth or roughened ........................................................ 25 
24. Spore print typically rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown; cobwebby or silky veil present when 
young, often leaving hairs on stalk; stalk thick or thin but not usually fragile; spores roughened 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Cort;nar;us, p. 417 
25. Odor spermatic or like greencorn( crush the cap ifunsure!); spore print dull brown or dull yellow- 
brown .......................................................... Inocybe, p. 455 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Spore print dull brown or dull yellow-brown; cap usually opaque and small or medium-sized, 
often umbonate and/ or with easily-splitting margin (especially in age); surface of cap usually 
silky, hairy, or scaly; gill edges often whitish; gills typically not decurrent; very apex of stalk 
often minutely powdered, flaky, or scurfy; often growing in groups but not usually in clusters 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Inocybe, p.455 
26. Not as above ................................................................ 27 
27. Veil present at least when very young; stalk with small scales (often somewhat concentrically 
arranged) below the veil ................................. (see Strophariaceae, p. 367) 
27. Not as above; veil absent or present; stalk not normally scaly, but may have fibrils ...... 28 
28. Stalk typically 4 mm or more thick; cap typically 4-10 cm broad ..................... 29 
28. Not as above (usually smaller) ....................... Galer;na, Tubar;a, & Allies, p. 399 
29. Spore print reddish- or pinkish-cinnamon .................. (see Entolomataceae, p. 238) 
29. Notasabove ...................... _...................... (seeBolbitiaceae,p.466) 
399 
GALERINA, TUBARIA,& Allies 
Small to minute. mostly brown mushrooms found on wood, moss, or ground. CAP typically smooth 
or nearly so. often translucent-striate toward margin when moist. GILLS brown to rusty ortawnyat 
maturity. typically adnexed to adnate (Galerina) or slightly decurrent (Tubaria). STALK thin 
(generally less than 5 mm thick). fragile or cartilaginous. usually hollow and central. VEIL absent 
or present, sometimes forming an annulus ( ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT ochre- 
brown to cinnamon-brown or brown. Spores smooth or roughened, usually lacking a germ pore. 
Cystidia usually present on gill edges. Cap cuticle usually filamentous. 
THIS is an artificial grouping oflittle brown mushrooms ("LBM's") with brownish spores 
and a thin, usually fragile stem. Ga/erina is a large genus{ over200 species) formerly divided 
among Pho/iota and the obsolete genus Ga/era. I t can be recognized in the field by its small 
size, yellowish to brown color, and conical to convex cap, plus the thin stem and brown 
spores. Pho/iota intergrades with Ga/erina, while Conocybe species also have brown 
spores but are usually more conical and have a different type of cell structure in the cap 
cuticle {cellular rather than filamentous). Also, Conocybes usually grow in grass, dung, or 
cultivated soil, whereas Galerinas are partial to wood, humus, and moss in forests and bogs 
(however, some Galerinas grow in grass and some Conocybes in moss). 
Tubaria is a small but ubiquitous genus with slightly decurrent gills and a convex to plane 
or depressed cap. It is most likely to be confused with Agrocybe, which does not usually 
have decurrent gills, and with Pho/iota, with which it intergrades. Several other small 
genera are also treated or mentioned here {e.g., Naucoria, A/nico/a, and Simocybe), but 
they are differentiated largely on microscopic characters and are of little interest to the 
average mushroom hunter. 
Ga/erina and Tubaria are espeCially common during dry spells when other mushrooms 
are scarce. Several Galerinas are known to contain deadly amanita-toxins. Many others 
have not been tested and all are difficult to identify-a compelling reason to avoid eating 
all Galerinas, Tubarias, and other "LBM's:' 
Two Galerinas and two Tubarias are described here, plus one rare but distinctive 
mushroom of uncertain disposition, Naucoria vinic%r. If your"LBM" does not key out 
convincingly, throw it away! For more comments on "LBM's," see p. 32. 
Key to Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies 
l. Fruiting body dark red to vinaceous (wine-colored) when fresh .. Naucor;a v;n;color, p. 404 
l. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Veil present when young, usually forming a small or large annulus (ring) on the stalk (check 
several specimens if possible) ................................................... 3 
2. Veil absent, or if present then not forming an annulus .............................. II 
3. Annulus prominent, distinctly membranous and often flaring and/ or movable; cap dry and not 
translucent-striate; cap conical or bell-shaped when young (but may expand), 0.5-2.5 em 
broad; spores with a germ pore, cap cuticle cellular .............. (see Conocybe, p. 470) 
3. Not as above; cap usually striate when moist (at least at margin) and/ or differently shaped 4 
4. Growing on wood or wood chips ................................................. 5 
4. Growing on ground (in humus, moss, etc.) ......................................... 9 
5. Cap thinly to thickly viscid when moist ........................................... 6 
5. Cap not viscid ................................................................ 7 
6. Cap thinly viscid and translucent-striate when moist; stalk lacking obvious scales below the 
annulus (ring); spores roughened ................ _ . . . . . . . . Galer;na autumnalis, p. 401 
6. Not as above; spores smooth ................................... (seePhol;ota, p.384) 
7. Cap often with hoary white fibrils or particles when young; gills usually adnate to decurrent 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Tubar;a con/ragosa, p. 403 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
400 CORTINARIACEAE 
8. Stalk with small or prominent scales or patches of veil remnants I:)elow the veil; spores smooth 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (seePholiota, p. 384) 
8. Not as above; spores usually roughened ..... Galerina marginata(see G. aUlumna/is. p.401) 
9. Cap reddish-cinnamon when moist; often growing on lawns; known only from the Pacific 
Northwest ............................. Galerina venenata (see G. aUlumna/is. p. 401) 
9. Not as above; usually growing in moss, grass, or swampy groundand/ or differently colored 10 
10. Cap translucent-striate when moist .......... Galerinapaludosa(see G. autumna/is. p.401) 
10. Not as above ............................................... (seeAgrocybe, p. 467) 
II. Gills usually slightly decurrent; cap convex to plane or slightly depressed (not conical and 
not typically tawny or yellow) ................................................. 12 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
12. Cap and stalk white to grayish; cap often somewhat hairy, especially toward margin; found 
in woods; widespread but not common ................. (see Clitocybe& Allies, p. 148) 
12. Cap brown when fresh but often fading to buff or whitish as it dries; found in many habitats 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " TubariaJurJuracea & others, p. 402 
13. Cap more or less olive-brown; growing on wood; spores smooth .... Simocybecentunculus 
13. Not with above features ....................................................... 14 
14. Stalk or base of stalk blue to blue-green in age; growing in moss or grass (seeConocybe, p.470) 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Cap bright yellow when fresh (but often fading) and conspicuously striate and viscid; entire 
fruiting body withering or dissolving quickly ..................... (seeBolbitius, p. 473) 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Spore print ochre-brown to pinkish; odor usually strong and fishy or cucumberlike; cap bell- 
shaped to conical when young, reddish-brown to dark brown or blackish (margin often paler); 
stalk also dark, minutely velvety; gills with giant cystidia ... (see Tricholomataceae, p. 129) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Growing on decaying wood; cap hairy or scaly or silky and/ or odor spermatic; cap not viscid 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (seelnocybe, p. 455) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap convex to plane or broadly umbonate ....................................... 19 
18. Cap conical to bell-shaped or acutely umbonate ................................... 24 
19. Lower stalk usually with small scales or veil remnants; veil present at least in young specimens; 
cap often viscid when moist; spores smooth; usually found on wood, sometimes on ground, but 
not usually in moss .......................................... (seePholiota, p. 384) 
19. Not as above; spores smooth or roughened; growing in many habitats, often in moss .... 20 
20. Cap viscid when moist and conspicuously striate; flesh very thin; stalk white or yellow and very 
fragile (2-3 mm thick); entire fruiting body withering or decaying quickly; cap cuticle cellular 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (seeBolbitius, p.473) 
20. Not as above ................................................................ 21 
21. Gills adnate; cap brown but often fading to tan, buff, or even whitish as it loses moisture; spore 
print ochre to dull brown or tan; s pore walls nearly colorless and thin, easily breaking; common 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., TubariaJurJuracea & others, p. 402 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Spore print brown; found mostly under alder and willow ........................... 23 
22. Spore print usually rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown (brighter than above); found in many 
habitats .................................................................... 24 
23. Cap dark reddish-brown ......................................... Alnicola scolecina 
23. Cap brown to tan or yellow-brown ........... A Inicola melinides, A. escharoides, & others 
24. Cap usually yellowish to yellow-brown or tawny or sometimes rusty-brown; veil present or 
absent; usually growing in moss or grass or on wood; cap usually translucent-striate when 
moist; stalk fragile; spores roughened or smooth ... Galerina heterocystis & others, p. 402 
24. Not as above; sometimes growing in moss, but usually on ground and not normally in grass or 
on wood; veil always present (at least when very young); stalk not often fragile; spores 
roughened ............................................... (see Cortinarius, p.417) 
"" 
 .... 
.... 
-\. 
,\ :: 
, .... ... 
.. 
Galerina autumnalis is a deadly poisonous ..LBM." Growth on wood, brown spores, and scale-less 
stalk with a small annulus (ring) are the main features. 
Galerina autumnalis (Deadly Galerina) 
CAP 1-4 (6.5) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or slightly umbonate; surface smooth, 
viscid when moist, dark brown to yellow-brown or tawny, fading to tan or yellowish as it 
dries; margin translucent-striate when moist. Flesh thin, watery brown; odor mild or 
slightly farinaceous. GILLS attached (slightly decurrent to adnexed) but often seceding, 
close, yellowish to pale brown becoming rusty-brown or brown. ST ALK 2-10 cm long, 3- 
6 (10) mm thick, equal or thicker below, dry, hollow, pallid to brownish, often darker 
below in age, fibrillose below the veil; base often with white mycelial strands. VEIL fibril- 
lose or somewhat membranous, usually forming a thin, superior, white ring on stalk which 
is subsequently darkened by falling spores or often disappears in age. SPORE PRINT 
rusty-brown; spores 8-11 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, roughened and/ or wrinkled. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or tufted on rotting wood and debris of both hard- 
woods and conifers; widely distributed. Fairly common in our area from fall through early 
spring, especially during relatively dry years. 
EDIBILITY: DEADLY POISONOUS-it contains amanita-toxins! Fortunately, it is 
rarely eaten because of its diminutive dimensions and mundane appearance. 
COMMENTS: Since this drab ..LBM" is deadly poisonous, it is important to learn its dis- 
tinguishing characteristics: (I) the rusty-brown spores (2) the small size and thin stem (but 
in areas of high rainfall overgrown specimens often occur) (3) the veil which usually (but 
not always!) forms a thin whitish superior annulus (ring) (4) the growth on wood (some- 
times buried or very decayed). The annulus may turn brown in age or even disappear, so 
it is best to avoid any mushroom that is remotely similar, including the edible Pho/iola 
mutabilis, which typically grows in large clusters and has small scales on the stem. There 
are several very similar deadly poisonous Galerinas with a thin annulus, including: G. 
marginata, with a moist but not viscid cap, found mainly on decaying conifers; and G. 
venenata, with a reddish-cinnamon cap that fades to pinkish-buff or whitish in age, 
growing on lawns or buried wood and known only from the west coast. Other species: G. 
paludosa also has a white superior annulus, but it has a long thin stem and grows in bogs; 
its edibility is unknown. 
401 
402 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Galerina heterocystis 
CAP 5-20 mm broad, bluntly conical becoming bell-shaped or convex or sometimes 
umbonate; surface smooth, hygrophanous: pale yellow to pale cinnamon to tawny and 
translucent-striate when moist, paler(more or less bufO when dry. Flesh very thin, fragile. 
GILLS close, usually attached but not decurrent, pale yellowish becoming pale cinnamon- 
brown. STALK 1-8 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, tubular, fragile, pallid to 
pale yellowish darkening to bown or cinnamon; lower portion faintly fibrillose. VEIL 
absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT pale cinnamon-brown; spores 11-17 x 6.5-8.5 
microns, more or less elliptical, roughened to nearly smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in damp mossy or grassy places (usually in or near 
woods); widely distributed. In our area this species and its numerous look-alikes are 
especially common during relatively dry weather when other mushrooms are scarce. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: There are dozens of Galerinas that will more or less fit the above descrip- 
tion, and they can only be differentiated microscopically. Unlike G. autumnalis, the veil is 
evanescent or even absent, but like that species the cap is usually translucent-striate when 
fresh. Some are found in the woods or at their edges, others frequent seepage areas, still 
others grow on logs or in bogs; most are moss-inhabiting. Conocybe species may also 
key out here, but are generally more sharply conical, not as translucent, and have a cellular 
cap cuticle; they favor lawns, dung, or cultivated ground, but a few grow in moss. Psi/o- 
cybe and Psathyrella species are also similar, but have darker spores. Other Galerinas 
with an evanescent or absent veil include: G. semilanceata, with a fibrillose veil, usually 
found on the ground; G. cedretorum, larger (cap 1-3 cm), with a more or less convex cap 
and no veil, found in humus or debris under conifers; G. hypnorum, minute, with a rudi- 
mentary veil, found on mossy logs; G. triscopa, also minute, but with a sharply conical 
cap when young, growing on logs; and G. tibicystis, growing only in Sphagnum bogs. 
N one of these should be eaten. 
Tubariafurfuracea (Totally Tedious Tubaria) 
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth to 
finely fibrillose or often with minute whitish flecks and patches (veil remnants); hygro- 
phanous but not viscid, brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon-brown, or tan when moist, 
fading to buff, pinkish-buff, orwhitish as it dries( often fading incenter first); margin striate 
when moist. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS close, adnate to slightly decurrent, pale tawny to 
cinnamon or brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, 
colored more or less like cap or paler, sometimes with whitish flecks, fibrillose, fragile; 
base usually with whitish mycelium. VEIL whitish, fibrillose, evanescent. SPORE PRINT 
ochre-brown to pale ochre; spores 6-9 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground, sticks, and woody debris in wet places- 
Tubariafurfuracea, the "Totally Tedious Tubaria." Note adnate to slightly decurrent gills and ten- 
dency of cap to fade as it loses moisture. A similar viscid-capped species is also common locally. 
\, 
'1 . 
j : 
 
. ( 
"- 
.:"", 
,. '- 
f "-. 
'; 
## 
. . 
. 4\ 
\ 
\ 
" 
fl...  
\ ' 
.... 
Tubariafurfuracea is a quintessential"LBM:' These specimens are taller than most and their gills 
are rather widely spaced. Could they be a distinct species? Does anyone know? Does anyone care? 
woods, vacant lots, landscaped areas, along trails, etc.; common and widely distributed. It 
seems to be most abundant when and where other mushrooms are scarce-perhaps 
because it is only likely to be noticed when and where other mushrooms are scarce. I have 
seen enormous fruitings in wood chip mulch at Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is it, folks-your quintessential "LBM" (see p. 32)-as boring as it is 
ubiquitous and as innocuous as it is inconspicuous. The brownish spores, adnate to 
decurrent gills, thin stalk, and whitish-flecked, hygrophanous cap are the most distinctive 
(or least undistinctive) field marks. To say more about it would do the more interesting 
mushrooms in this book an injustice. Other species: The "Totally Tedious Tubaria" is 
easily mistaken for the "Truly Trivial Tubaria," T. pelluc;da, which, however, is slightly 
smaller (cap 0.5-1.5 cm broad) and has slightly smaller spores. T. tenu;s, otherwise known 
as the "Truly Trivial AND Totally Tedious Tubaria," is also smaller, but has a completely 
glabrous (bald) cap and widely spaced gills. A small unidentified viscid-capped species 
also occurs in our area. There are various other "LBM's" belonging to obscure genera 
such as Simocybe and Alnicola. You can find more information on these in the key to 
Galerina, Tubaria. & Allies, but don't you have something more exciting to do? 
Tubaria confragosa (Not So Tedious Tubaria) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad, broadly convex to more or less plane or slightly uplifted; surface moist 
or dry but not viscid; hygrophanous, brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown to 
reddish-cinnamon when moist, markedly paler (buff to cinnamon-bufO as it dries out; 
smooth or often a ppearing hoary at first from a thin la yer of w hi tish fi brils or min ute scales 
(especially toward the margin, which is striate when moist). Flesh thin, fragile, colored 
like cap. GILLS cinnamon to rusty-brown to reddish-cinnamon to brown, adnate to 
slightly decurrent, close. ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5-6 mm thick, equal or thicker below, soon 
hollow, colored like cap or paler, usually with fibrils or a few small scales below the ring; 
base typically with white mycelial mat. VEIL usually forming a membranous, often flaring 
superior ring on stalk, but sometimes disappearing or leaving only a fibrillose zone. 
SPORE PRINT brown to dark reddish-cinnamon; spores 6.5-9 x 4-6 microns, broadly 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious ( often clustered) on rotting logs, sa wd ust, etc.; widely distributed. 
I have seen large fruitings in the fall and winter in wood chip mulch, sometimes accom- 
panied by T. furfuracea. 
403 
" 
t 
. '- 
Tubaria confragosa, the "Not So Tedious Tubaria," is reminiscent of the more common "Totally 
Tedious Tubaria" (T.furfuracea), but usually has an annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The presence of a well-defined annulus (ring)-at least in many specimens 
-rescues this "LBM" from the obscurity it so richly deserves. It is slightly larger than 
T. furfuracea, and is more likely to be cespitose (clustered). I t is also known as Phaeo- 
ma,asmius conf,agosus and Pholiota conf,agosa, but the hygrophanous, non-viscid cap 
and smooth to only slightly scaly stalk separate it from the Pholiotas of this book. 
N aucoria vinicolor 
Color Plate 94 
CAP 1-4 em broad, convex to plane or obtusely umbonate; surface smooth or finely 
fibrillose or occasionally fibrillose-scaly, not viscid, dark red to wine-red (vinaceous), the 
center often darker. Flesh thin, tinged cap color; odor mild. GILLS slightly decurrent to 
adnate, adnexed, or notched, close; dark red or vinaceous when young, soon becoming 
cinnamon or rusty-brown as spores mature. STALK 1-7 em long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or 
slightly thicker below, colored more or less like cap but often overlaid with a fine whitish 
silky-fibrillose coating. VEIL fibrillose, vinaceous, disappearing or forming a slight hairy 
zone on stalk which turns cinnamon from falling spores. SPORE PRINT cinnamon- 
brown; spores 6.5-8 x 4-5 microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: In small tufts or clusters (or sometimes solitary) on dead wood; known only 
from California, but perhaps more widely distributed. I have found it several times on oak 
in the fall and winter, but it is rare. 
EDIBILITY: Too rare to be of value. Greg Wright, who has found it in Los Angeles 
County, reports that it is harmless, with a "mealy, moderately mushy" texture and a flavor 
"that suggests bland beef." (I just can't wait to try it! Can you?) 
COMMENTS: This interesting mushroom was originally described in 1909. It does not 
belong to the genus N aucoria in its modern sense, but has not officially been transferred to 
another genus- per ha ps because of its rarity, but perhaps also because its .. correct" genus 
is in doubt! The fibrillose veil and cinnamon-brown spores give it the aspect of a small 
Cortinarius (e.g., C. sanguineus), but it always seems to grow on wood, usually in small 
clusters. I ts wine-red color and small size plus the spore color and growth on wood are the 
distinguishing field marks. Lactarius fragilis sometimes grows on wood but has a latex 
and/ or a fragrant odor, lacks a veil, and has white or yellowish spores. Naemat%ma 
aurantiaca is similarly colored but has darker spores and is usually terrestrial. 
404 
405 
CREPIDOTUS 
Small to medium-sized mushrooms typically growing shelj7ike on wood. CAP usually round to 
kidney-shaped in outline, surface smooth or hairy. Flesh soft, thin. GILLS usually brownish at 
maturity. ST ALK usua/(r absent or rudimentary, or if present then lateral or off-center. VEIL and 
VOL V A absent SPORE PRINT dull brown to yellow-brown, cinnamon-brown. or pinkish- 
brown. Spores smooth or roughened, lacking an apical germ pore. Cystidia often present on gills. 
Cap cuticle filamentous. 
THIS is a fairly common but lackluster group of wood-inhabiting mushrooms with little 
or no stem. They superficially resemble the oyster mushrooms (Pleurotus) as well as 
Phyllotopsis and Claudopus. but have brown spores. Other brown-spored, wood- 
inhabiting mushrooms (Pholiota. Galerina, etc.) have well-developed stems. Crepidotus 
is given its own family, the Crepidotaceae, by some mycologists. 
CrepidoluS species are worthless as food-they are flaccid and decay rapidly. They 
favor decaying hardwood logs, branches, and twigs (especially oak), but a few species 
occur on conifers or even in soil-in which case they may have a lateral to off-center(but 
not central) stem. Two widespread representatives are depicted here. 
Key to Crepidotus 
I. Fruiting body tough and leathery or woody ........... _ (see Polyporaceae& Allies, p. 549) 
I. Not as above; fruiting body fleshy ................................................ 2 
2. Cap white or whitish ........................................................... 3 
2. Cap tawny to pale ochre, brownish, or red (but may sometimes fade to whitish in age) .... 4 
3. Cap) -4 em broad and nearly smooth (bald) C. opplanatus &others (see C. herbarum. below) 
3. Cap smaller (up to 2 em broad) and distinctly hairy or downy . C. herbarum & others, below 
4. Cap bright red (scarlet to cinnabar-red), small (up to 15 mm broad); gill edges also scarlet to red; 
found on hardwoods in eastern North America; rare ................... C. cinnabarinus 
4. Not as above; cap not red ....................................................... 5 
5. Found on fabrics or old carpets, seat covers of abandoned cars, mattresses, ""rotting blue jeans," 
or on wood; fruiting body yellow-brown to brown or cinnamon; stalk present, often darker, 
usually off-center, curved, and slender ............................. Me/anotus textilis 
5. Not as above; found on wood orlignin-rich humus ................................. 6 
6. Gills often forked or veined, especially near base of cap ........... (see Paxillaceae, p. 476) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Gills yellow to orange or ochre-orange ............. C. crocophyllus(see C. mollis, p. 406) 
7. Gills whitish to grayish, brownish, or dull cinnamon ................... C. mollis, p. 406 
Crepidotus herbarum (Little White Crep) 
CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline; surface hairy or downy, 
white, not viscid. Flesh very thin, white. GILLS fairly well-spaced, white becoming pale 
ochre or brownish; radiating from point of attachment to substrate. STALK absent or 
rudimentary. SPORE PRINT pale yellow-brown; spores 6-8 )( 34 microns, pip-shaped to 
lance-shaped or somewhat elliptical, smooth. 
Crep;dotus var;abilis (see comments under C. herbarum) is one of several small whitish shelving 
species with brown or pinkish-brown spores. 
,<\ 
.- 
Of 
- 
. 
..... 
. 
. ... 
406 
CORTINARIACEAE 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups or troops on fallen branches, twigs, herbaceous stems, 
and debris( usually of hardwoods); widely distributed. Common in our area throughout the 
mushroom season, but often overlooked. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like most of us, destined to remain so. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several small whitish CrepidolUs species that typically grow 
on twigs and branches, sometimes com pletely covering their host. I t is likely to be mistaken 
for a Claudopus or small PleurolUs, but has brownish spores. Similar species include: 
C. veTsutus, with dull brown, elliptical spores 9-10 microns long; C. vaTiabilis, with pale 
brown to pinkish-brown, minutely warty, elliptical spores 5-7 microns long; C.fusispOTUS, 
with pinkish-buff, fusiform (elongated) spores; C. applanatus, very common and widely 
distributed, with round, minutely spiny spores and a larger ( 1-4 em), nearly smooth, white 
cap that often becomes brownish in age; and C. maculans, also larger and smooth, but 
usually blackish-spotted in age. 
Crepidotus mollis (Jelly Crep; Flabby Crepidotus) 
CAP 1-5 (8) em broad, fan- or kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline, convex to plane; 
surface gelatinous in wet weather beneath a dense to rather sparse coating of fulvous to 
rusty-ochre to brown fibrils (hairs) or small fibrillose scales; in age often smooth or with 
very few fibrils and varying in color from tawny to pale ochreto brown, orfadingto whitish. 
Flesh soft, thin, pallid, soon flaccid. GILLS close, whitish becoming brown or dull cinna- 
mon; radiating from base of cap. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT dull 
brown to yellowish-brown; spores 7-11 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Usually in groups or overlapping tiers on the bark of dead hardwoods (or 
rarely conifers); very widely distributed and common. In our area it is frequent throughout 
the mushroom season, especially on live oak. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as C. fulvotomentosus and C. calolepis, this is our most 
common and conspicuous Crepidotus, often fruiting in attractive masses on dead oaks. 
The relatively large size(for a CrepidolUs), gelatinous texture when wet, brown spores and 
mature gills, and fibrillose scales on the cap when young are the main field marks. In age it 
becomes quite flabby and is likely to attract your attention for this reason iffor no other. 
C. CTocophyllus is a similar, widely distributed species with yellow to ochre-orange imma- 
ture gills. I have found it several times in our area. 
Crepidotus mo//is is a common shelving mushrooms with a flabby cap and brown spores. Y oungcaps 
shown here are covered with brown fibrils or scales, but older or rain-battered caps can be bald. 
" 
\3 
', 
.; 
«f 
" 
, 
407 
GYMNOPILUS 
Medium-sized to large mushrooms found mostly on wood. CAP smooth or scaly, dry. GILLS 
notched to slightly decurrent, usually yellow to rusty-orange. STALK more or less central. fleshy. 
VEIL usually (but not always) present. sometimes forming an annulus (ring). VOL V A absent. 
SPORE PRINT orange to rusty-orange to bright rusty-brown. Spores typically elliptical and 
roughened, without an apical pore. Cystidia present, at least on gill edges. Cap cuticle filamentous. 
THIS is a clearcut group of rusty-orange-spored mushrooms formerly divided among 
Pho/iota and the defunct genus Flammula. The fruiting body is typically reddish-brown to 
rusty-orange to yellow, and a veil is often present. The vast majority of species grow on 
wood but at times may appear terrestrial. Pho/iota and Cortinarius are the genera most 
often confused with Gymnopilus. Pho/iota. however, usually has a viscid cap and duller 
(brown to cinnamon-brown) spores, while Cortinarius grows on the ground. 
Gymnopilus species are found primarily in the woods, but sometimes turn up on cut 
stumps, wood chip mulch, and in nursery flats and flower pots. They are quite common, 
but rarely fruit in the large numbers typical of, say, Hebeloma. Cortinarius. and Inocybe. 
About 75 species of Gymnopilus are known from North America and over 25 from 
California. Several are quite striking but none are good edibles. A few-specifically G. 
spectabilis, G. va/idipes, and G. aeruginosus-are "pupil-dilating" (hallucinogenic). 
F our species are depicted here. 
Key to Gymnopilus 
I. Cap usually tinged or variegated with blue or blue-green when young (sometimes also with 
other colors) or staining bluish when bruised ...................................... 2 
I. Not as above; blue or blue-green shades absent ..................................... 3 
2. Cap with fibrils or scales; veil present, at least when young ......... G. aeruginosus, p.409 
2. Cap nearly smooth; veil absent ............... G. punctifolius(see G. aeruginosus. p.409) 
3. Cap with fibrils or scales of a radically different color than the background( i.e., reddish, pinkish, 
brownish, etc.); not common ...... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4 
3. Cap smooth or with fibrils or scales that are roughly the same color as background (i.e., some 
shade of yellow, orange, rusty-orange, or reddish-brown); common ................. _ 6 
4. Cap scales or fibrils red to purple-red, reddish-brown, or pink ........................ 5 
4. Cap scales or fibrils tawny to dark brown to blackish-brown ........................... 
. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G.fulvosquamulosus& G. parvisquamulosus(see G. /uteofo/ius, p. 409) 
5. Fruiting body (especially cap) sometimes with bluish or blue-green stains (examine several 
specimens!); veil evanescent, not typically forming a distinct annulus (ring) .............. 
...... .... .. .. . ..... ... . . ... ... ., . .. . ............... G. aeruginosus& others, p. 409 
5. Not as above; veil often forming a slight annulus ........... G. luteofolius & others, p. 409 
6. Cap medium-sized to gigantic ( up to 40 em broad or more!); stalk 1-7 em thick; veil membranous 
or fibrillose, often forming an annulus (rng) on stalk; usually growing in clusters (but occa- 
sionally solitary) ......................... _ _ . . . . . . . . . . .. G. spectabilis group. p. 410 
6. Not as above; smaller and veil absent or evanescent; not often clustered ................ 7 
7. Veil present when young (bUl often disappearing in age) ............................. 8 
7. Veil absent (check young specimens!) .............................. _............. 10 
8. Veil whitish ...................... G. penetrans& G.flavidellus(see G. sapineus. p.408) 
8. Veil pale yellow or yellowish .................................................... 9 
9. Cap golden-yellow to tawny-orange, often with minute scales or scattered fibrillose patches 
... ................ ...... ... ...... .. .... . ... . ..... . . .......... G. sapineus. p.408 
9. Cap darker (tawny to cinnamon, russet, or reddish-brown), smooth ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G. luteocarneus(see G. sapineus. p.408) 
10. Usually growing on ground; taste mild .............. G. terrestris(see G. sapineus. p.408) 
10. Typically found on wood; taste usually bitter G.liquiritae& G. bellulus(see G. sapineus. pA08) 
..... 
. to. 
., 
 
.. 
Gymnopi/us luteocarneus (see comments under G. sapineus, below) is one of several small orangish 
species with an evanescent veil or no veil at all. Mature caps can be somewhat larger than the ones 
shown here, but never approach the size of the G. spectabi/is group. Left: A young specimen on wood 
and an older one on a cone. Right: Mature specimen; note how stalk base is darkened by falling spores. 
Gymnopilus sapineus (Common and Boring Gymnopilus) 
CAP (1) 2-5 (9) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or sometimes obscurely umbonate; 
surface dry, usually with minute scales or scattered patches of fibrils, often cracking in age; 
golden-yellow to tawny-orange, the margin sometimes paler. Flesh yellowish, firm; taste 
usually bitter. GILLS attached (usually adnate), close, yellow becoming rusty-yellow to 
rusty-cinnamon in age. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, equal or tapered slightly 
below; yellowish-buff to yellow, becoming brownish-yellow inage or when handled; fibril- 
lose. VEIL yellowish, fibrillose, disappearing or leaving a few hairs near top of stalk which 
turn rusty from falling spores. SPORE PRINT amber- to rusty-orange to bright rusty- 
brown; spores 7-10 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in small tufts or groups on rotting logs, cones, and 
humus rich in lignin; widely distributed, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area 
it is common under conifers (especially pine) throughout the mushroom season. Similar 
species turn up occasionally in nursery flats and flower pots. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown; the small size and bitter taste are deterrents. 
COMMENTS: There are several small, eminently undistinguished and evidently indis- 
tinguishable Gymnopilus species that will more or less fit the above description. As a group 
they can be recognized by their yellow to orange-brown color, modest size, growth on 
wood, dry cap, and rusty-orange spores. Some have an evanescent fibrillose veil, others 
have no veil at all. G. sapineus is distinct by virtue of the small scales or fibrillose patches 
on the cap. The others are hardly worth differentiating, but some of them are: G. luteo- 
caTneus, common in California on conifers, with a smooth, darker (tawny-cinnamon to 
russet) cap and pale yellowish, evanescent veil; G. penetTans and G. flav;dellus, with a 
smooth yellow to yellow-orange cap and whitish evanescent veil, the latter with a stalk 
that stains orange-brown when handled; and the following species with no veil and a 
smooth, tawny to orange, rusty, or cinnamon-brown cap: G. l;qu;T;t;ae, growing on wood, 
taste bitter; G. bellulus, on wood, taste bitter, but cap only 1-2.5 cm broad and smooth to 
minutely scurfy; and G. teTTestT;s, usually terrestrial under conifers, with a mild taste. 
408 
1. 
\. 
-.. 
.. ,. 
 
, t. 
.... ... 
........ 
---. 
Left A close relative of G. aeruginosus(perhaps the same?), this unidentified Gymnopilus has dark red 
fibrils on the cap and stalk when young and often exhibits bluish stains. Note absence of annulus( ring) 
on stalk (see comments below). Right: Close-up of G. lureofo/ius showing cap fibrils and annulus. 
Gymnopilus aeruginosus 
CAP (2) 5-15 (23) cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface dry, fibrillose-scaly (or 
cracked in age); color variable: at first dull bluish-green or variegated with green, yellow, 
salmon, red, Cor vinaceous, sometimes fading to buff or pinkish-buff in age; scales tawny to 
reddish to dark brown. Flesh whitish or tinged blue or green; taste bitter. GILLS adnexed 
to adnate or slightly decurrent, often seceding; buff to yellow-orange or ochre, close. 
STALK (3) 5-12 cm long, (0.4) 1-1.5 (4) cm thick, more or less equal, colored more or less 
like the cap, smooth or fibrillose, dry. VEIL yellowish, fibrillose, often scanty, leaving an 
evanescent zone of hairs near top of stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty to rusty-orange or rusty- 
cinnamon; spores 6-9 )( 3.54.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: In groups or clusters on stumps, logs, and sawdust of both hardwoods and 
conifers; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific Northwest. I have seen large 
fruitings in the fall, winter, and spring in wood chip mulch. 
EDIBILITY: Hallucinogenic. The blue-green tones are indicative of psilocybin and/ 
or psilocin, as in Psilocybe. 
COMMENTS: The tendency of the cap to exhibit a blue-green tinge when young (often 
variegated with pink, vinaceous-red, and/ or other colors) plus the scaly cap, yellowish 
gills, rusty-orange spores, and growth on wood make this species quite distinctive. G. 
harmoge may be a synonym. A similar unidentified species (perhaps the same?) with 
vinaceous-red fibrils on the cap and stalk when young (see photo) is common on wood 
chips. Its cap often shows bluish or blue-green stains and it is hallucinogenic. G. puncti- 
fol;us is colored like G. aeruginosus, but has a nearly smooth (bald) cap and no veil. 
Gymnopilus luteofolius 
CAP 2-12 cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming nearly plane; surface dry, at first covered 
with dense, dark red to purple-red or reddish-brown, fibrillose scales, these fading slowly 
to pinkish-red or yellowish-red; surface finally yellowish in old age as scales disperse; 
margin inrolled at first. Flesh thick, reddish to lavender, then fading to yellowish; taste 
bitter. GILLS notched to adnate or slightly decurrent, fairly close, yellow becoming bright 
rusty-orange or rust-colored as spores mature. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.3-2 cm thick, 
fleshy, equal or enlarged below (or tapered downward if clustered); solid, dry, fibrillose, 
more or less colored like cap, becoming yellowish or rusty-stained. VEIL fibrillose to 
somewhat membranous, yellowish; forming a hairy, superior ring on stalk which may 
disappear or trap falling spores. SPORE PRINT bright rusty-orange; spores 5.5-8.5 )( 
3.54.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
409 
410 
CORTINARIACEAE 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters on decaying coniferous wood, sawdust, and humus rich in 
lignin (rarely on hardwoods); widespread, but not common. I have seen one fantastic 
local fruiting, under pine at New Brighton Beach State Park, with Pluteus cervinus and 
large clusters of Pho/iota terrestris and Naematoloma fasciculare (all certified wood- 
lovers) also present. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but the closely related G. aeruginosus is said to be hallucinogenic. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive mushroom can be told by the dark red fibrils or scales on 
the cap (and often the stem), plus the yellow gills, rusty-orange spores, and relatively 
persistent veil. The much more common Tricholomopsis rutilans features the same at- 
tractive color combination, but has white spores and lacks a veil, while G. aeruginosusand 
relatives have a transient veil and often have bluish stains. G. pulchriJolius is a smallerspe- 
cies with a pink to pale pink cap. Others with distinctively colored cap scales include: G. 
Julvosquamulosus, with tawny to brown scales on a yellow background; and G. 
parvisquamulosus, with dark brown to blackish-brown scales on an ochraceous-tawny 
background. Both have a mild taste and fibrillose to slightly membranous veil. I have 
found them in our area, but they are rare. 
Gymnopilus spectabilis group Color Plate 99 
(Big Laughing Mushroom; Giant Gymnopilus) 
CAP 5-40 em or more broad, convex becoming broadly convex or nearly plane; surface 
dry, smooth to silky or fibrillose, often breaking up to form small scales; bright yellow- 
orange to yellowish-buff when young (or at times nearly whitish from overlaid fibrils), 
often somewhat darker in age (rusty-orange to golden-tawny to orange-brown or reddish- 
brown); margin at first incurved, sometimes wavy, sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh 
thick, firm, yellowish; taste bitter. GILLS notched to adnate or slightly decurrent, close, 
ochre-buff or pale yellow becoming more or less rusty-orange to rusty-brown in age. 
ST ALK (3) 5-25 em long, 1-6 (10) em thick, usually swollen in the middle or below, the 
base often narrowed; solid, firm, dry, rusty-orange to rusty-yellow or paler, fibrillose below 
the ring. VEIL pallid to pale yellowish or rusty-stained, membranous or fibrillose, 
sometimes disappearing, but usually forming a superior ring on stalk; ring soon stained 
with rusty-orange spores, often collapsing or disappearing in age. SPORE PRINT bright 
rusty-orange; spores 7-10.5 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened or wrinkled. 
HABIT A T: Usually in clusters (occasionally solitary) on or around stumps and trees; 
widely distributed. This species "complex" favors conifers on the west coast, hardwoods 
in eastern North America. In our area it is quite common on old pine stumps in the fall, 
winter, and early spring, and occasionally turns up on eucalyptus also. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible due to the bitter taste. Forms in Asia and eastern North America 
apparently contain psilocybin and/ or psilocin and are hallucinogenic (hence the Japanese 
name, "Big Laughing Mushroom"). On the west coast, however, it is apparently "in- 
active." An Ohio woman had an unforgettable experience after inadvertently nibbling on 
one. She found herself in an alien world offantastic shapes and glorious colors, and while 
concerned friends were rushing her to the hospital, she was heard to mutter, "If this is the 
way you die from mushroom poisoning, then I'm all for it. . ." 
COMMENTS: This species "complex" is easily recognized by its overall yellow-orange 
to rusty-orange color, rusty-orange spores, robust size, bitter taste, and frequent presence 
of a ring formed by the veil. Several Pho/iota species are similar, but have duller spores and 
viscid caps; the honey mushroom (Armi/lariella mellea) is also somewhat similar, but has 
white spores and whitish or flesh-colored gills, while the jack-o-lantern mushrooms 
",...:' 
. . 
,. 
... 
... 
" 
r- 
..- 
, 
.. 
.., 
... 
.... 
..... 
Gymnopi/us speclabi/is group is easily told by its yellow to rusty-orange color (see color plate), 
membranous veil, and rusty-orange spores. Note how small the penny is! This large western form is 
considered to be a separate species, G. ventricosus, by some authorities. 
(Omphalotus) have white or yellow-tinted spores, lacka veil, and grow only on hardwoods. 
"Typical" G. spectabilis grows on both hardwoods and conifers and has. a somewhat 
fibrillose veil. It was originally called Pholiola spectabilis and is also known as G.junonius 
(probably its ..correct" name). The large, non-hallucinogenic, conifer-loving western form 
with a swollen stalk and membranous veil is called G. venlricosus (if truly distinct). It is 
one of our largest and most spectacular mushrooms, commonly attaining pizza size(more 
than one foot in diameter) with clusters weighing 10 pounds or more. Young specimens 
present an entirely different appearance: squat and compact with hard, very thick, yellow 
flesh and very narrow (shallow) gills. Other species in the G. spectabilis..complex" include: 
G. subspectabilis, with larger spores; and G. validipes of eastern North America, a hallu- 
cinogenic species with a mild to only slightly unpleasant taste and a fibrillose veil. 
ROZITES & PHAEOLEPIOT A 
Medium-sized to large, terrestrial, woodland mushrooms. CAP dry; often wrinkled (Rozites) 
or powdery-granulose (Phaeolepiota). GILLS attached, tawny to orange-buff to brownish at 
maturity. STALK central, fleshy, smooth to fibrillose (Rozites) or powdery-granulose (Phaeo- 
lepiota). VEIL present. membranous. usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown to tawny or orange-buff. Spores elliptical, roughened to nearly smooth. 
THOUGH not closely related, these two small genera are treated together here because 
they have a number offeatures in common: both grow on the ground, both have yellow- 
brown to rusty-brown spores and a well-developed membranous veil that forms a distinct 
annulus on the stalk, and both were originally placed in the genus Pho/iota. 
Rozites has somewhat wrinkled or roughened spores and has been aptly characterized 
as ..a Cortinarius with a membranous veil." Phaeolepiota. on the other hand, has a granu- 
lose or powdery cap and stem and has consequently been called ..a brown-spored Cysto- 
derma:' (Some mycologists go so far as to place it alongside Cystoderma in the Agari- 
caceae; others retain it in Pho/iota ofthe Strophariaceae.) 
Each genus includes a single well-known species. Both are edible and quite good, but 
some people are apparently "allergic" to Phaeolepiota. 
411 
412 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Key to Rozites& Phaeolepiota 
I. Cap and stalk covered with a granulose or powdery layer (but the granules sometimes wearing 
or washing off, especially those on the cap); stalk 1.5 cm thick or more; found mainly in the 
Pacific Northwest ....................................... Phaeolep;ota aurea, below 
1. Cap and stalk not powdery or granulose .......................................... 2 
2. Gills purplish when young or some part offruiting body purple-tinged (see Cort;nar;us, p.417) 
2. Not as above; purple or violet shades absent ....................................... 3 
3. Cap distinctly viscid or slimy when moist. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . .. .. . .. 4 
3. Cap not viscid (or only very slightly so and soon drying out) .......................... 5 
4. Gills covered by a cobwebby partial veil when young; annulus(ring) on stalk formed by the outer 
(universal) veil; spore print rusty- to cinnamon-brown. . .. . . . . . . . (see Cort;nar;us, p.417) 
4. Not as above ................................................ (seePhol;ota, p. 384) 
5. Cap warm tan to yellow-brown or orange- brown, often wrinkled radially (especially in age) and 
sometimes with a thin silky or hoary bloom when young; spore print rusty-brown; found in 
forests ................................................... Roz;tes caperata, below 
5. Not as above; cap dark brown to olive- brown to tan, creamy, etc.; spore print dull to dark brown 
but not rusty-brown; found in forests as well as suburban habitats .. (seeAgrocybe, p. 467) 
Rozites caperata (Gypsy Mushroom) Color Plate 10] 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, oval becoming somewhat bell-shaped to broadly convex, plane, or 
obscurely umbonate; surface dry, usually distinctly wrinkled or corrugated radially, at 
first covered with a thin white to grayish coating of silky fibrils (especially at center); warm 
tan to yellow-brown or orange-brown, margin often paler. Flesh thick, white, firm. GILLS 
adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first pallid, soon dull tawny or brown, sometimes 
transversely banded with darker and lighter zones. STALK 5-13 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, 
equal or slightly enlarged at base, solid, firm, white to pale tan or pale ochre; apex often 
striate or scurfy, base sometimes with an obscure volvalike zone. VEIL white, membran- 
ous, forming a more or less median ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 
11-15)( 7-10 microns, elliptical, roughened or warty. Some cystidia present on gill edges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed in northern 
regions. It favors mossy, old-growth coniferous forests but alsD grows under hardwoods, 
especially when huckleberry is in the vicinity. I have seen large fruitings in Washington 
and Idaho in the late summer and fall. It also occurs in northern California and the Sierra 
Nevada, but I have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and in my humble fungal opinion, the best of the Cortinariaceae. 
I t is especially good with rice after a long, hard day of backpacking. The tough stems should 
be discarded. 
COMMENTS: Originally called Pholiota caperata, the gypsy mushroom is easily told 
by its warm brown or yellowish, wrinkled cap that has a hoary sheen when young, plus 
the membranous veil which forms an annulus(ring) and the rusty-brown spores. Agrocybe 
praecox is somewhat similar, but does not have a wrinkled cap and usually grows in culti- 
vated ground; Phaeo/epiota aurea differs in its powdery-granulose cap and stem, while 
similarly-colored Cortinarius species do not have a membranous veil. 
Phaeolepiota aurea 
CAP 6-20 (30) cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex, plane, or broadly 
umbonate; surface dry, granular to somewhat powdery (the granules sometimes wearing 
away in age), orange to orange-tan, tawny-yellow, or golden-brown, often somewhat paler 
PHAEOLEPIOT A 
413 
in age; margin usually hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pallid or yellowish. GILLS 
adnate to notched or free, close, pallid or pale yellowish becoming tawny to orange- 
brown. ST ALK 5-15 (25) cm long, (1) 24 (6) cm thick, thicker toward base, orange to buff 
or colored like cap and granulose or powdery below the ring. VEIL membranous, colored 
like cap, sheathing the stalk and breaking to form a superior flaring or funnel-like ring 
which eventually collapses or becomes skirtlike; ring smooth on upper surface and granu- 
lose on underside. SPORE PRINT pale yellow-brown to orange-buff; spores 10-14 )( 5-6 
microns, elliptical, smooth to minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters in rich humus and soil under both hardwoods and 
conifers; known from the Pacific Northwest and Alaska (also Europe), fruiting in the 
late summer and fall. It is rather rare, but when it fruits it often does so in large quantities. 
An ideal place to look for it is under alder along roads and trails. 
EDIBILITY: Edible for most people, but mildly poisonous to some. It is a tempting 
specimen, but try it cautiously if you must. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Pho/;ota aurea and Togar;a aurea, this large, beautiful 
mushroom is as distinctive as it is rare. No other large, brownish-spored mushroom is 
golden-brown to pale orange with a granulose coating on both the cap and stem. 
Cystoderma species are granulose but much smaller and have white spores; Agaricus 
augustus is similarly colored but has chocolate-brown spores and an almondy odor, while 
Pho/iota species, Rozites caperata. and Agrocybe praecox lack the granulose coating. 
PHAEOCOLL YBIA 
Medium-sized, terrestrial, woodland mushrooms. CAP usually viscid or slimy when moist. GILLS 
adnexed to free, usually rusty-brown or cinnamon at maturity. ST ALK with a long. tapered. deeply 
rooting base or" tap root. "VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT cinnamon- to rusty-brown. 
Spores elliptical, roughened, without an apical germ pore. Cystidia present, at least on gill edges. 
THE presence of a ""tap root" and absence of a veil distinguish this small, well-marked 
genus from its closest relative, Cortinarius. The ""tap roof' (pseudorhiza) is merely an 
extension of the stem that roots deeply in the humus. It gradually tapers to a point, be- 
coming so thin and fragile that it can't be traced to its origin (probably tree roots). Most 
other agarics with ""tap roots" (e.g., Caulorhiza and Oudemansiella) have white spores. 
Phaeocollybias are quite rare in most regions (including ours), but where they do occur 
they often fruit in large numbers. The Pacific Northwest is an exception, for it is there 
that the genus is most common and diverse. Many types seem to occur only with Sitka 
spruce, while several favor western hemlock, redwood, or Douglas-fir; few, if any, occur 
with hardwoods. About two dozen species are known from North America, many of them 
restricted to the Pacific Northwest. Little is known oftheir edibility. Three representatives 
are described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Phaeocollybia 
I. Cap dark green to olive, at least when fresh and moist (but may fade as it loses moisture) -. 2 
I. Cap never greenish or olive ..................................................... 4 
2. Gills violet or lilac when young ........................ P.jallax(see P. o/ivacea, p.414) 
2. Gills whitish to pale brown when young, or at least not violet ......................... 3 
3. Stalk typically slender (less than I cm thick at apex); cap I.{) cm broad ................... 
................................. .P.jest;va&P.pseudofest;va(seeP. o/ivacea, p.414) 
3. Stalk typically about I cm thick (or more) at apex; cap 3-11 cm broad .... P. ol;vacea, p. 414 
414 
COR TINARIACEAE 
4. Gills violet or lilac when young ................... P. lilacifolia(see P. californica. p. 415) 
4. Gills pallid to yellowish. tan, brownish, or cinnamon when young ..................... 5 
5. Cap typically with grayish tones (grayish-brown to grayish-bufO at maturity or when faded 6 
5. Not as above; cap dark brown to amber-brown, cinnamon, reddish, or orangish ......... 7 
6. Stalk typically 8 mm thick or more at apex ............ P. gregaria(see P. olivacea. p. 414) 
6. Stalk typically 3-7 mm thick at apex ................. P. scatesiae(see P. olivacea. p.414) 
7. Stalk slender (up to 7 mm thick at apex) and cap rather small (up to 5 cm broad) ........ 8 
7. Stalk thicker than above (usually at least 5 mm at apex) and cap 3-7 cm broad or larger .. 10 
8. Stalk 1.5-3 mm thick at apex; cap not viscid or only slightly so .......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. similis(see P. californica. p. 415) 
8. Not as above; stalk usually at least 3 mm thick at apex, or if thinner than cap viscid or slimy 9 
9. Cap amber-brown to yellowish to salmon or salmon-ochre; spores at least 8 microns long ... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. attenuata & P. laterarius(see P. californica. p.415) 
9. Cap cinnamon-brown to reddish or orangish P. radicata& others (see P. californica. p. 415) 
10. Cap (4) 6-25 cm broad, cinnamon to dark reddish-brown to liver-colored, dark brown, or 
umber; surface viscid or slimy; stalk 1-4 cm thick at apex .......................... II 
10. Not as above; either smaller, slimmer, or orangerthan above, or cap not viscid ......... 12 
II. Cap dark brown to umber or sometimes dark pinkish-brown; cap conical when young. . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. spadicea (see P. kauffmanii. p. 416) 
II. Cap usually redder or more liver-colored than above and/ or not conical when young ....... 
.................................................... .P. kauffmanii& others, p.416 
12. Cap slimy or viscid when moist .......................... P. calijornica & others. p. 415 
12. Cap not viscid ................................ P. deceptiva(see P. californica. p.415) 
Phaeocollybia olivacea (Olive Phaeocollybia) 
CAP 3-11 cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or uplifted, but usually 
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, hygrophanous: deep green 
to olive-green when moist, fading as it dries (to olive-buff, etc.). Flesh thin, olive; odor 
cucumberlike or radishlike when fresh. GILLS pallid becoming pale brown, then rusty- 
brown; adnexed or free, close, edges often eroded or wavy. ST ALK 10-22 cm long or more, 
(0.5) 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal above or swollen at ground level, then tapering below 
the ground to form a "tap root"; cartilaginous, smooth, stuffed with a pith; watery olive 
to yellowish above, rusty-orange to reddish-brown below or occasionally overall. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-11 )( 5-6 microns. elliptical with snoutlike apex, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious, often in large rings. on ground in mixed 
woods and under conifers; fruiting in the fall and winter, known only from the west coast. 
I t is said to be common in southern Oregon and northern California, but is rare in our area. 
Budding boletivore Craig Mitchell has located one very prolific fairy ring near Big Basin 
State Park. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
CO MMENTS: This striking mushroom is easily recognized by its slimy olive-green cap, 
rather thick rooting stem, rusty-brown spores, and absence of a veil. It is somewhat 
unusual among the Phaeocollybias in that it often fruits in mixed woods (i.e., it mayor 
may not be associated with conifers). There are three other Phaeocollybias with an olive 
cap when fresh: P. fest;va, P. pseudofest;va, and P. fallax. All are considerably slimmer, 
smaller, and more conical (cap 1-6 cm broad, stalk less than 1 cm thick at apex) than P. 
olivacea. and all have slightly smaller spores. P. fal/ax is easily told by its violet or lilac 
gills when young, but the other two can only be differentiated microscopically. Also 
worth mentioning are two species which have grayish-toned caps: P. scates;ae, with a 
slim (3-7 mm) stalk, dingy yellowish gills when young, and a dull cinnamon cap that fades 
-. .t.' 
. ." 
, 
, 
Phaeocollybia olivacea. Greenish to olive-gray cap, rusty-brown spores, and "tap root" are 
distinctive. 
to grayish-brown, often fruiting in massive clusters of up to several hundred fruiting 
bodies; and P. gregaria, with a thicker (8-15 mm) stalk and a yellowish-gray to brownish- 
gray or grayish-buff cap. All of the above species occur with northern conifers and are 
very rare or absent in our area. 
Phaeocollybia californica Color Plate 100 
CAP (2) 3-7 (10) cm broad, conical with an inrolled margin when young, often expanding 
in age to plane but retaining a distinct umbo; surface smooth, viscid when moist, hygro- 
phanous: amber-brown to cinnamon-brown or orange-brown when moist, fading as it 
dries, but in age often rusty-spotted or darkening to reddish-brown. Flesh thin; odor 
pungent (somewhat radishlike). GILLS adnate to adnexed or even free, pallid or tinged 
cap color, darkening to brown or rusty-brown in age; close. STALK 10-20 cm long or 
more, 4-10 mm thick, equal above, gradually tapering below the ground to form a "tap 
root"; cartilaginous, hollow, smooth, colored more or less like cap or paler, or more often 
dark reddish or reddish-brown below and paler (apricot-bufO above. SPORE PRINT 
rusty-brown; spores 8-11 )( 5 microns, elliptical with a small"beak" at apex, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Densely gregarious or in large loose clusters on ground under conifers, often 
forming arcs or fairy rings; known only from the west coast, not common. In our area it 
is quite rare, but one large fairy ring under redwood and Douglas-fir fruits in colossal 
quantities every winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The presence of a ""tap root," absence of a veil, rusty-brown spores, and 
amber-brown to orangish or reddish-brown color are the distinctive features of this 
species and its look-alikes (see below). Caulorhiza umbonata also features a "tap root," 
but is much more common and has pallid gills, a non-viscid cap, and white spores. Other 
dark cinnamon to orangish Phaeocollybias include: P. piceae, with a bitter taste and 
more or less mild odor, favoring Sitka spruce; P. dissi/iens, also fond ofSitka spruce, but 
with distinctly smaller spores and a thicker stalk that easily splits lengthwise;P. /ilacifo/ia, 
with violet gills when young;P. attenuata, with a thinnerstem(3-6 mmthickatapex)anda 
viscid, amber-brown to yellowish-buff cap; P. /aterarius, also slender but with a salmon 
to pale salmon-ochre cap when moist (known from Michigan); P. similis, with a very 
thin stalk (1.5-3 mm) and a non-viscid or only slightly viscid cap; andP. deceptiva, with 
a cinnamon to yellowish-brown, non-viscid cap and a thicker (8-15 mm) stalk that does 
415 
, 
. . 
Phaeoco//ybia ca/ifornica. Note conical cap, ""tap root," and absence of veil. Also see color plate. 
not markedly redden with age. Finally, there is a group of species (e.g., P. rad;cata, P. 
jennyae, P. chr;st;anae, P. s;pei) with a slender (3-6 mm) stem, small cap, and smaller 
spores (less than 8 microns long) that are best differentiated from each other microscopi- 
cally. Nearly all of the above occur in the Pacific Northwest; a few are more widely dis- 
tributed or have counterparts (e.g., P. ruf;pes) in eastern North America. None are as 
large as P. kauffmanii and none show the olive or grayish tones of P. o/ivacea and the 
species listed under it. 
Phaeocollybia kauffmanii (Giant Phaeocollybia) 
CAP 7 -25 cm broad, obtuse or convex when young becoming broadly umbonate to nearly 
plane in age; surface smooth, viscid to very slimy; cinnamon to pale reddish-cinnamon 
or reddish-brown becoming more or less liver-colored in age, but fading to reddish-orange, 
rusty-reddish, or apricot as it loses moisture; margin remaining inrolled for a long time, 
not striate. Flesh thick, firm, colored like cap or paler; odor usually farinaceous, at least 
when crushed. GILLS close or crowded, free or adnexed, buff becoming brown to rusty- 
brown in age. STALK (15) 2040 cm long, 1.54 cm thick at apex, tapered downward to 
form a long ""tap root" below the ground; pinkish-brown to pinkish-buff above, reddish- 
brown to dark purplish-brown below and darkening with age (sometimes nearly black); 
smooth; stuffed with a pith, the outer rind tough and cartilaginous. SPORE PRINT 
cinnamon-brown; spores 8-11)< 4.5-7 microns, elliptical with an apical beak, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers (particularly Sitka spruce) 
in the late summer and fall; known only from the west coast. It is fairly common during 
some seasons, particularly in Oregon and northern California, rare during others. I have 
not seen it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Its large size is tempting but the glutinous cap is not. 
COMMENTS: This giant of the genus can usually be recognized by its size alone. The 
colors are quite variable depending on age and moisture, but are usually darker and 
redder than those of P. californica and the species discussed under it. No other Phaeo- 
collybia has a stalk so consistently thick nor a cap so broad. The obtuse rather than conical 
shape of young caps is also distinctive. Other species: P. oregonens;s is a very similar but 
slightly smaller species with smaller spores; P. spad;cea is a fairly large species (cap 4-12 
cm broad, stalk 1-2 cm thick) with a dark brown to umber cap when moist. Both occur in 
the Pacific Northwest. 
416 
417 
CORTINARIUS 
Woodland fungi nearly always growing on the ground. CAP viscid or dry, smooth to fibrillose or 
scaly. GILLS typically attached but not often decurrent; variously and often brightly colored when 
young but usually rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown in age. STALK thick or thin but usually fleshy, 
central, the apex typically not powdery or dandruffy. VEIL present as a cobwebby or silky cortina 
which often leaves hairs on stalk; fibrillose or slimy universal veil often present also. VOL V A 
typically absent (but rimmed bulb sometimes present). SPORE PRINT rusty-brown to cinnamon- 
brown or at times ochraceous-tawny. Spores round to elliptical, roughened, lacking an apical pore. 
Cystidia usually absent on faces (sides) of gills but sometimes present on the edges. Cap cuticle 
typically filamentous. 
CORTINARIUS is the largest genus of gilled mushrooms, with an estimated 1000 
species-many of them still unclassified. Cortinarii can be dry or slick, thin or thick, large 
or small, chunky or tall, but as a group they are easy to recognize, for there are three funga- 
mental features that unite all 1000+ species: rusty-brown to cinnamon-brown spores, the 
presence of a cortina, and a terrestrial woodland growth habit. 
The cortina, which is the hallmark of Cortinarius, is an exquisitely constructed veil of 
silky or cobwebby fibers. It shrouds the gills of the young mushroom (COLOR PLATE 
10S), but colla pses as the ca p opens, often leaving hairs on the stem which are subsequently 
stained rusty-brown by spores (COLOR PLATE 103). In some species the cortina 
may completely disappear, but the combination of rusty-brown spores (and often, rusty- 
brown mature gills) and growth on the ground is a fairly infallible indicator of Cortinarius. 
In many species the cortina is augmented by a universal veil that leaves scaly belts, fibrils, 
and/ or a sheath of slime on the stem (and sometimes the cap). 
Among the brown-spored mushrooms, Cortinarius is most likely to be confused with 
lnocybe and Hebe/oma, which are terrestrial and may have a cortina, but which have 
duller brown spores and often have whitish-edged gills and a powdery or dandruffy stalk 
apex; with Phaeocollybia. which has rusty-brown spores but lacks a cortina; and with 
Gymnopilus and Pho/iota. both of which are primarily wood-inhabiting. (Cortinarii 
can occasionally be found on w.ood in an advanced stage of decay, but you will never find 
them on the mossy crotch of a live oak or the cut end of a felled fir.) 
Within these parameters-presence of a cortina and often a universal veil, rusty-brown 
to cinnamon-brown or "ochraceous-tawny"' (whatever that may mean) spores, and 
growth on the ground near or under trees-Cortinarii vary tremendously in shape, size, 
color, and habit. Many are Boring Ubiquitous Mushrooms. ("BU M's"), but a sizable 
number are big, bold, and blatantly beautiful. In fact, the Cortinarii, along with the 
waxy caps (Hygrophoraceae), are the most colorful of all the agarics: blues, violets, 
yellows, oranges, browns, and olives predominate, but reds, bright greens, and whites 
are not rare. To make any headway in identification it is essential to know the color 
of fresh individuals-particularly the color of the immature gills, since it changes as 
soon as the spores begin to form. As Cortinarii grow older, the bright colors and 
individuality of their youth are drowned in brownness, until the enormity of their 
uniformity makes identification of species hopeless (on the other hand, the sameness of 
their mundane-ness helps to signify that they are Cortinarii).* 
You should also note whether the cap and stalk are viscid when they arefresh and moist. 
Scent is another important variable-many species have indifferent odors, but some are 
enticingly aromatic (e.g., C. percomis), others are downright disgusting (e.g., C. cam- 
phoratus), while still others are aromatic and disgusting (e.g., C. subfoetidus). 
Even if you take meticulous notes onfresh specimens in all stages of development, you 
will still find Cortinarii difficult to identify. Perhaps this is why professional mycologists 
*N ote: These lines were composed at 3:00 A.M. under the influence of severe boredom. 
418 
CORTINARIACEAE 
seldom bother to name the multitudes of Cortinarii they encounter, and why Elias Fries, 
the "father" of mushroom taxonomy, said in 1838: "No genus is more natural nor more 
sharply distinguished from others . . . but the species are so intimately related among 
themselves that to distinguish the separate ones is almost to be despaired of." Cortinarius 
species deserve to be better known, however, so don't let your inability to name them 
prevent you from learning to recognize them. Naming them, after all, is not anend in itself, 
but a means of expediting the recognition process. If you really must have labels, you can 
give them descriptive nicknames of your own. 
The labyrinthine process of identifying a Cortinarius can be shortened to some extent 
by learning to place each species in its proper subgenus. Five (or sometimes seven) large 
subgenera have traditionally been recognized, and even raised to the rank of genus by 
some mycologists: 
Subgenus Myxacium: both cap and stalk viscid or slimy. 
Subgenus Bulbopodium: only the cap viscid; stalk with an abrupt. often rimmed basal 
bulb (see photograph on p. 439 and Color Plate 105). 
Subgenus Phlegmacium: only the cap viscid; stalk equal to club-shaped or swollen, but 
lacking a rimmed bulb. 
Subgenus Telamonia: neither the cap nor the stalk viscid; cap hygrophanous and 
smooth or occasionally fibrillose. 
Subgenus Cortinarius (now divided into four subgenera-see below): neither the cap 
nor the stalk viscid; cap often fibrillose or scaly but not typically hygrophanous. 
The three subgenera with viscid caps are the easiest to recognize. Myxacium is especially 
distinctive by virtue of the slimy universal veil that coats the cap and stalk. Bulbopodium 
and Phlegmacium feature many large and/ or colorful species but intergrade somewhat 
(the bulb can be somewhat abrupt or slightly rimmed), causing some investigators to 
recognize only the latter. 
The hygrophanous-capped subgenus T elamonia is the largest and most difficult group 
of Cortinarii, with at least 400 species- most of them brownish or cinnamon-brown and 
many of them small and nondescript (in other words, typical "LBM's" in the grand, bland 
tradition of Inocybe. Galerina. and Tubaria). 
Members of the dry-capped subgenus Cortinarius are now divided up by Cortinarius- 
categorizers into four subgenera, based largely on the types of pigments they contain: 
Subgenus Cortinarius (in its most restricted sense): contains a single striking deep 
violet, fibrillose-scaly species (c. violaceus). 
Subgenus Sericeocybe: has violet to pale violet or lilac-white colors. 
Subgenus (or genus) Dermocybe: composed mainly of small, slender-stemmed, bright- 
ly colored, conifer-loving species with yellow, olive, orange, or red pigments called 
anthraquinones(which are water-soluble and hence make wonderful dyeing agents). 
Subgenus Leprocybe: a large and diverse group whose color ranges from oliveto yellow, 
yellow-brown, rusty-orange. or brown, but whose pigments differ from those found 
in Dermocybe. 
Cortinarius is one of the most prominent features of our woodland fungal flora, but its 
fruiting behavior is notoriously erratic. Sometimes there is one sudden spectacular, 
Russula-like eruption of Cortinarii; at other times they fruit in a rather uninspired, 
desultory fashion throughout the rainy season. A few species, such as C. glaucopus. are 
common every year, but many types will be exceedingly abundant one season, then rare 
or absent for the next two or ten (or even twenty!) years. 
Most if not all Cortinarii are mycorrhizal. They attain their maximum numbers and 
diversity in the cool coniferous forests of the north temperate zone, but are also common 
under hardwoods (particularly "Bulbopodiums" and "Phlegmaciums"). In our area each 
", 
.. 
" 
. 
 
1',7 
, 
.;.. 
'"'- 
,  
, .... 
. 
," 
';\. 
. 'i"- 
Corl;nar;us crocoliluS (see comments under C. collin;lus, p. 431) is one of hundreds of Cortinarii. Its 
stalk is marked by yellow-brown or ochre belts formed by the universal veil. 
forest type offers its own characteristic clique of Cortinarii: e.g., C. infraetus, C. eotoneus, 
and C. eol/initus with tanoak; C. glaueopus, C. regalis, and C. sodagnitus with live oak; 
C. cinnamomeus, C. phoenieeus var. oecidentalis, and C. obtusus with pine; and C. 
balteatus, C. eylindripes, and C. vibrati/is with ericaceous trees and shrubs (huckleberry, 
manzanita, and madrone). It is in northern latitudes or higher altitudes(i.e., with northern 
conifers, especially spruce), however, that the Cortinarii come into their own, and their 
astonishing diversity becomes overwhelming. 
Some of the older popular mushroom manuals list Cortinarius as a "safe" (albeit 
mediocre.) genus-but nothing could be farther from the truth. Cortinarius, in fact, 
contains several deadly poisonous species (particularly in the subgenus Leprocybe-see 
C. gentilis!) whose effects on the human body re greatly delayed (for up to three weeks!). 
Therefore it is best not to eat ANY Cortinarius, especially in view of the large number of 
poorly known or difficult-to-identify species. (Even some of those proclaimed to be edible 
may not be safe, since there is no assurance that the eater identified them correctly.) 
Cortinarius is a tempting potential food source, however, so if you are adamant about 
experimenting, then stick to the ones with viscid caps (none of which, as yet, are known 
to be deadly poisonous), and wait at least two weeks-rather than the usual two days- 
after your first "test" before indulging in more. 
Because Cortinarii are so prominent and colorful, the selection of species in this book 
is fairly sizable, at least in comparison to other giant-but more mundane-genera such as 
Inoeybe and Psathyrella. Over 130 species of Cortinarius are mentioned (not all of them 
native to California) and 34 are fully described. Remember, however, that these 130+ 
species represent only a fraction of the total number that occur. The field marks listed are 
often insufficient for positive identification, and many of the descriptions are meant to 
serve as models or "archetypes" for a large number of species (e.g., brown "T elamonias" 
with a club-sha ped stalk and medium-sized ca p are typified by C. laniger). Thus most of the 
names in this chapter should be seen as suggestions-rather than statements-as to what 
your mysterious Cortinarius might be. Those wishing to verify their identifications should 
consult a more definitive source, such as Alexander Smith's keys to North American 
Cortinarii (which are not available to the public), or Daniel Stuntz's key to species ofthe 
Pacific Northwest and Meinhard Moser's keys to those of Europe, which are (see Sug- 
gested Readings and Primary References). 
* Even Captain Charles Mcilvaine, that intrepid turn-of-the-century toadstool-tester who sung the praises of such 
flaccid, featureless, fleshless fungi as Coprinus ephemerus("choice as a flavoring") and Psathyrella candolleana 
("tender: one ofthe best"), was non-plussed by the Cortinarii, for on more than one occasion he characterized their 
flavor as "more or less that of rotten wood." However, one colleague of mine has a dissenting interpretation of 
McIlvaine's comparison: he reasons that Mcilvaine's tastes (which included a fondness for stinkhorns) were so 
bizarre and eccentric that "rotten wood" was undoubtedly high up on his list of "best edibles," and consequently, 
so were the Cortinarii! 
420 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Key to Cortinarius 
I. Fruiting body typically developing underground (but cap may surface in wet weather), the veil 
membranous or somewhat membranous and persistently covering the gills (i.e., either re- 
maining intact through maturity or shredding radially but not rupturing); found mostly under 
mountain conifers ............................................................ 2 
I. Not as above; if developing underground then veil not persistent and membranous ....... 4 
2. Cap purplish or lavender-tinged ................. C. velatus(see C. magnivelatus, p.442) 
2. Cap white to yellow, ochre, or yellow-brown (not purplish) .......................... 3 
3. Cap whitish when fresh; veil tough, often not rupturing ........... C. magnivelatus, p. 442 
3. Cap yellow to yellow-brown or tan (or rusty-stained); veil not as tough or thick as above, often 
shredding radially ............... C. veTTucispoTUS & others (see C. magnivelatus, p. 442) 
4. Cap viscid or slimy when moist (it may dry out, but look for adhering debris) ........... 5 
4. Cap not normally viscid (in wet weather it may be slightly viscid or tacky but never slimy) 61 
5. Cap radially corrugated or coarsely wrinkled, yellow-brown to ochre, tawny, or rusty-brown; 
gills purplish at first but soon brown to rusty-cinnamon; stalk with a basal bulb when young, 
but bulb often obscure in age; found under hardwoods in eastern North America, often in 
large numbers ..................................................... C. cOTTugatus 
5. Not as above ................................................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6 
6. Fruiting body massive; stalk 3-7 cm thick and lacking a basal bulb; flesh also very thick; cap 
brownish to russet at the center (often with small flattened scales) and yellowish at margin 
(lacking pronounced violet tones) ...................... C. pondeTOsus & others, p.432 
6. Not as above; either smaller or with violet on cap or stalk with a basal bulb ............. 7 
7. Stalk(at least the lower part) viscid or slimy when moist, sometimes enlarged below but typically 
without an abrupt, rimmed basal bulb(in very wet or very dry weather the viscidity may not be 
evident) ..................................................................... 8 
7. Stalk typically not viscid (but if cap is slimy, some of the slime may drip off onto stalk base); 
stalk with or without an abrupt, rimmed basal bulb ............................... 21 
8. Fruiting body small (cap 2-5 cm broad) and gray, the cap and young gills with a slight lilac tinge 
that often disappears in age; stalk whitish with a bluish-tinged apex when young; found under 
conifers; rather rare .................................................... C. steTilis 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Fruiting body purple, violet, or bluish in some part, at least when young and fresh ...... 10 
9. Violet or bluish shades completely absent ................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 17 
10. Stalk typically club-shaped (thicker at base) ...................................... II 
10. Stalk equal, tapered downward, or spindle-shaped (swollen slightly in the middle and tapered 
below) ..................................................................... 13 
II. Cap violet or lavender well into maturity C. iodes& others (see C. cy/indripes group, p. 430) 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Center of cap rusty or tawny becoming chestnut-brown in age, the margin paler; gills violet- 
tinged when very young ............ _. C. castaneicoloT(see C. cy/indripes group, p. 430) 
12. Not as above ................. C. gTiseoluTidus& others (see C. cy/indripes group, p. 430) 
13. Lower portion of stalk with conspicuous transverse or concentric bands, plaques, or scaly belts 
formed by the universal veil; cap yellow-brown to rusty-orange or rusty-brown at maturity 
(margin may be bluish or violet when young) ................ C. collinitus group, p.431 
13. Not as above (stalk occasionally with some scaly belts, but if so then cap darker or differently 
colored) ................................................................... 14 
14. Cap purple or lilac, at least when young ............. C. cylindripes group & others, p. 430 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Cap blackish to deep chestnut-brown to dark olive-brown, often fading to cinnamon-brown or 
yellowish-brown in age, the margin often becoming radially wrinkled or grooved; stalk long, 
usually rooting deeply in soil; common under northern conifers ..................... 16 
15. Not as above; cap differently colored, at least when young (i.e., paler or brighter) _. _ . . . _ . . _ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. pseudosaloT & C. delibutus (see C. cy/indripes group, p. 430) 
CORTIN ARIUS 
421 
16. Cap blackish to deep chestnut-brown when young, fading to cinnamon in age; gills not violet 
or bluish when young ...................................... C. vanduzeTensis, p.432 
16. Cap colored as above or ranging to olive- or yellow-brown; gills violet or bluish-tinged when 
young .................................... C. elatioT (see C. eol/initus group, p. 431) 
17. Stalk usually club-shaped or thickened below, at least when young; fruiting body sometimes 
rather small ................................................................ 18 
17. Stalk more or less equal or tapered downward; fruiting body medium-sized or larger .... 20 
18. Fruiting body medium-sized (cap usually 5 cm broad or more); stalk usually at least I cm thick 
at apex, typically with ochre-brown patches of veil tissue below; odor and taste not distinctive 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . C. pallidifolius (see C. eol/initus gro up, p. 431 ) 
18. Not as above; fruiting body rather small (cap usually less than 5 cm broad); odor typically 
fragrant or taste of ca p surface bitter ........................................... 19 
19. Odor fragrant; flesh, young gills, and stalk yellow .. C. citTinifolius (see C. pereomis, p. 436) 
19. Odor typically mild but taste very bitter (at least of the cap surface); flesh and stalk whitish 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. vibTalilis, p. 429 
20. Lower portion of stalk typically with transverse or concentric bands, plaques, or scaly belts 
of universal veil tissue; found under both hardwoods and conifers C. collinitus group, p. 431 
20. Not as above; associated principally with conifers ................... C. mucosus, p. 429 
21. Immature gills sooty olive to olive, greenish, or yellow-green, or soon becoming these colors 22 
21. Immature gills differently colored (including yellow) ............................... 28 
22. Stalk lacking an abrupt, rimmed basal bulb; cap sooty-olive when young (may be browner or 
tawnier in age), the skin often bitter-tasting; gills usually sooty-olive also ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. infTactus & others, p. 435 
22. Not as above; stalk usually with an abrupt, often rimmed basal bulb, at least when young 23 
23. Immature gills with violet faces or entire gills with a fleeting violet phase at first ........ 24 
23. Gills never violet ............................................................. 25 
24. Gills at first with violet faces and olive edges C. montanus& others (see C. eedretorum, p.439) 
24. Gills violet-tinged when very young but soon entirely olive to greenish or greenish-yellow ... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. scaUTUS group, p.440 
25. Cap reddish to reddish-brown or orange-brown when fresh, at least at the center .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. oTichalceus& C. Tufo-olivaceus(see C. seaurus group, p. 440) 
25. Not as above ............:................................................... 26 
26. Cap olive; gills olive to olive-yellow; stalk yellowish or olive-tinged; found mainly under conifers 
in the Pacific Northwest _.................... C. pTasinus (see C. seaurus group, p. 440) 
26. Not as above; usually more brightly colored, -at least in part; widespread .............. 27 
27. Gills green; stalk pale bluish when fresh; found in eastern North America under hardwoods 
.. . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. viTentophyllus(see C. seaurus group, p. 440) 
27. Not as above; especially common in the West ................... C. scaUTUS group, p. 440 
28. Some part offruiting body lilac, violet, purple, or bluish when fresh and young(check cap sur- 
face, stalk. immature gills, and flesh) ............................................ 29 
28. Fruiting body completely lacking violet, lilac, or bluish tones ........................ 48 
29. Flesh (at least in base of stalk) staining wine-red when bruised ....................... 72 
29. Not as above (but flesh may stain purple or dull lilac) .............................. 30 
30. Gills and/ or flesh staining purple or dull lilac when bruised (if already purple, then staining 
darker purple) .................................. C. mutabilis group & others, p.437 
30. Not as above ................................................................ 31 
31. Immature gills yellow or purplish with yellow or olive edges ......................... 32 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
32. Flesh partly violet or lilac and partly yellowish or whitish when fruiting body is sliced open 
lengthwise (see Color Plate 105); stalk apex not bluish ..... C. cedretoTum & others, p. 439 
32. Not as above; stalk apex often bluish; gills entirely olive or with olive edges ............... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. montanus (see C. cedretorum, p. 439) 
33. Whitish fibrillose or felty veil remnants usually present on cap (often in the form of a patch) 
.. ...... ..... . ... ._. ...... .... C. calyptratus& C. calyptTodeTmus(see C. regalis, p_ 443) 
33. Not as above ................................................................ 34 
422 CORTINARIACEAE 
34. Stalk with an abrupt, rimmed basal bulb, at least when young ....................... 35 
34. Stalk merely equal or club-shaped, lacking a sharply defined, rimmed basal bulb ....... 43 
35. Basal bulb with a whitish volva-like sheath; cap grayish to bluish-gray; growing mainly under 
spruce ........................................... C. volvatus(see C. rega/is, p.443) 
35. Not as above ................................................................ 36 
36. Cap bright yellow to yellow-brown or ochre (the center sometimes oranger), even when young 
and fresh............................ C. calochrous& others (see C.fu/mineus, p.441) 
36. Cap differently colored (but may develop ochre or yellowish shades in age) ............ 37 
37. Cap dark reddish-brown to chestnut, becoming paler reddish-brown in age; gills pale lilac at 
first, darkening to reddish-brown; found mainly under conifers. especially in southern Oregon 
and northern California ..................................... C. subpurpureophy//us 
37. Not as above ............................................................ _ . .. 38 
38. Cap dark olive or greenish to steel-gray or brown, often streaked or mixed with ochre, blue, or 
gray, and often developing rusty to fulvous tones when older (especially toward center); 
immature gills gray to bluish-gray to bluish-violet (or occasionally violet) ............... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. g/aucopus group & others, p. 437 
38. Not as above; immature gills lilac, violet, or lavender, or if bluer then cap typically bluish to 
bluish-gray or at least differently colored from above .............................. 39 
39. Associated with conifers in the Pacific Northwest; fruiting body modest in size (stalk typically 
less than 1.5 cm thick at apex); gills lilac to pinkish-lilac when young . C. o/ymp;anus, p.439 
39. Not as above; especially common under hardwoods............ .................... 40 
40. Fruiting body (or at least the immature gills and stalk apex) with a bluish tinge when fresh 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. caes;ocyaneus(see C. o/ympianus, p.439) 
40. Not as above (gills and stalk apex more violet or purple than blue) ................... 41 
41. Mature fruiting body with a small but sharply defined basal bulb; taste usually bitter (at least 
of the cap cuticle); cap with violet or lilac tones at least at the margin; common under oak in 
California ............................................. C. sodagn;tus group, p.438 
41. Not as above; found mainly under hardwoods in eastern North America .............. 42 
42. Cap and basal bulb discoloring ochre or buffy-tan fairly quickly ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. ve/;cop;a(see C. o/ympianus, p.439) 
42. Not as above ....... C. m;ch;ganens;s, C. aggregatus, & others (see C. o/ympianus, p.439) 
43. Cap usually lilac or lavender at least at the margin; stalk usually very thick (2-5 cm) or if not then 
odor usually sweetish (like overripe pears) ....................................... 44 
43. Not as above ................................................................ 45 
44. Stalk very thick (2-5 cm); flesh thick and firm ............... C. ba/teatus& others, p. 433 
44. Stalk typically 2 cm thick or less; odor usually sweetish ............. c. subJoet;dus, p. 434 
45. Stalk with pale tawny patches or fibrils, thinly viscid at first; cap tawny to chestnut-brown with 
a paler (buff-colored) margin .......... C. castane;color(see C. cy/indripes group, p. 430) 
45. Not as above ................................................................ 46 
46. Cap yellow to yellow-brown. tawny, or fulvous C. var;us & others (see C. mu/tiformis. p. 442) 
46. Cap differently colored ........................................................ 47 
47. Cap reddish-brown to liver-brown or dull purplish; gills usually violet or lilac when young .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. var;;c%r& others (see C. mu/tiformis, p.442) 
47. Not as above; gills usually bluer or grayer ................... C. g/aucopus group, p.437 
48. Odor distinctly fragrant and sweet (break open the flesh if there is any doubt) .......... 49 
48. Not as above (but odor may be distinctive) ............... _.. . . ............... .... 51 
49. Odor aniselike; stalk with a basal bulb, at least when young C. odorifer(see C. percomis, p. 436) 
49. Not as above ......................................................... _...... 50 
50. S talk and flesh yellow or yellowish ................................ C. percom;s, p. 436 
50. Stalk and flesh white or whitish ............ C. luteoarm;lIatus(?) (see C. percomis, p.436) 
51. Odor strongly pungent (like green corn or corn silk); gills and cap yellowish when young, the cap 
becoming browner or redder in age; stalk usually with darker fibrillose patches or zones; found 
under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ................................. C. superbus 
51. Not as above ................................................................ 52 
CORTINARIUS 
423 
52. Gills yellow to yellow-orange or yellow-brown when young and stalk with an abrupt, usually 
rimmed basal bulb (at least when young) ........................................ 53 
52. Not as above ................................................................ 54 
53. Cap bright green to citrine-green when fresh (sometimes brownish at the center); common 
under oak in California .............. c. sp. (unidentified) (see C. scaurus group, p. 440) 
53. Cap not green ........................................ C. fulmineus & others, p. 441 
54. Cap brownish to dingy-flesh colored, but usually with a patch or patches of white fibrillose 
or felty veil material, only slightly viscid; stalk with a basal bulb; found under oak in California 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. regalis, p. 443 
54. Not as above ................................................................ 55 
55. 
55. 
56. 
56. 
Cap white or whitish (or at times ranging to buff or pale tan) ....... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 56 
Cap darker or brighter than above ..................................... - . . . . . . .. 57 
Stalk with a basal bulb; found under hardwoods in eastern North America ...... C. albidus 
Not as above; stalk equal or club-shaped (thicker below) but lacking a prominent basal bulb; 
often found under conifers ................................................... 138 
Lower portion of stalk with concentric belts or transverse bands of colored (usually ochre) 
veil tissue ............................... C. crocolitus(see C. collinitus group, p. 431) 
Not as above ................................................................ 58 
57. 
57. 
58. 
Cap radially corrugated or wrinkled, cinnamon to pinkish-cinnamon to cinnamon-brown; 
found in the Pacific Northwest under conifers ........... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. corrugis 
Cap not radially corrugated .................................................... 59 
Veil copious, usually leaving remnants oncap marginandf or a fibrillose white sheath or patches 
on the stalk (and often a slight ring or annulus) .... C. turmalis(see C. multiformis, p.442) 
Not as above; veil not so copious (but may leave a few remnants) ..................... 60 
Stalk 1-4 cm thick and very firm, usually stout, more or less equal or narrowed slightly at the 
base ............................................ C. crassus (see C. balteatus, p. 433) 
Stalk with a basal bulb (at least when young) or not as thick and stout as above ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. multiJormis & others, p. 442 
Fresh fruiting body at least partially purplish, bluish, lilac, lavender-gray, lavender-white, 
etc. (check immature gills, stalk apex, flesh, and cap) .............................. 62 
Fresh fruiting body completely lacking violet, bluish, or pale lavender shades .......... 87 
Lower part of stalk with reddish bands, patches, or "bracelets" formed by the universal veil 
or stalk with a fiery orange to red base .......................................... 63 
Not as above (but upper stalk may have a ring of rusty hairs from the cortina) .......... 64 
Stalk 3-7 mm thick at apex, with reddish to vinaceous patches, fibrils, or "bracelets"; cap 2-5 
cm broad ................................. C. boulderensis (see C. armillatus, p. 448) 
Usually larger than above; stalk with a bright orange or red base ........ C. rubripes, p. 449 
Stalk typically with a persistent, somewhat membranous annulus (ring) formed by the veil, 
usually club-shaped or bulbous; gills broad, well-spaced, deep purpli&h becoming dark 
cinnamon-brown; cap deep purplish to brownish to copper-brown, often fibrillose or hoary; 
found mainly under hardwoods in eastern North America C. torvus (see C. evernius, p. 450) 
Not as above ................................................................ 65 
Cap hygrophanous (fading markedly as it loses moisture) and smooth (bald) or at most with a 
few whitish veil remnants near the margin ....................................... 66 
Cap smooth, silky, fibrillose, hairy, or scaly, but if smooth then not markedly hygrophanous 72 
Fruiting body small (cap 1-3 cm broad; stalk less than 5 mm thick) ...................... 
........................... C.pulchellus& C. subflexipes(see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
Fruiting body medium-sized (largerthan above) ................................... 67 
Fresh fruiting body violet-tinged only at apex of stalk ... C. brunneus (see C. laniger, p. 451) 
Fresh fruiting body showing more violet than above (but violet tones may fade) ........ 68 
Stalk with conspicuous remnants from the universal veil ............................ 69 
Stalk with inconspicuous veil remnants (or lacking them) .............................. 
........ .... ........ . . . . .. . ......... C. impennis& C. adustus(see C. evernius, p. 450) 
58. 
59. 
59. 
60. 
60. 
61. 
61. 
62. 
62. 
63. 
63. 
64. 
64. 
65. 
65. 
66. 
66. 
67. 
67. 
68. 
68. 
t - 
" 
 
 
...... 
I. 
, ,:\ 
.J' . 
....- 
,. 
.' 
<\. 
"'- 
Cort;nar;us pholideus occurs mostly with birch. Note prominent scales on cap and stalk. 
69. Universal veil remnants on stalk yellowish to buff . C. subpurpureus (see C. evernius. p. 450) 
69. Not as above ................................................................ 70 
70. Stalk more or less club-shaped (thicker at base) ....... C.lucorum (see C. evern;us. p. 450) 
70. Stalk equal or tapering downward .............................................. 71 
71. Stalk often with a narrow, flaring annulus (ring); cap pale when fresh .................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. urb;cus (see C. evern;us. p. 450) 
71. Not as above ........................................... C. evern;us & others, p. 450 
72. Flesh bluish or violet but staining wine-red to wine-brown when cut or bruised, at least in baseD! 
stalk; cap bluish or bluish-gray to grayish-lavender becoming deep purplish-brown in age; 
cap surface usually fibrillose or with flattened scales; gills dark bluish or bluish-violet when 
young; stalk with a basal bulb which often disappears in age; not common ..... C. cyan;tes 
72. Not as above; flesh not staining wine-red when bruised; common ..................... 73 
73. Cap distinctly hairy, scaly, or fibrillose-scaly ...................................... 74 
73. Cap smooth or silky or very slightly scaly (but may have universal veil remnants on it) ... 78 
74. Stalk with only a tinge of violet or bluish-gray and soon fading to whitish; cap brownish to buff 
beneath a white to grayish-white fibrillose-hairy layer (cap lacking violet or bluish shades); 
found under conifers ............................. C. plumiger (see C. evernius. p. 450) 
74. Not as above ................................................................ 75 
75. Entire fruiting body deep violet (sometimes nearly black) when fresh (the gills may be rusty- 
dusted in age) ................................................. C. violaceus, p. 446 
75. Not as above; fruiting body paler, browner, or with only a tinge of violet .............. 76 
76. Cap and stalk with brown to cinnamon-brown scales; stalk not radically bulbous (see above 
photo); fairly common under hardwoods (especially birch) in eastern North America, rarely 
in the Pacific Northwest ..................... C.pholideus(see C. squamulosus. p. 445) 
76. Not with above features; stalk not usually conspicuously scaly ....................... 77 
77. Stalk radically bulbous; cap with brown to dark chocolate-brown scales; found under hard- 
woods in eastern North America, rare (or absent) in West ......... C. squamulosus, p.445 
77. Not as above; stalk not radically bulbous and/ or habitat different .................... 78 
78. Flesh in stalk rusty-brown to cinnamon-, tawny-, or yellow-brown (often marbled); associated 
with conifers ................................................. C. traganus, p. 447 
78. Not as above (flesh in stalk usually white to buff or tinged violet) ..................... 79 
424 
, J 
II! 
..'\. 
" 
-:. 
.1',.,." 
" ',\... 
. . 
. 
Cortinarius bolaris favors beech and other hardwoods in eastern North America. Note distinctive 
red fibrils or scales on the cap and stalk. 
79. Stalk with buff to tan, ochre, or brownish-yellow patches, zones, or "bracelets" formed by 
the universal veil ............... C. anomalus& C. caninus (see C. alboviolaceus. p.447) 
79. Not as above; universal veil remnants differently colored (if present) .................. 80 
80. Odor distinctive: either sweetish (like overripe pears), spermatic, or very unpleasant ..... 81 
80. Not as above; odor mild, radishlike, or merely fungal .............................. 83 
81. Odor sweetish, resembling overripe pears ............ c.Jragrans(see C. traganus, p. 447) 
81. Odor unpleasant or spermatic .................................................. 82 
82. Odor usually spermatic; fruiting body rather small. the cap often umbonate; spore print dull 
brown ...................................................... (see Inocybe, p. 455) 
82. Odor unpleasant but not spermatic; fruiting body medium-sized; spore print rusty-brown to 
cinnamon-brown .................... C. camphoratus & others (see C. traganus, p. 447) 
83. Stalk very thick (2-5 cm thick at apex) and firm; cap viscid when moist (but soon dry and often 
shiny) ....................................................... C. balteatus, p. 433 
83. Stalk typically 2 cm thick or less at apex and/ or cap not viscid when young ............ 84 
84. Cap and lower stalk viscid when very young, often with brown or olive-brown patches or spots 
(of dried slime) when older; found under conifers; rare ............................... 
............................ ... . ... C. griseoviolaceus(see C. cylindripes group, p. 430) 
84. Cap and stalk not viscid (or cap only very slightly so in wet weather) and not spotted as above 
(but may develop ochre, tan, buff, or brownish discolorations in age); found under both 
hardwoods and conifers; common ............................................. 85 
H5. Cap predominantly pale violet to lilac-white or silvery-violet or pale bluish-violet (but buff to 
ochre stains may develop in age) ............................................... 86 
85. Cap differently colored (either grayish-buff or soon becoming brown to ochre throughout) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. subpulchrifolius& C. malachius (see C. alboviolaceus, p. 447) 
86. Lower portion of stalk sheathed with conspicuous white universal veil tissue (fibrils); stalk often 
rather long and club-sha ped (thicker below but not abruptly bul bous) C. alboviolaceus, p. 447 
86. Stalk often thick and stout with a prominent basal bulb and/ or lacking conspicuous white 
universal veil tissue ....... C. argentatus& C. subargentatus (see C. alboviolaceus, p. 447) 
87. Growing in sand (but associated with pine); gills rusty-orange to brownisl}-orange when young 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. aureifolius (see C. cinnamomeus group, p. 453) 
87. Not with above combination of characteristics .................................... 88 
88. Cap olive-brown to olive-yellow to yellow-brown with small darker (often blackish) hairs 
or fibrillose scales, especially toward center .................. C. cotoneus group, p. 445 
88. Not as above ................................................................ 89 
89. Cap and stalk with reddish scales, fibrils, and/ or streaks on a paler (whitish to yellowish) 
background; found under hardwoods, especially beech, in eastern North America (see above 
photo) ...................................... C. bolaris(see C. squamulosus. p. 445) 
89. Not as above (but cap and stalk can be entirely reddish or the stalk can have reddish universal 
veil remnants) .............................................................. 90 
425 
426 CORTINARIACEAE 
90. Stalk white to brownish with 1-4 reddish to reddish-brown bands or belts of universal veiltissue 
over the lower portion or stalk with a bright red to orange base or a sheath of vermillion fibrils 
(universal veil remnants) ..................................................... 91 
90. Notasabove(but stalk may be entirely red or orange or the stalk mayhavea single zone ofrusty 
hairs formed by the cortina, usually near apex) ................................... 94 
91. Cap 1-3 cm broad; stalk wholly or partially sheathed by vermillion fibrils ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. min;atopus (see C. rubripes. p. 449) 
91. Not as above; cap usually larger ............................................... 92 
92. Stalk base red to bright orange; associated with hardwoods, especially oak C. rubr;pes, p. 449 
92. Stalk with 1-4 reddish bands or "bracelets"; associated with conifers or birch .......... 93 
93. Typically associated with birch ................................. C. armil/atus, p. 448 
93. Typically associated with conifers (especially in the Pacific Northwest) or with hardwoods 
other than birch ........... C. haematoche/is& C. subtestaceus (see C. armillatus. p.448) 
94. Stalk 6-18 cm long and 0.5-2cm thickatapex, usually whitish and club-shaped (thicker at base); 
gills pale yellow when young; cap creamy to pale buff to yellowish or tawny-brown (often 
darkest at center), silky or minutely scaly; found under hardwoods (especially beech) in eastern 
North America .................................................... C. f/avifo/;us 
94. Not as above ............................................................... 95 
95. Growing on lawns or buried wood; stalk typically 3-5 mm thick and often with a small annulus 
(ring); cap typically less than 4 cm broad, reddish-brown to cinnamon, fading to more or less 
buff as it loses moisture; found in the Pacific Northwest .............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Ga/er;na, Tubar;a, & Allies, p. 399) 
95. Not as above ............................................................... 96 
96. Stalk yellow to bright yellow but the gills whitish to brown (i.e., not brightly colored) when 
young; cap smooth and hygrophanous, fading to yellowish as it loses moisture ........ 97 
96. Not as above; stalk not yellow (but may have yellowish veil remnants), or if stalk yellow then 
immature gills usually brightly colored also or cap minutely scaly ................... 98 
97. Gills whitish when young; cap brown to tan when moist .................... C. ren;dens 
97. Gills brownish or cinnamon when young; cap bronzy-brown to deep olive-brown when moist 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. angu/osus 
98. Gills colorful (yellow, greenish, orange, red, dark red, or bright rusty-orange) when young; 
stalk often colorful also; cap usually not hygrophanous ............................ 99 
98. Gills dull (whitish, grayish, brownish, or dull cinnamon) when young; stalk usually dull also 
(brownish, gray, white, etc.); cap usually hygrophanous .......................... 110 
99. Immature gills orange-red to rusty-orange; cap hygrophanous (dark rust-red but fading as it 
loses moisture); stalk usually paler than cap and gills; found only on the west coast in mixed 
woods and under conifers. . . . . . C. ca/iforn;cus (see C. phoeniceus var. occidentalis. p. 454) 
99. Not as above (if colored as above, then cap not hygrophanous or found elsewhere) .... 100 
100. Immature gills red to dark red ................................................ 101 
100. Immature gills some shade of yellow, olive, orange, or bright cinnamon ............. 104 
101. Entire fruiting body orange-red to red, dark red, or rust-red ....................... 102 
101. At least the stalk (and sometimes cap) yellowish or ochre to yellow-brown ........... 103 
102. Fruiting body cinnabar-red to rusty-red or dark red; found mainly in eastern North America, 
especially under hardwoods ......... C. cinnabarinus & others (see C. sanguineus. p. 454) 
102. Fruiting body blood-red to dark red; found mainly under conifers in northern and western 
North America ........... _ . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. sangu;neus, p. 454 
103. Cap red to dark red or reddish-brown ............ C. phoen;ceus var. occidenta/;s, p. 454 
103. Cap ochre to brown or yellowish .................................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. sem;sangu;neus (see C. phoeniceus var. occidentalis. p. 454) 
104. Cap orange-red to bright rusty-red to coppery-red (or occasionally orange-brown); immature 
gills bright yellow to greenish-yellow or sometimes orangish; associated mainly with conifers 
and willow; not common ............................................ c. u/;g;nosus 
104. Not as above; cap not reddish ................................................ 105 
105. Cap tawny to rusty-orange and covered with numerous minute, erect scales .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. ra;n;erens;s (see C. genti/is. p.444) 
105. Not as above; cap smooth to fibrillose or with a few scales only .................... 106 
CORTINARIUS 
427 
106. Cap smooth and hygrophanous, orange-brown to yellow-brown or ochre when moist, fading 
as it loses moisture; gills ochre-yellow to cinnamon-brown or brown (not particularly bright); 
stalk deep orange-brown or cinnamon-colored, often with a few yellow veil remnants when 
young; fruiting body small (stalk less than 5 mm thick) ................ C. genti/is, p. 444 
106. Not as above; cap smooth to fibrillose or slightly scaly, not hygrophanous; fruiting body 
variously colored but often brighter or more olive than above (especially the stalk) .... 107 
107. Immature gills yellow to olive-yellow or greenish ................................ 108 
107. Immature gills saffron (orange-yellow) to orange or rusty-orange .................. 109 
108. Stalk club-shaped and at least 2.5 cm thick at base; fruiting body bright yellow becoming 
oranger or browner in age ............. C. callisteus (see C. cinnamomeus group. p. 453) 
108. Not as above; stalk more slender and/ or equal; fruiting body sometimes with olive tones 
(but sometimes without) ...................... C. cinnamomeus group & others, p. 453 
109. Cap 3-9 cm broad; stalk usually 0.5-1.5 cm thick; gills ochre to tawny or orangish-cinnamon 
when young; occurrence in North America questionable .............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. C. orellanus& C. speciosissimus(see C. genti/is, p. 444) 
109. Not as above; usually smaller or more slender; gills sometimes brightly colored (saffron, 
orange, etc.); common in North America ........................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c. croceoJo/ius & others (see C. cinnamomeus group. p. 453) 
110. Cap and stalk whitish to grayish or pale tan, but the flesh staining yellow when bruised and 
finally turning (or aging) reddish; widely distributed, but especially common along the west 
coast under conifers ............................ C. rubicundu/us (=c. pseudobo/aris) 
110. Not as above .............................................................. 111 
Ill. Fruiting body small and rather fragile; cap sometimes umbonate, averaging 1-4 (5) cm broad; 
stalk averaging 2-6 mm thick (examine several specimens if unsure!) ................ 112 
Ill. Fruiting body medium-sized or larger; cap not umbonate or only very broadly so, averaging 
4-15 cm broad; stalk averaging 0.5-3 cm thick (check several specimens if unsure) ..... 121 
112. Stalk usually with yellow or yellowish veil remnants, at least when young (check several speci- 
mens); gills ochre-yellow to cinnamon-brown when young ............. C. genti/is, p. 444 
112. Not as above .............................................................. 113 
113. Gills staining black when bruised ...... C. washingtonensis (see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
113. Not as above .............................................................. 114 
114. Cap with a prominent black umbo (otherwise slightly paler) ........................... 
. . .. . ... . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . C. nigrocuspidatus(see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
114. Not as above (but cap may be entirely blackish) ................................. 115 
115. Cap very dark when moist (deep vinaceous-brown to blackish-brown or black), but often paler 
as it loses moisture ......................................................... 116 
115. Cap paler than above when moist ............................................. 119 
116. Stalk with conspicuous white universal veil material, at least when young and fresh '" 117 
116. Stalk with only slight universal veil remnants (if any) ............................. 118 
117. Odor geranium-like (at least when flesh is crushed); found in bogs or other wet places ..... 
....... ...... .... . . " . . ..... . .... .. .. ..... C.pa/eaceus(see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
117. Not as above ............................ C. stemmatus(see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
118. Cap blackish-brown when moist; gills and stalk also very dark; found under conifers ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. uraceus 
118. Cap dark vinaceous-brown when moist; gills tawny-yellowish to pale brownish when young 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. decipiens (see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
119. Cap (and sometimes stalk) minutely scaly .......................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. psammocepha/us& C. incisus (see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
119. Cap more or less smooth .................................................... 120 
120. Cap typically with an acute (sharp) umbo C. acutus & others (see C. obtusus group, p. 452) 
120. Cap typically with an obtuse (blunt) umbo or with none at all C. obtususgroup & others, p. 452 
121. Fruiting body (including stalk) rusty-orange to yellowish or yellow-brown; cap minutely scaly 
and not hygrophanous; not definitely known to occur in North America ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. orellanus& C. specios;ss;mus(see C. genti/is, p. 444) 
121. Not as above; very common in North America .................................. 122 
428 CORTINARIACEAE 
122. Cap brownish to dingy flesh-colored, but often with a whitish patch of universal veil tissue; 
stalk thick (1.5-3.5 em at apex), with a large, abrupt, often rimmed basal bulb; fairly common 
in California under oak .......................................... C. regalis, p. 443 
122. Not as above .............................................................. 123 
123. Cap covered with cinnamon-brown to chocolate-brown scales, not markedly hygrophanous; 
either stalk also with scales or stalk radically bulbous; common under hardwoods in eastern 
North America, rare in the West .............................................. 124 
123. Not as above .............................................................. 125 
124. Stalk radically bulbous and smooth to fibrillose Or only slightly scaly C. squamulosus, p. 445 
124. Stalk equal or slightly thicker below, with brown scales like those on cap ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " C. pholideus (see C. squamu/osus. p. 445) 
125. Cap broadly cone-shaped and finely silky-scaly from the universal veil when young; stalk 
equal, sheathed with white universal veil remnants, soon becoming hollow; cap dark to pale 
cinnamon ........................................................ C. hemitrichus 
125. Not as above (but may be similar in some respects, such as color) ................... 126 
126. Cap blackish-brown when moist; gills and stalk also very dark; found under conifers ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " C. uraceus 
126. Not as above; usually paler or brighter in color .................................. 127 
127. Stalk typically tapered downward or spindle-shaped (swollen near ground and tapered below), 
the base often rooting ....................................................... 128 
127. Stalk typically equal to club-shaped or bulbous ................................. 130 
128. Cap cinnamon-brown when moist ................. C. duracinus(see C./aniger. p.451) 
128. Cap vinaceous-brown to cocoa-colored when moist .............................. 129 
129. Stalk with conspicuous white universal veil remnants C. damascenus (see C. /aniger. p. 451) 
129. Universal veil remnants on stalk absent or evanescent ................................ 
. ... . '" ..... . . .. . .. . ....... . .. ... C.privignus& C. cacao-color (see C./aniger. p. 451) 
130. Cap silky to fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly and white to silvery-gray or pale brownish-gray or 
cap brown beneath a whitish to grayish fibrillose layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 131 
130. Cap darker, at least when moist, and usually more or less smooth or minutely scurfy (but cap 
may fade to buff or paler as it loses moisture) ................................... 133 
131. Cap brown to buff beneath a fibrillose-scaly layer .... C. plumiger (see C. evernius. p. 450) 
131. Cap paler than above and silky to fibrillose (but sometimes becoming pale brownish-gray in 
age) ...................................................................... 132 
132. Cap silky-fibrillose, white to silvery, sometimes becoming pale brownish in age ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. pinetorum (see C. /aniger. p. 451) 
132. Cap whitish or silvery, usually with a faint hint oflavenderorviolet (examine several specimens 
if unsure), silky; flesh and stalk apex often with a violet tinge also ...................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. alboviolaceus & others, p. 447 
133. Cap yellow-brown when moist, fading to pale yellow-orange or orange-buff asit loses moisture 
............................................... C. armeniacus(see C./aniger. p.451) 
133. Cap redder or darker than above, at least when moist ............................ 134 
134. Gills widely spaced; cap smooth or scurfy .............. C. distans(see C./aniger. p. 451) 
134. Not as above .............................................................. 135 
135. Stalk more or less equal ................. C. biformis & C. dilutus (see C. /aniger. p. 451) 
135. Stalk usually club-shaped or swollen below, at least when young (but sometimes equal, so 
examine several specimens if unsure) .......................................... 136 
136. Stalk with conspicuous universal veil remnants, at least when young ................ 137 
136. Stalk with only slight traces of the universal veil, if any (but may have remnants from the 
cortina) ................................. C. triformis&others(see C./aniger. p.451) 
137. Cap dark or dull brown when moist; stalk similarly colored beneath whitish to brownish veil 
remnants, the apex sometimes vinaceous- or violet-tinged C. brunneus(see C./aniger. p. 451) 
137. Cap cinnamon to reddish-brown or chestnut-brown when moist; stalk similarly colored be- 
neath whitish veil remnants, not vinaceous- or violet-tinged at apex C. /aniger & others, p. 451 
138. Cap surface or cuticle bitter-tasting ............. C. crystallinus (see C. vibratiJis. p. 429) 
138. Not as above ................................................ C. lustratus & others 
- .. 
\ 
\ 
!." . 
.. 
\ 
" 
\ I. 
. ,... . 
.. {I 
t 
, .. 
, .' 
\:: 
.. 
...... 
Cortinarius vibratilis. Note small size, slimy cap, and viscid stalk that is swollen at base. 
C ortinarius vibratilis (Bitter Cortinarius) 
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped to convex to nearly plane; surface smooth, viscid 
or slimy when moist, yellowish to tawny, fulvous, orange-brown, or yellow-orange (or in 
one form brown) when fresh, fading as it ages or dries (sometimes to pale tan). Flesh thin, 
whitish; odor mild, taste bitter (especially cap surface). GILLS close, notched to adnate 
or slightly decurrent, at first whitish, soon becoming dull ochre or ta wny and finally cinna- 
mon-brown. STALK 3-7 cm long, 3-10 mm thick at apex, usually clearly thickened below 
(club-shaped) but sometimes equal; viscid or slimy when moist, but in age sometimes viscid 
only at the base; white, smooth or nearly so. UNIVERSAL VEIL slimy, colorless. 
CORTINA scanty, sometimes leaving a few hairs on stalk which trap falling spores. 
SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in forest humus; widely distri- 
buted and fairly common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It usually occurs with 
conifers, but in our area I have collected it under manzanita, madrone, and huckleberry, 
in December. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible due to the bitter taste. (If Russula brevipes is "better kicked than 
picked," then C. vibrati/is is "better kicked than licked!") 
COMMENTS: The small size, viscid tawny cap, and viscid white stalk plus the bitter taste 
-which can usually be detected by pressing your tongue to the surface of the cap-are 
the hallmarks of this petite Cortinarius. It typifies a group of species within the subgenus 
Myxacium which have a club-shaped (thickened) stalk, at least when young. Other species: 
C. crystallinus is similar in size, shape, and bitter taste but is whitish to buff or pale tan 
overall and has a non-viscid stalk. See also C. citrinifolius (under C. percomis). 
Cortinarius mucosus (Slimy Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate, or even uplifted in age; surface 
smooth and very slimy when moist, chestnut- to reddish-brown or bright orange-brown, 
often paler (tawny or ochre) in age. Flesh whitish; odor and taste mild. GILLS close, 
usually more or less adnexed, whitish to grayish when very young, becoming pale ochra- 
429 
430 
CORTINARIACEAE 
ceous or tawny, then cinnamon-brown from ripening spores. STALK 4-15 cm long, 1-2 
(2.5) cm thick, more or less equal, slimy or viscid when moist, white or whitish but some- 
times rusty-stained from spores; not breaking up into conspicuous scaly belts. UNI- 
VERSAL VEIL whitish, slimy, disappearing or leaving indistinct remains on stalk. 
CORTIN A usually forming a superior, hairy-fibrillose zone on stalk which is stained rusty- 
brown by spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 11-18)( 5-7.5 microns, elongated- 
elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in mixed woods and under conifers (parti- 
cularly pine and spruce); widely distributed, but especially common in the West in the late 
summer and fall, and in the southern United States. I have seen large fruitings in Wash- 
ington, New Mexico, Arizona, and northern California, but not in our area. Cortinarius- 
classifier Joe Ammirati says it has been found under birch and willow in the Brooks Range 
in northern Alaska; it also occurs with hemlock. 
EDIBILITY: Better eschewed than stewed. It is too slippery to be worthwhile, and its 
edibility is unknown. 
COMMENTS: The smooth, viscid, tawny to orange-brown or reddish-brown cap and 
viscid, whitish, equal stalk are the distinguishing features of this "slimy sucker." The cap 
color is reminiscent of C. collinitus, but the stalk lacks the scaly belts characteristic of that 
species, and the taste is not bitternorthe stalk club-shaped as in C. vibrati/is. Phaeocollybia 
species are somewhat similar, but lack a cortina and have a long, rooting stalk. C. turma/is 
(see comments under C. multiformis) is also similar, but has a dry stalk. 
Cortinarius cylindripes group (Slimy Purple Cortinarius) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex or broadly bell-shaped becoming broadly umbonate to plane 
or with an uplifted margin; surface smooth or in age sometimes wrinkled, viscid to ex- 
tremely slimy when moist, at first lavender or violet, but fading quickly or slowly (often 
from center outward) to yellowish, brownish-ochre, tawny, brown, or paler. Flesh 
rather thin, violet-tinged becoming whitish; taste mild. GILLS at first lavender or grayish- 
lavender, soon grayish or grayish-cinnamon with whitish, finely scalloped edges. finally 
rusty-cinnamon; adnate to adnexed or notched, close. STALK 5-15 cm long, 1-2.5 (3) cm 
thick, equal or at times spindle-shaped when young (swollen slightly in the middle); viscid 
or slimy throughout or at least over lower portion; violet to silvery-violet or lavender in part 
or throughout, but often fading somewhat (like cap) in age; smooth or with whitish to 
violet scales above. UNIVERSAL VEIL slimy, violet, forming a slime sheath on stalk. 
CORTINA obscured by slime, evanescent or leaving a few hairs on stalk. SPORE PRINT 
dark cinnamon-brown; spores 12-17 )( 5.5-8 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in woods; widely distributed and locally 
abundant (along with similar species) in the late fall and winter. Like C. balteatus, it tends to 
fruit with ericaceous shrubs and trees, e.g., manzanita, madrone, and/ or huckleberry. 
EDIBILITY: Better eyed than fried; the snotlike universal veil will deter most. 
COMMENTS: This species may not be the most distinctive or desirable of our local 
Cortinarii, but it unquestionably qualifies as the slimiest. The yellowish to brownish or 
lavender cap, slimy universal veil, and viscid, more or less equal, violet or lavender stalk are 
the principal diagnostic characters of C. cy/indripes, but there are numerous look-alikes, 
including: C. stillatitius, with only slightly roughened spores; C. salor, with smaller, round 
spores; C. pseudosalor, similarly colored in age, but without a purplish cap when young; 
C. splendidus, with a small (3-5 cm) liver-brown to tawny cap, also found with conifers; 
C. iodes (=c. heliotropicus) and C. iodioides, with a purple cap that doesn't fade much plus 
a club-shaped to spindle-shaped stalk when young (the latter also has bitter-tasting slime); 
. 
.. 
. 
t 
.. , 
'.. 
; 
;., 
.... 
. t' 
.. 
... 
Cortinarius cy/indripes group includes a number of purple or partially purple species with a slimy 
cap and stalk. The stalk is equal or slightly spindle-shaped and not conspicuously banded. 
C. griseovio/aceus, a small violet-tinged conifer-lover whose cap and stalk are only thinly 
viscid (if at all); and C. griseo/uridus, with a club-shaped stalk when young and a violet 
to olive or ochre cap, found under conifers in the Rocky Mountains. All of these have 
viscid, violet-tinged stalks that lack the distinctive belts characteristic of C. co/linitus. 
and none have caps as dark or as wrinkled as those of C. vanduzerensis and C. elatior. 
Other violet-tinged Myxaciums include: C. castaneic%r, found under northern conifers, 
with a whitish to tawny, club-shaped stalk, pale violet gills when very young, and a buff 
to tawny to chestnut-brown (darker at the center) cap; and C. de/ibutus and C. sphaero- 
sporus (two very similar if not identical species), with a bright yellow to ochre or straw- 
colored cap, violet-tinged gills at first, and an equal to club-shaped whitish stalk that 
often has yellowish veil patches (or slime) below nd often has a violet-tinged apex. 
Cortinarius collinitus group Color Plate 104 
(Belted Slimy Cortinarius) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate to plane; surface 
smooth, slimy or viscid, color variable: yellowish to orange-yellow, orange-brown, tawny, 
ochre, fulvous, or even reddish-brown, the margin often paler or yellower (or in one form 
bluish-violet) and sometimes striate. Flesh firm, whitish to yellowish-buff. GILLS close, 
adnate to adnexed or notched, pallid or pale grayish (or violet-tinged in one form) when 
young, becoming brown and finally rusty-brown in age. STALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-2 cm 
thick, equal or tapering downward, usually rooting somewhat in the humus; viscid or slimy 
when moist, color variable but usually whitish above, and lower portion usually breaking 
up into irregular whitish, yellowish, ochre, and/ or rusty-brown (or in one form violet or 
bluish-violet) bands, patches, or scaly rings (but these sometimes obscure). UNIVERSAL 
VEIL fibrillose beneath a layer of slime, leaving bands or patches on stalk. CORTINA 
pallid, usually forming a ring of hairs near top of stalk which turns rusty-brown from falling 
spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-15 x 6-8.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under both hardwoods and conifers; 
widespread in the northern hemisphere and fairly common in our area in the late fall and 
winter under tanoak and madrone at higher elevations in the coastal mountains (often 
mingling with C. cotoneus and C. infract us). It is also abundant under aspen in the southern 
Rocky Mountains and the Southwest and with conifers in the Pacific Northwest. 
EDIBILITY: Better neglected than collected. In spite of the slime it is said to be edible, 
but it is a species "complex," and some of the variants are poorly known or untested. 
COMMENTS: This species "complex" is relatively easy to recognize by virtue oftheslimy- 
viscid cap and belted or scaly, viscid stalk. It is a very confused group taxonomically, 
however, and names like C. trivia/is and C. mucif/uus have been used to describe some of 
431 
432 
CORTINARIACEAE 
the variants which differ in color and spore size. Our local version, which might be C. 
trivialis, does not show violet on the stem, and neither does the common aspen-loving 
form. C. e/at;or is a similar species that is not so strikingly banded. It has a dark brown to 
olive-brown or yellow-brown cap that is often radially wrinkled or grooved at the margin 
in age, violet or bluish-tinged gills when young, and a tapered, rooting stalk that is also 
bluish- or violet-toned (and slimy). It favors conifers and is fairly common in northern 
California and the Pacific Northwest. Other species: C. pa//;difo/;us has pallid gills 
when young and a viscid club-shaped stalk with ochre-brown patches or zones; it is also 
found under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, especially fir. C. croco/;tus (=c. tr;um- 
phans?) and close relatives have a yellowish to brown viscid cap and a dry stalk marked 
with yellow-brown to ochre belts or patches (see photo on p.419); they favor hardwoods. 
Cortinarius vanduzerensis 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, somewhat conical becoming broadly conical or convex; surface 
smooth, very slimy when moist, deep chestnut-brown to nearly black when young, be- 
coming paler chesnut and finally cinnamon-brown in age, often wrinkled radially or 
corrugated at maturity, especially toward margin. Flesh pallid to cinnamon-buff; odor 
mild. GILLS close, adnate or adnexed, pallid or buff becoming pale brown and finally 
dull cinnamon-brown. STALK 8-20 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or often tapered slightly 
toward the base, often deeply rooted, viscid to very slimy, bluish-violet to violet to dark 
lavender above, paler below, often fading in age. UNIVERSAL VEIL slimy, sheathing at 
least the lower half of the stalk and occasionally breaking up into concentric zones. 
CORTINA forming a ring of hairs near top of stalk or disappearing. SPORE PRINT 
rusty-brown; spores 11-15 )( 7-9 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers; known only from northern 
California and the Pacific Northwest, where it is fairly common in the fall and early winter. 
I have found it several times under Sitka spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too slippery to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The dark slimy cap, slimy violet or bluish-violet stalk, and pallid to brown 
gills when young form a distinctive combination offeatures. It closely resembles C. etatior 
(see comments under the C. col/initus group) in shape, size, and the wrinkled cap at 
maturity, but does not have the bluish-violet immature gills of that species. The stalk 
often roots deeply in the ground, but the presence of a veil distinguishes it from Phaeo- 
collybia. The stalk occasionally shows concentric ring-zones, but not to the extent of 
C. col/initus. (Violet-stalked forms ofthe latter also have a brighterorpalercap.) For other 
similar ..Myxaciums" with paler caps, see C. cylindripes group. Also see photo on p. 433. 
Cortinarius ponderosus (Ponderous Cortinarius) 
CAP 10-35 cm broad, convex becoming nearly plane in old age; surface viscid to slimy 
when moist, brown to cinnamon or russet at the center, with small, flattened, spotlike, 
russet to rusty-brown or brown scales; margin usually yellow or ochre-yellow to yellow- 
olive or tawny, remaining inrolled for a long time. Flesh very thick and firm, whitish or 
buff; odor mild to somewhat spermatic (Inocybe-like). GILLS close, slightly decurrent 
to adnate or sometimes adnexed, lilac-tinged when young( at least near margin), becoming 
dingy ochre and finally rusty-brown as spores mature; often with rusty or russet spots or 
stains in age. STALK 8-20 cm long, (3) 4-7 cm thick, equal or slightly enlarged below or 
tapered at the base; solid, very firm and hard; viscid below when moist; apex pallid or 
colored like gills, lower portion with yellow-ochre to rusty-brown or russet stains and/ or 
fibrils or fibrillose patches. UNIVERSAL VEIL slimy, yellow, disappearing or leaving 
h 
\ 
" 
......' 
"" 
i 
."" 
':. 
"" 
" 
l' 
Left: Cortinarius vanduzerensis has a dark slimy cap and long, violet-tinged stalk. Right: Cortinarius 
ponderosus (or something very similar-see comments below). This species may be the largest of 
all the Cortinarii, but this is a rather small specimen. 
slime on stalk. CORTINA often leaving a hairy zone on upper stalk. SPORE PRINT 
rusty-brown; spores 8.5-11 )( 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious or in arcs on ground in mixed woods (oak, 
ponderosa pine, etc.) in northern California and southern Oregon in late fall and winter; 
not common, but often prolific when it fruits. A very similar if not identical species occurs 
under oak and madrone (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Better chucked than plucked. It is certainly large enough to be tempting, 
but its edibility has not been determined, and several Cortinarii are very poisonous. 
COMMENTS: This massive Cortinarius can almost be identified by its size alone. The 
stalk is exceptionally hard and thick and the fruiting bodies develop gradually over a con- 
siderable length of time. An equally ponderous but possibly distinct Cortinarius occurs 
in our area. It differs in several minorrespects: the stalk is dry or only slightly viscid (tacky), 
the intermediate color phase of the gills is grayish rather than ochre, the cap is viscid but not 
usually slimy (and the slime on the cap, when present, is not yellow), and the upper half of 
the stalk is slightly different in color. In size, shape, and overall aspect, however, it is 
remarkably similar (see photograph). Whether it is just a variation of C. ponderosus or a 
distinct species is uncertain, but collectors should have no trouble recognizing it. For other 
large species without a pronounced basal bulb, see C. balteatus. 
C ort;nar;us balteatus 
CAP (3) 6-20 (25) cm broad, broadly convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane in 
age; surface viscid when moist but soon dry and often shiny, smooth, without scales but 
sometimes appearing streaked or blotched; dull violet or lavender to lavender-gray when 
young (but sometimes whitish while still covered by humus), soon becoming tawny to 
tawny-olive or brown from the center outward, the margin usually remaining lavender 
until old age. Flesh thick, firm, whitish to grayish to buff or slightly violet-tinted under the 
cuticle; odor mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, whitish or tinged violet 
to violet-gray when young, gradually becoming brown as spores mature. STALK 5-12 cm 
long, (I) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal above, often slightly narrowed at base (but sometimes 
thicker); firm, solid, dry, pallid or lavender becoming brownish-stained in age, especially 
below (or staining yellow in one form). CORTIN A disappearing or leaving hairs on stalk 
which trap falling spores.- SPORE PRINT dull cinnamon-brown; spores 9-11 )( 5-6 
microns, elliptical, roughened. 
433 
, 
,. 
j 
. , " 
\.. : 0..& 
. . 
'" 
, 
'\ 
-".' 
:, 'f 
.. 
1'. . ""'" 
ill> 
; 
Corlinarius ballealus is a large firm purple-tinged species. Note how the stalk lacks a basal bulb. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under hardwoods and sometimes 
conifers, usually with members of the Ericaceae (huckleberry, manzanita, madrone, etc.) 
also present; widely distributed. In our area it is sometimes common in the fall and early 
winter under madrone. Usually only one crop is produced but the fruiting bodies develop 
and decay slowly, and so may be found over a period of several weeks. I have also seen it in 
the Oregon Cascades (near Crater Lake) in both the spring and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. As Alexander Smith points out, it is firm and meaty enough to 
warrant experimentation-but in light of the recent rash of poisonings caused by species 
of Cortinarius, who wants to be the one to try it? 
COMMENTS: This cumbersome Cortinarius can be recognized by its violet-tinged 
gills when young, violet-tinted cap margin, and hard thick stem which is not abruptly 
bulbous. The cap is only thinly viscid and may not seem so at all in dry weather. In wet 
weather our form is often full oftiny springtail beetles (columbalids). Other cumbersome, 
viscid-capped Cortinarii without an abrupt basal bulb include: C. largus, very similar but 
with violet-tinged flesh and an ochre to reddish-brown cap in age; C. balteato-cumatilis, 
also quite similar but with an odor "like overripe pears" (Stuntz); and C. crassus, with a 
yellow-brown to russet or reddish-brown cap, short thick stalk, and pallid to buff gills 
which gradually darken to cinnamon. The latter is fairly common under western conifers, 
especially at higher elevations (I have seen it in the Rockies). 
Cortinarius subfoetidus 
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, broadly umbonate to convex or plane in age; surface viscid or slimy 
when moist, smooth or appearing fibrillose, bright lavender or violet or at times bluish- 
lavender, in age sometimes fading at the center to buff or paler. Flesh tinged cap color, paler 
in age; odor distinctly fragrant, but with a fetid (nauseating) component. GILLS close, 
adnexed or notched to adnate, at first lilac or violet, but becoming pale to dull brown and 
finally rusty-brown in age. STALK 5-8 cm long, O.7-2cm thick, more or less equal, colored 
like cap or paler (often fading), the apex often whitish; not viscid. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
fibrillose, forming a pale lavender to violet sheath over lower portion of stalk. CORTINA 
transient, sometimes leaving a few hairs at stalk apex which trap falling spores. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 )( 5-5.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
434 
CORTINARIUS 
435 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in duff and moss under conifers; 
known only from the Pacific Northwest, fruiting primarily in the fall, especially with 
hemlock and/ or fir. I have seen it in northern Idaho, where, according to Alexander Smith, 
it is more common than anywhere else. 
EDIBILITY: Better wasted than tasted. 
COMMENTS: The sickeningly sweet odor (which has been likened to that of overripe 
pears) and bright lavender to violet color combine to make this one of the easiest of all 
Cortinarii to recognize. Alas, the casual hunter may not get a chance to recognize it 
because it is not a very common species. The viscid cap distinguishes it from C. traganus, 
C. camphoratus and other "Sericeocybes," while the stalk is neither viscid as in the C. 
cylindripes group nor bulbous as in C. olympianus and other purplish "Bulbopodiums." 
Although uncommon, it attracts more than its shar:e of attention because of its beautiful 
color. C. balteato-cumati/is (see comments under C. balteatus) in similar in odor and 
color but is much more robust (stalk typically at least 2 cm thick). 
Cort;nar;us ;nfractus (Sooty-Olive Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-13 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface 
viscid when moist, dark olive to sooty-olive becoming slightly browner (dingy yellow- 
brown) in age or sometimes mottled with tawny shades; margin sometimes wavy and/ or 
faintly zoned. Flesh thick, firm, whitish or tinged violet or ochre-buff; taste bitter (at least of 
the skin). GILLS notched to adnexed or ad nate, close, dark olive to sooty-olive or olive- 
brown, or in some forms tinged violet at first, becoming dark cinnamon-brown in old age. 
ST ALK 3-13 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, equal or more often enlarged slightly below; solid, 
fibrillose, dry, whitish or tinged capcolor( or in some forms tinged violet at apex), and often 
dingy olive-brown toward the base. CORTINA pale grayish, usually forming a hairy 
median or superior zone on stalk which turns rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 x 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and conifers; widely 
distributed and common. In our area it fruits in the fall and winter, usually under tanoak 
and madrone (often accompanied by C. collinitus, C. cotoneus, and Entoloma species). 
EDIBILITY: Better overlooked than cooked-it is probably bitter-tasting. 
Cortinarius infractus is a common sooty-olive species with a viscid cap when moist. Note collapsed 
hairs (cortina) on stalk. These are fairly mature specimens; young ones have smaller caps. 
.#" 
... 
,.J 
"'" 
"""' 
.,i. ..::, 
, .,..... 
..Jo 
 
t" 
-+ 
,. 
" 
, 
" 
,. 
\ 
\ 
.. 
.. 
." 
.. 
436 
CORTINARIACEAE 
COMMENTS: A distinctive Cort;nar;us by virtue of the sooty-olive color of its cap and 
gills. The cap is viscid when moist, but there is no abrupt bulb at the base of the stalk as in 
the C. scaurus group. A number of varieties have been recognized, some of which show 
violet in the stalk apex and / or immature gills. The common version in our area, however, is 
violet-less. C. immixtus is a similar species with brighter (yellowish-olive-green) immature 
gills, a mild taste, and larger spores; it has been reported from the Pacific Northwest. 
Cortinarius percomis (Fragrant Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-8 cm broad, convex to broadly convex with an inrolled margin when young, ex- 
panding in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, bright to dull yellow to bright ochre 
or at times tinged fulvous or greenish-yellow. Flesh yellow; odor strongly aromatic and 
sweet (see comments); taste mild to slightly unpleasant. GILLS close, adnexed or notched 
to ad nate, pale yellow to sulfur-yellow when young, becoming browner( dingy olive-brown 
to rusty-cinnamon) as spores mature. STALK 4-8 cm long, 0.7-1.5 (2.5) cm thick at apex, 
equal or more often club-shaped (thicker below), but lacking a sharply-defined bulb; 
bright yellow to yellowish-white, dry, fibrillose, solid, firm. UNIVERSAL VEIL sulfur- 
yellow, fibrillose, often leaving remnants (fibrils) on stalk. CORTINA usually collapsing to 
form a ring of hairs on upper stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-13 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers; widely 
distributed. It is fairly frequent in western North America in the late summer and fall, but 
seldom in quantity. In our area a similar fragrant species (see comments) occurs with oak. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. I have cautiously sampled our local variety (see comments), and 
found its flavor to be a distinct disappointment (it didn't live up to the odor). 
COMMENTS: The strong, remarkably sweet odor (best detected by breaking open the 
flesh) and yellow color are the outstanding characteristics of this attractive Cort;nar;us. 
The odor is difficult to describe but is reminiscent-to different people-of citrin ella, 
toilet bowl cleaner, or papaya. In our area C. /uteoarmi//atus (?), with a similar odor, is 
common in the fall and winter under live oak. It has a pale ochre to pale tan, buff, or pale 
yellowish cap, white flesh, and a white stalk with or without yellowish universal veil zones. 
C. citrinifo/ius looks and smells like C. percom;s, but has a viscid stalk; it occurs in the 
Pacific Northwest. C. odorifer has an aniselike odor and a rimmed basal bulb(at least when 
young) and a greenish-yellow to cinnamon to vinaceous-brown cap. C. osmophorus is 
a fragrant European species that closely mimics our local variety in color, but it also has 
a rimmed bulb. None of these are worth eating. 
Cortinarius /uteoarmi//atus (or a very similar species-see above comments) is common in California 
under oak. Note how stalk is club-shaped (thicker below) but not bulbous. Sweet odor is distinctive. 
 .. 
f 
"t 
CORTIN ARIUS 
437 
Cort;nar;us mutab;l;s group (Purple-Staining Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or undulating; surface smooth, viscid when 
moist, at first violet or grayish-violet, but usually suffused in age with buff, ochre, or brown, 
especially toward the center (margin often remaining violet). Flesh thick, pallid or pale 
violet becoming dark purple when bruised or cut and then rubbed (sometimes staining 
slowly); odor mild. GILLS adnate or more often adnexed or notched, close, dull violet 
or grayish-lilac when young, slowly becoming pale brownish as spores mature; turning 
deep lilac or purple when bruised. ST ALK 4-10 cm ong, 1-2 cm thick at apex, thicker or 
swollen at base but without an abrupt bulb; pallid to pale violet or colored like ca p, staining 
deep lilac or purple when bruised. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2 cm thick at apex, thicker or 
swollen at base but without an abrupt bulb; pallid to pale violet orcolored likecap, staining 
which traps falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 )( 4.5-5.5 microns, 
elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps on ground or very rotten wood 
under conifers, western North America; especially common at higher elevations in the late 
summer and fall.l have seen it in the Rocky Mountainsand Cascades, but not on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, like most of us. 
COMMENTS: This species "complex" is variable in a number of respects, but can be 
recognized by the purple-staining gills and stalk surface. The flesh also stains purple, but 
the reaction seems to vary somewhat in brightness and duration. Other species: C. pur- 
ascens is a purple-staining species with a purple-brown to reddish-brown, often 
variegated cap and more sharply defined basal bulb on the stem; C. occidental is stains 
purple, but has a bluish cap that becomes grayish in age; C. subpurpurascens has purple- 
staining gills, but the flesh does not stain. All of these grow mainly with conifers. 
Cort;nar;us glauco pus group 
CAP 4-12 (17) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin slightly uplifted; surface 
smooth, viscid or tacky when moist, color extremely variable: rich greenish-brown to 
olive-black, greenish-gray, steel-gray, bluish-gray, etc., often streaked or mottled with 
yellowish or ochre fibrils and often becoming fulvous, cinnamon, or rusty-colored in age 
(typically from the center outward); margin sometimes yellowish-olive and often wavy. 
Flesh firm, thick, pallid to grayish or tinged violet-blue, becoming ochraceous in age; also 
ochraceous in base of stalk. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, bluish-violet to 
bluish-gray or sometimes gray when young, darkening to rusty-brown as spores mature. 
STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, more or less equal above, but with a bulb at 
base, the bulb abrupt and rimmed when young but often oblique or poorly defined in age; 
color variable but usually violet, blue, or green at apex and variously colored (often paler) 
below, often browner in age; dry, solid, firm. CORTINA pallid or pale bluish-violet, 
usually leaving hairs on stalk which are stained rusty-brown by falling spores. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 6-10 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, slightly roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or in small clumps or sometimes in troops, 
associated with both hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed but particularly common 
in western North America. Our members of this "complex" fruit prolifically in the fall and 
winter and are the most common "Bulbopodiums" of our live oak woodlands. In the Rocky 
Mountains and Pacific Northwest, however, it favors conifers, especially spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Better drowned and beaten than browned and eaten. Many members of 
this group have not been adequately tested and some are apparently bitter. 
COMMENTS: This species "complex" is extremely variable in color, but can be told in the 
button stage by its conspicuous bulb and blue-gray to bluish-violet gills. In age it becomes 
 .,. 
.'- 
 . 
'\i 
.", 
, . 
.1 
:  
'. 
Cortinarius glaucopus group is common under both hardwoods and conifers. In the button stage 
(not shown here) the basal bulb is usually quite large and abrupt, but becomes less pronounced as 
the stalk elongates. 
cinnamon- or rusty-colored and is easily confused with dozens of other Cortinarii. 
Younger specimens can resemble the blew it (Clitocybe nuda), but have a cortina and rusty- 
brown spores. C. pseudoarquatus is a similar species with a more buff or brownish cap 
and significantly larger spores. For other bluish-violet "Bulbopodiums" (most of which 
are more violet than blue and/ or have differently colored caps), see comments under the 
C. sodagnitus group and C. olympian us. 
Cortinarius sodagnitus group 
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid when moist, at first bright 
violet or lilac overall, but soon becoming brown to ochraceous or buff from the center 
outward ( or becoming somewhat silvery in dry weather), the margin retaining violet tones 
well into maturity. Flesh thick, firm, whitish with a violet tinge at top of stalk and ochre tint 
in basal bulb; not staining appreciably; taste bitter (at least of the skin). GILLS violet when 
young, becoming duller and suffused with brown or cinnamon-brown, but the edges 
usually remaining violet until old age; close, adnate to adnexed or notched. STALK 2.5-8 
cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, with a small but sharply defined, rimmed bulb at the base (1-3 cm 
broad); violet like the cap or pallid when young, discoloring brownish or rusty from the 
base upward, but usually retaining distinct violet zone at apex even in old age; solid, not 
viscid. CORTINA violet-tinged, leaving a median to superior zone of hairs on stalk, the 
hairs often rusty-stained by spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-12 x 5.5-6.5 
microns, elliptical, roughened. Cap surface staining red or wine-red in KGH or NaGH. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground under hardwoods; distribution 
uncertain. This species "complex" is quite common in our live oak woodlands in the fall 
and winter. It was originally described from Europe, where it favors beech. 
EDIBILITY: Better tossed than sauced-it is probably bitter. 
COMMENTS: This beautiful member of the subgenus Bulbopodium can be told by its 
rather small but well-defined, abrupt, rimmed bulb at the base of the stem (see photo at 
top of p. 439), by its violet colors when young, and by the tendency of the cap margin and 
stem apex to remain violet even in old age. Fresh specimens mimic the blewit (Clitocybe 
nuda) in size, shape, and color, but have a cortina and rusty-brown spores. Closely related 
species include: C. d;baphus, with a slightly pinker or more lilac cap and gills which turn 
brown more quickly (but otherwise very similar, if not the same); and C. caes;ostram;neus, 
with a slightly grayer cap. There are dozens of other purple or violet "Bulbopodiums"- 
see comments under C. olympianus for some of them. 
438 
.... 
'\ 
II. 
. . 
.' - 
:.t 
Cortinarius sodagnitus group. Note small but very prominent basal bulb. Common in California 
under oak. 
Cortinarius olympianus 
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex becoming plane, the margin inrolled at first; surface 
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, pale violet or lilac, sometimes fading to lilac-white, 
or sometimes tinged yellowish at center. Flesh fairly thick, white to grayish. GILLS pale 
lilac to pinkish-lilac when young, becoming browner in age but usually retaining a lilac 
tinge for a long time; notched or adnexed to adnate, close, not staining when bruised. 
ST ALK 3-7 cm long, 0.7-1.2 cm thick at apex, solid, firm, not viscid, with a distinct basal 
bulb that is rimmed, at least when young; lilac or pale violet above, often brownish-stained 
at base. CORTINA scanty, lilac-white, often leaving a few hairs on stalk which trap falling 
spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-10 )( 5-6 microns, elliptical, slightly 
roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers, fairly common in the 
Pacific Northwest in the late summer and fall, especially where there is fir, spruce, and/ or 
hemlock. I have seen large fruitings in Mt. Rainier National Park in late September. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several viscid-capped Cortinarii with a rimmed bulb and 
overall lilac to violet-white color. There are several similarly colored species that favor 
hardwoods and are especially prominent in eastern North America. These include: 
C. m;ch;ganens;s and C. caes;ocyaneus, both larger with conspicuous bulbs and pale violet 
to pale bluish-violet overall color (when fresh), the latter with a whitish universal veil; 
C. vel;cop;a, similar to the previous two species but discoloring ochre to buff or tan on the 
cap and basal bulb with age (often rather quickly) C. aggregatus, with darker violet gills 
when young and only a small. oblique bulb at the stem base C. caerulescens, with adarker 
blue or violet-blue cap when young; and C. cyanites (see couplet #72 of the key to 
Cortinarius). There are also several species that are very similar in size, shape, and color 
but do not have viscid caps, e.g., C. argentatus and C. subargentatus (see comments under 
C. a/bovio/aceus and photo On p. 448). 
Cortinarius cedretorum 
Color Plate 105 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming broadly con- 
vex or plane surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, at first yellow but darkening 
slowly to cinnamon-brown, orange-brown, or reddish-brown from the center outward, 
the margin often remaining yellowish. Flesh thick, firm, pallid to pale yellow with distinct 
lavender or violet areas near cap cuticle and in stalk; often ochraceous-yellow in base of 
439 
440 
CORTINARIACEAE 
stalk; odor mild. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed, yellow or sometimes greenish-yellow 
when young, dull cinnamon-brown in age, but often with an intermediate lavender to dull 
purple phase. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick at apex, with a conspicuous, abrupt 
basal bulb which is rimmed, at least when young and is 3-7 cm broad; solid, not viscid, 
color variable: pale lavender or yellow at apex or throughout, becoming dingy or often 
rusty-stained in age, the bulb usually yellow. CORTINA pale yellow to greenish-yellow, 
usually leaving hairs on the stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; 
spores 11-14 x 6.5-8 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, mainly in western 
North America. It is sometimes common in our area under oak in the late fall and winter; in 
the Pacific Northwest it favors conifers and in the Southwest I've seen it in mixed woods of 
aspen, spruce, and fir. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
CO MMENTS: The yellow gills and viscid yellow cap when young plus the beautiful violet- 
tinged flesh (see color plate!) and bulbous stalk form a distinctive set of characteristics. 
In our local form the purplish phase of the gills is often transient and difficult to detect. 
C. aureoJulvus is a similar oak-loving species which may show violet in the flesh but not 
in the gills. C. atkinsonianus shows the same transient violet gill phase as C. cedretorum, 
but has an olive-yellow to yellowish to deep reddish-brown cap and grows with hard- 
woods in eastern North America. C. montanus has violet-tinged gills with olive or yel- 
lowish-olive edges when young, anda rusty-brown to olive-brown, yellow-brown, orvarie- 
gated/ streaked cap. It is often common under old-growth conifers in western mountains, 
particularly the Cascades. 
Cortinarius scaurus group 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex with the margin inrolled somewhat at first, 
expanding in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: usually olive-green 
to dark olive-brown, but in some varieties brownish at the center and greenish to greenish- 
yellow at the margin, and in others bright grass- or citrine-green, often with a browner 
center or brownish spots and fibrils. Flesh pallid to yellowish, thick, firm; odor and taste 
usually mild. GILLS close, notched or adnexed to adnate, typically olive to greenish- 
yellow (in some forms with a fleeting initial lavender or bluish-violet stage), but in some 
forms yellow when young, all forms becoming browner or rustier as spores mature. 
ST ALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick at apex, equal above, the base with a more or less 
rimmed, abrupt bulb when young that may become oblique or obscure in age; usually 
greenish like the cap or yellower or even pallid (in age), the apex sometimes bluish, the 
bulb often sulfur-yellow; solid, not viscid. CORTINA olive to yellow, usually leaving 
hairs on stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; 
spores 9-13 x 6-7.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed. 
Some members of this group (see comments) favor conifers and are fairly common in the 
Pacific Northwest; others grow under oak and other hardwoods, including one uniden- 
tified variety that is common in our area in the fall and winter with live oak (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Due to difficulty in identification, this entire group should be avoided. The 
group as a whole is probably edible, but I wouldn't bet my life on it-and that's just what 
you do when testing a Cortinarius! 
COMMENTS: The above description has been broadened to include a number of bright 
green to greenish-yellow species with a viscid cap and well-defined bulb (at least when 
CORTINARIUS 
441 
young). Mycologists prefer to refer to them collectively as the C. scaurus group (when 
they refer to them at all, which is seldom), for they are a confusing lot, both in the field 
and in the literature. They are readily distinguished as a group, however, by their color. 
The "true" C. scaurus of Europe is said to have a spotted cap, slender stalk (less than 1 cm 
thick), and grow with conifers. Some of the other species in the group include: C. herpe- 
ticus, very similar but with a thicker stalk and often with violet-tinged immature gills and 
flesh and a whitish basal bulb; C. prasinus, with an olive-colored cap, olive to olive-yellow 
gills, and yellowish or olive-tinged stalk, fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under 
conifers; C. virentophyllus, with a deep green cap that fades to yellow as it ages, green gills, 
and a pale bluish stem, found under hardwoods in eastern North America; C.Jlavovirens, 
with a farinaceous odor, greenish-yellow gills, and yellow stalk, reported from southern 
California; C. orichalceus and C. ruJo-olivaceus, with a reddish to reddish-brown cap (at 
least at center), and greenish to yellowish stalk (the latter species is quite large and robust, 
the former is smaller and can have an oranger cap); and finally, a distinctive but 
unidentified species which is sometimes common under live oak in California. It has a 
bright citrine-green cap (sometimes shaded with brown at the center), yellow gills when 
young, and a yellowish stalk with a bulb at the base. Whether it is one of several similar 
European species, or is unnamed and endemic to California is unclear, but it is definitely a 
member of the C. scaurus group, which should satisfy all but the most hardcore Cortinarius 
-categorizers. See also C. montanus (under C. cedretorum). 
Cortinarius Julmineus 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane, the margin at first incurved; surface viscid 
when moist, entirely yellow or with only the margin yellow and the center fulvous to ochre 
to orange-brown, sometimes with small spotlike scales. Flesh thick, firm, yellow to 
yellowish-white or buff; odor and taste mild or radishlike. GILLS close, adnate or 
notched, yellow to yellow-brown or ochre, becoming ochre-cinnamon and finally rusty- 
brown as spores mature. STALK 3-7 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, often rather short and 
stout, with a large rimmed bulb at the base; solid, firm, not viscid; yellowish-white or 
yellow, sometimes becoming ochraceous in age. CORTINA pallid or yellowish, often 
leaving hairs on stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty- 
brown; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods; widely 
distributed. It is not uncommon in our area in the fall and winter in mixed woods and 
under live oak. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species typifies a number of yellowish to rusty-orangeCortinarii with 
a viscid cap, yellowish to orange gills, and a distinctly rimmed bulb when young. The 
rimmed bulb places it in the colorful subgenus Bulbopodium, and the yellowish or pallid 
flesh separates it from another "Bulbopodium," C. cedretorum. Other species: C.Julgens 
is similar but brighter orange in color; C. elegantior is also similar but has larger spores 
(12-16 microns long), while C. elegantioides has even larger spores and a decidedly bitter 
taste. There are also several beautiful "Bulbopodiums" with a bright yellow cap (or yellow- 
margined with a redder, browner, or oranger center) and lilac to violet gills at first. These 
include: C. metarius, common under spruce and fir in western North America, with a 
fairly broad basal bulb; C. calochrous, widespread under both hardwoods and conifers 
and very similar to C. metarius. but with a smaller bulb and slightly shorter spores; C. 
citrinipedes, cap yellowish with a darker brown margin; and C. cyanopus (=c. amoene- 
lens), widespread, with an ochre cap, bitter-tasting cap cuticle, and deep violet gills when 
young. 
442 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Cortinarius multijormis 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate, the margin at first 
inrolled; surface smooth, viscid when moist, ochre to ochre- buff to tawny or yellow-brown 
or occasionally more reddish or fulvous and sometimes becoming rustier in age, often with 
a whitish silky bloom when young. Flesh thick, firm, pallid; odor mild or slightly pungent. 
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first whitish, then tan or watery brown, 
finally rusty-cinnamon. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2 (2.5) cm thick at apex, usually with a 
bulb at the base that is abrupt when young but often obscure or even absent in age; dry, 
solid, firm, white or discoloring tan or ochre. UNIVERSAL VEIL disappearing or leaving 
a thin whitish film on cap. CORTINA scanty, white, disappearing or leaving a few hairs 
on stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores 7-11 x 4-6 
microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods (mainly under coni- 
fers); widely distributed. It is common throughout much of the West, but infrequent or 
absent in our area. I have seen large fruitings under spruce near Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. It is eaten in Europe, but I can find no information on the North 
American version, and there are too many similar species for me to recommend it. 
COMMENTS: The viscid, ochre to tan cap and pallid to tan immature gills serve to dis- 
tinguish this species from most other Cortinarii. The cap and gill color suggest a Hebe/oma, 
but the spores are cinnamon-brown and the odor is not radishlike. The hoary white film on 
young caps is reminiscent of the gypsy mushroom (Rozites caperata), but the veil is not 
membranous. There are many similar Cortinarii with non-viscid caps that sometimes 
mingle with C. mu/tiformis (see C. /aniger). Other viscid-capped species with an equal to 
club-shaped (but not abruptly bulbous) stalk include: C. turmalis, with a tawny to fulvous 
or yellow-brown to darker brown cap and a well-developed white veil that usually leaves 
a distinct fibrillose sheath and/ or ring on the stalk; C. cliduchus and C. latus, without 
such a copious veil but otherwise similar to C. turmalis (the latter with a paler cap); C. 
crass us, a stout, thick-stemmed species (see comments under C. ba/teatus); C. varius, 
a widespread species with a fulvous to bright yellow-brown or ochre cap and violet gills 
when young plus a white stalk; C. variicolor, with a purplish to brownish cap, lilac gills 
when young, and a fibrillose, whitish or lilac-tinged stalk; and C. claricolor, with bluish- 
gray to brownish gills, a yellower cap, and more copious universal veil. All but the last 
species favor conifers and occur fairly commonly in the Pacific Northwest and/ or Rocky 
Mountains. 
Cortinarius magnivelatus 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or irregularly undulating; surface moist or 
dry but not viscid, smooth orfibrillose, entirely white or white at margin and ochre toward 
the center, often stained buff or ochraceous in age or in bruised areas; margin incurved. 
Flesh thick, firm, white to buff; odor mild. GILLS close, slightly decurrent to adnate or 
adnexed, whitish when very young, becoming buff and then tawny-brown to brown; often 
forked near the stalk. STALK 4-6 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, often (but not always) 
enlarged below, colored like cap or whiter, solid. VEIL thick, tough, membranous, elastic, 
whitish, typically covering the gills through maturity or shredding radially but not 
normally detaching from the cap and stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 9-14 
x 6-8 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious under mountain conifers (especially fir and pine), 
usually buried in the duff; fairly common throughout the higher mountains of California, 
particularly in the late spring and summer, but probably more widespread. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
.. .;. 
, , 
.. 
,. 
., : 
," 
.. -, " 
" 
.., . ".. 
<II 
.. 
.' ,",,' 
-.., 
+, 
.. .. 
Two conifer-loving Cortinarii with persistent veils. Cortinarius magniveJalUs (two at right) has a 
tough, whitish veil that is reminiscent of a rubber band. Cortinarius verrucisporus (three at left) 
is yellower and has a short stalk and thinner veil that tends to tear radially (see comments below). 
COMMENTS: The whitish color, underground growth habit, and tough, thick, persistent 
veil distinguish this Cortinarius from most others. Presumably the latter features are adap- 
tations to the pendulum-like changes of weather that occur in our western mountains. 
Many Cortinarii (particularly "Bulbopodiums") tend to fruit under the duff in dry 
weather, but they do not have the persistent membranous veil ofthis species. That the veil 
does not break suggests that this species is on its way to becoming "gastroid." The spores, 
however, are forcibly discharged (hence a spore print is obtainable), unlike the truly 
gastroid genus Thaxterogaster (see p. 734). The membranous nature of the vei can 
lead to confusion with other brown-spored genera, but the overall aspect is clearly "cor- 
tinarioid." Several other semi-gastroid Cortinarii occur in western North America. Like 
C. magniveialUs. they have a persistent veil and tend to grow under the duff, although 
the mature caps may surface if conditions are wet enough. These species include: C. 
wiebeae, discovered in the Cascades, similarly colored but larger with thin, fragile gills 
that are brown or rusty (not whitish) when young; C. verrucisporus, fairly common in 
the Sierra Nevada, with a yellow to yellow-brown or rusty-stained cap and a thinner 
yellowish veil that stretches from the stalk or stalk base to the cap margin and usually tears 
radially (see above photo), plus broad gills, a frequently underdeveloped stalk, and very 
coarsely warted spores; C. bigelow;;, fairly common in Idaho, with a pale yellow-brown 
to yellowish cap, whitish veil, and a short, fat bulbous stalk; and C. velatus of the Sierra 
Nevada, easily distinguished by its purplish to lavender-tinged cap and somewhat thinner, 
semi-cobwebby (but persistent) veil. Other semi-gastroid species undoubtedly occur in the 
West but have yet to be described. 
C ortinarius regalis 
CAP (4) 6-15 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin, becoming broadly umbonate to 
plane or with margin slightly uplifted in age; surface dry or very slightly tacky, usually with 
a large patch or patches of white fibrillose universal veil tissue at first; background 
brownish to dingy flesh-colored to dull brown with a vinaceous tinge, often appearing 
somewhat streaked. Flesh thick, pallid or tinged vinaceous or cap color; odor mild to some- 
what musty or sometimes fruity. GILLS usually adnexed or notched, pallid in button 
stage, becoming grayish-brown to dull watery-brown and eventually dark brown. ST ALK 
6-16 cm long, (1) 2-3.5 cm thick at apex, with a large, abrupt and/ or rimmed bulb at base 
(3-6 cm thick); dry, solid, firm pallid or tinged cap color, fibrillose. UNIVERSAL VEIL 
443 
444 
CORTINARIACEAE 
whitish, felty-fibrillose, often leaving remnants on cap and fibrils or hairs on stalk which 
become rusty-stained. CORTINA white, disappearing or also leaving hairs on stalk. 
SPORE PRINT dull rusty-brown; spores 7-11 )( 5-6 microns, elliptical, finely roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; known only from Cali- 
fornia, where it usually grows with oak. I find it regularly in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The fairly large size, thick bulbous stalk, absence of distinct violet hues, 
and whitish veil material on the cap combine to distinguish this Cortinarius. The bulb is 
typical of the subgenus Bulbopodium, but the cap is not truly viscid, making this species 
something of an anomaly. Viscid-capped species with conspicuous whitish veil remnants 
on the cap and a prominent bulb at the base of the stalk include: C. calyptratus, medium- 
sized, with violet gills when young, occurring under conifers in northern California; and 
C. calyptrodermus, larger, with deep violet gills when young, occurring under hardwoods 
in eastern North America. Another viscid-capped species with purplish ( or purplish-blue) 
gills when young, C. volvatus, has a universal veil which forms a whitish sheath or"volva" 
on the basal bulb, but does not normally leave conspicuous remnants on the cap. 
Corlinarius genii/is (Deadly Cortinarius) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped at first, expanding somewhat in age but usually 
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, not viscid but somewhat hygrophanous, tawny to 
ochre to orange-brown or rusty-yellow, fading in age or as it dries. Flesh thin, yellowish. 
G ILLS fairly well-spaced, adnexed to adnate, ochre-yellow to cinnamon-brown becoming 
browner in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 3-5 (7) mm thick, more or less equal, colored like 
the cap or more cinnamon-colored; often (but not always) with traces of the yellow veil 
when young; not viscid. UNIVERSAL VEIL yellow, disappearing or lea vinga few patches 
or hairs on stalk. CORTINA also yellow, disappearing or leaving hairs on stalk. SPORE 
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9)( 5.5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in troops in moss or duffunderconifers; widelydis- 
tributed. It is sometimes abundant in the summer and fall in the Rocky Mountains and 
Pacific Northwest, but is not likely to be collected by the average mushroom hunter. 
EDIBILITY: DEADLY POISONOUS! Fortunately, it is seldom eaten because of its 
small size. Along with several other Cortinarii in the subgenus Leprocybe (notably C. 
orel/anus and C. speciosissimus), it contains toxins which destroy the liver. Symptoms 
are greatly delayed (it may be two weeks before they appear!), making the culprit difficult 
to pinpoint. 
COMMENTS: This species would be just another"LBM" were it not for the fact that it 
is deadly poisonous. The yellow-brown to dull orange-brown overall color, somewhat 
hygrophanous cap, small size, yellow veil, and rusty-brown spores form a distinctly 
undistinguished set of distinguishing features. It is most likely to be confused with the 
C. cinnamomeus group, which is more brightly colored, does not have a hygrophanous 
cap, and contains different pigments (anthraquinones). Related species thought to be 
deadly poisonous include C. ra;n;erens;s, C. orellanus, and C. spec;os;ss;mus. The latter 
two species have caused a rash of deaths in Europe. They are somewhat larger (cap 3-9 cm 
broad and tawny-brown to orange-brown, fulvous, or cinnamon-colored) than C. gen- 
ti/is; C. speciosissimus has an umbonate cap, C. orel/anus has an un-umbonate cap 
and a yellowish stem. They may well occur in North America, but their presence has not 
yet been definitely established. C. rainierensis, on the other hand, was originally described 
from the Pacific Northwest (under conifers). It is rusty-orange to tawny or brownish- 
orange, and its cap is covered with small, more or less erect or protruding scales. 
CORTINARIUS 
445 
Cort;nar;us cotoneus group (Scaly Cortinarius) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming plane; surface dry, covered with small, 
dark, fibrillose scales and appearing blackish to olive-brown at the center where the scales 
are densest, and greenish to olive-brown, olive-yellow, or yellow-brown toward the margin 
(sometimes paler overall inage). Flesh brownish to pale olive-yellow; odor often somewhat 
radishlike. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, rusty-yellow to olive-yellow to dull 
yellowish or yellow-brown, becoming dull orange to dark cinnamon-brown in age. 
ST ALK4-15 cm long, 0.8-3 cm thick, equal or thicker at base; dry, solid, pale olive-yellow 
or yellowish above, tawny to olive or colored like cap below, often dingier or browner 
throughout in age. UNIVERSAL VEIL yellow or olive-yellow, often lea ving hairy fibrils 
or patches on lower stalk. CORTINA disappearing or leaving a zone of hairs on upper 
stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 x 5-7.5 microns, 
elliptical to nearly round, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed. 
Our representative of this group is fairly common in tanoak -madrone woods in the late fall 
and winter, often mingling with C. col/initus and C. infractus. In the Pacific Northwest, 
however, it is common under conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but possibly very dangerous! It belongs to the same group (sub- 
genus Leprocybe) as the deadly poisonous C. gentilis. C. orellanus. and C. speciosissimus. 
COMMENTS: The dry cap with small blackish scales on an olive-yellow to yellow-brown 
background distinguishes this Cortinarius "complex" from most others. It is one of several 
distinctive Cortinarii with a hairy and/ or scaly cap. Others include: C. clandestinus, prac- 
tically identical but with pallid gills when very young; the deep violet C. violaceus (see 
description); and a striking trio of eastern and northern hardwood-lovers: C. bolaris. 
C. pholideus. and C. squamulosus (see the latter species for more details). 
Cort;nar;us squamulosus Color Plate 108 
(Bulbous Scaly Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface dry, fibrillose, soon 
breaking up into dense fibrillose scales, brown tinged with purple at first, usually more 
or less chocolate-brown in age, the background paler (yellower or more cinnamon). 
Flesh rather thick, whitish to grayish or pinkish-tinged; odor often somewhat spicy, espe- 
cially in age. GILLS sometimes adnate at first but usually deeply notched by maturity, 
close, dark purplish or purplish-brown soon becoming brown to cinnamon-brown or 
chocolate-brown. STALK 6-15 cm long, 1-2 cm thick at apex, with a conspicuous basal 
bulb 3-6 cm broad; smooth to fibrillose or slightly scaly, at first purplish-tinged, becoming 
more or less cap-colored, often with a median bandlike ring (from universal veil?). COR- 
TINA whitish to brownish, disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE 
PRINT dark rusty-brown; spores 6-8 x 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious under hardwoods (especially oak), often in low wet 
woods; not uncommon in the late summer and fall in northeasern North America. I have 
seen impressive fruitings in Minnesota and Wisconsin, but have yet to find it on the west 
coast. One source reports it from California but does not mention the habitat. 
EDIBILITY: ..Consistency very pleasant and flavor fairly good," says McIlvaine, who ate 
almost anything. However, several relatives are either poisonous or haven't been tested. 
COMMENTS: Like C. violaceus. this species is one of the few truly distinctive Cor- 
tinarii (i.e., one that beginners can recognize in the field), but like that species it is not 
particularly common. The dry, purplish-brown to brown, densely scaly cap plus the 
446 
CORTINARIACEAE 
radically bulbous stem are its main features. Another scaly-capped species, C. phol;deus, 
is common under birch in the Northeast, often on or near rotten logs, and also occurs 
rarely in the Pacific Northwest. Its stalk is equal or only slightly thicker at the base and 
is decorated with distinctive brown to cinnamon-brown scales like those on the cap (see 
photo on p. 424) and the fruiting body is slightly more cinnamon-colored overall than 
C. squamulosus. It might be mistaken for a Pho/iota because of the brown scales on the 
stem and tendency to grow on or near rotting logs, but the dry scaly cap, violet-tinged 
stalk apex (when young), and roughened, cinnamon-brown spores distinguish it. Still 
another distinctive hardwood-loving easterner, C. bolar;s, is quite different: its cap and 
stalk feature reddish scales, fibrils, and/ or streaks on a whitish to yellowish background 
(see photo on p. 425 and couplet #89 of the key to Cortinarius). 
Cortinarius violaceus (Violet Cortinarius) Color Plate 109 
CAP 3.5-12 (I5) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex, broadly umbonate, or 
plane; surface dry, densely covered with minute erect, tufted hairs or small scales, giving it 
a rough, somewhat velvety appearance; deep violet to nearly black, often with a metallic 
luster in age; margin often somewhat paler and fringed or ragged. Flesh thick, deep violet 
becoming grayish-violet; odor mild or cedarlike. GILLS adnate becoming adnexed or 
notched, fairly well-spaced, deep violet or colored like cap, then dusted with cinnamon- 
brown spores. STALK 6-18 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal or more often thicker 
below, dry, fibrillose or woolly, deep violet, solid, firm. CORTINA violet, soon disap- 
pearing or leaving a few indistinct hairs near top of stalk which may catch falling spores. 
SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 13-17 x 7-10 microns, broadly elliptical to oblong, 
roughened. Cystidia present on both the faces and edges of the gills. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in twos and threes under conifers, sometimes next to rotting logs; 
widely distributed but quite rare except in certain localities, such as the old-growth 
coniferous forests of M 1. Rainier and Olympic national parks in Washington. In our area 
it shows up occasionally in the late fall and winter in mixed woods; in northern California 
it is sometimes quite common under Sitka spruce; in Europe it is said to favor hardwoods. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice. Its principal appeal is its beauty. 
COMMENTS: There are dozens upon dozens of violet Cortinarii, but none are as deeply 
colored as this one. Its hue alone makes it as unique as it is unforgettable-the color 
photograph hardly does it justice. The cap is dry and rough due to the presence of many 
small scales or tufted fibrils, another distinctive feature. The color is at times so deep that it 
borders on black, making it difficult to pick out in the shade of the forest. Its only rivals 
for color are some of the deep blue or violet Leptonias (see L. carnea and L. nigroviolacea), 
but they lck a cortina and have pinkish spores. Several colorful Cortinarii make wonder- 
ful dyes (e.g., C. sanguineus. C. semisanguineus), but C. violaceus, despite its intense 
color, is not one of them. 
It is ironic to note that C. violaceus. the species chosen to typify the immense genus 
Cortinarius. is perhaps the least typical of the 1000+ species! Besides its unique color it is 
practically the only species to possess sterile cells (cystidia) on both the edges and faces 
of the gills. This is the kind of difference to which the "splitters" (see p.lO)owealiving,and 
C. violaceus might indeed have its own little genus by now, were it not that under the 
existing rules of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, the "new" genus 
would have to be Cortinarius (since C. violaceus is the type species or "model" of Cor- 
tinarius), and all of the other 1000+ Cortinarii would have to be placed in a new genus 
(or genera), thus compounding the confusion that already exists. Noteven the most ardent 
"splitter" wants to be responsible for a mess like that! Perhaps as compensation, C. vio- 
laceus is itself split by some "splitters" into two species: C. violaceus. with oblong-elli ptical 
spores, and C. hercyn;cus, with rounder spores. 
CORTINARIUS 
447 
Cort;nar;us traganus (Lilac Conifer Cortinarius) Color Plate 106 
CAP 4-13 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface 
smooth, dry, finely silky or fibrillose, violet to lilac, sometimes with white wedge-shaped 
sectors, occasionally also with rusty or ochraceous stains; margin often hung with veil 
remnants. Flesh rusty-brown to tawny- or yellow-brown (often marbled) in the stalk, 
usually paler in the cap and yellower in the stalk base; odor often faintly pungent or sweet. 
GILLS pale cinnamon or ochre-buff becoming cinnamon- or rusty-brown in age; fairly 
well-spaced, adnexed to adnate. STALK 5-12 cm long, 1-3 (5) cm thick, usually enlarged 
below, solid, dry, finely fibrillose, lilac or purplish, sometimes also with white areas. 
CORTINA pale lilac, leaving hairs on upper stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling 
spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 )( 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (sometimes in clumps) under conifers; 
widely distributed. It is a common late summer and fall mushroom in the mossy, old- 
growth forests of the Pacific Northwest and northern California, but does not seem to 
extend south into our area. I have often found it growing with the gypsy mushroom, 
Rozites caperata. 
EDIBILITY: Not firmly established (like so many of us!), but poisonous according to one 
source and merely "indigestible" according to another. 
COMMENTS: This characteristic inhabitant of northern coniferous forests is easily 
recognized by its beautiful lilac or lavender color, rusty-brown gills and spores, and rusty 
to tawny-brown flesh in the stalk. The latter feature distinguishes it from most other 
members of the subgenus Sericeocybe of Cortinarius (see C. alboviolaceus), and the 
sweetish odor ("like overripe pears") that is frequently present is also distinctive. The cap 
is not viscid as in C. olympianus, C. sodagnilUs, and others, and the presence of a cortina 
separates it from the edible blewit (ClilOcybe nuda). Some authorities consider the Ameri- 
can variant to be a distinct species, C. pyr;odorus, while reserving the name C. traganus 
for the European version, which is said to smell "like goats:' Other species: C./ragrans 
also smells like overripe pears, but has a slightly paler cap and whitish or lavender-tinged 
flesh in the stalk. C. caes;ifo/;us has a buff to brownish cap, bluish gills when young, and 
a fleeting, disagreeable odor. C. camphoratus has a lavender to lilac-white cap (fading to 
buff), violet or bluish-lilac gills and stalk when young, and a powerful, remarkably raunchy 
odor of rotting meat or vegetables. The stench alone distinguishes it from other lilac 
Cortinarii, although a more deeply colored species, C. amethyst;nus, is said to smell "like 
burnt hair." C. camphoratus grows almost exclusively with conifers and is widely distri- 
buted. I have found it in northern California under Sitka spruce, in November. 
Cort;nar;us albov;olaceus (Silvery-Violet Cortinarius) 
CAP 3-8 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped becoming convex or broadly umbonate to nearly 
plane; surface dry, silky-shining, pale violet soon becoming pale silvery-violet, lilac-white, 
or even whitish. Flesh pallid to pale violet; odor mild. GILLS adnate or adnexed or 
notched, fairly close, pale violet to purple-gray, then eventually cinnamon-brown as spores 
ripen. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick at apex, usually club-shaped or enlarged 
at base, dry, silky, violet or pale violet above, clothed with whitish silky fibrils below(but 
pale violet underneath the fibrils). UNIVERSAL VEIL white, silky, usually forming a 
thin, soft, silky sheath over lower half of stalk. CORTINA white, evanescent or leaving 
hairs at top of stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 
)( 4-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps in forest humus, associated mainly 
with hardwoods; widely distributed. It turns up occasionally in our area in the late fall and 
winter under tanoak and other trees, but I have never seen it in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
.. 
. t. 
.. 
\ 
"". 
., .. ..... 
.. ( 
. '-- 
... 
t . r 
, \.. 1. f'; 
.' .:-. 
, ,. , 
.. 
. 
.. 
. 
It 
",! 
." 
 
.' .., 
Left: Cort;nar;us albov;olaceus. Note the rather long stalk sheathed with copious universal veil 
remnants, Right: Cort;narius argentatus (see comments under C. albov;olaceus) is also pale violet 
or bluish-violet but has a thicker, stouter stalk with a bulb at the base. 
COMMENTS: The beautiful silvery-violet to lilac-white overall color plus the dry silky 
cap, mild odor, and whitish universal veil sheath on the stem distinguish this attractive 
mushroom from its close relatives in the subgenus Sericeocybe (a closely-knit group of 
dry-capped Cortinarii with violet to pale lilac pigments). The flesh is never rusty-brown or 
tawny as in C. traganus, and the gills are violet-tinged when young. Inocybe li/acina is 
somewhat similar but smaller and more umbonate, withdull brown spores and a spermatic 
odor. Similar species include: C. argentatus, lilac-blue to violet-gray but with a thicker, 
stouter, prominently bulbous stalk (see above photo) that lacks a silky white sheath and 
with a radishlike odor and tendency to turn ochre in age, found mostly under hardwoods 
(especially eastern); C. subargentatus, favoring hardwoods, very similar to C. argen- 
tatus, but lacking the odor; C. subpulchrijolius, with a grayish-buff cap that often 
develops ochraceous or rusty stains inage, dull purplish immature gills, and a dull purplish, 
equal or club-shaped stalk that is sheathed by veil remnants, found under hardwoods in 
eastern North America; C. malachius, favoring conifers, violet-tinged at first but its cap 
soon becoming ochre or brownish; and C. caninus and C. anomalus,.growing under both 
hardwoods and conifers, the former with a violet-tinged cap that becomes reddish-brown 
and buff to tan universal veil zones on the stalk, the latter with a violet-tinged to gray or 
brown cap, distinctly violet flesh and violet stalk apex, and ochre veil zones on the stalk. 
For more odoriferous and/ or brightly colored "Sericeocybes," see C. lraganus, and for 
violet or violet-tinged hygrophanous Cortinarii, see C. evernius. 
Cortinarius armillatus (Bracelet Cortinarius) 
CAP 5-13 cm broad, obtuse to broadly bell-shaped or convex, becoming nearly plane or 
broadly umbonate; surface smooth or sometimes with small scales in age, not viscid and 
only slightly hygrophanous (if at all); dull tawny or yellow-brown to rusty-brown, orange- 
brown, or reddish-brown; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pallid 
or brownish; odor usually radishlike. GILLS fairly well-spaced, broad, adnate toadnexed 
or notched, pale or dull cinnamon becoming rusty-brown as spores mature. ST ALK 7 -15 
cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, club-shaped ( thicker below), dry, whitish to brownish with 
one or more (usually 2-3) dull red bands or "bracelets" below the cortina. UNIVERSAL 
VEIL fibrillose, forming reddish bands on stalk. CORTINA whitish and copious, often 
leaving hairs on upper stalk that turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE PRINT 
rusty-brown; spores (7) 9-13 x 5.5-7.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
448 
, 
-, 
, j 
. 
k 
t 
 
. 
 
-\. 
 .. 
,. -'- 
r - 
Left: C orl ;nar;us arm;//al us, a birch-lover with reddish bracelets on stalk. Right: C orl ;nar;us bou/der- 
ens;s (see comments below) has reddish or vinaceous bracelets but is smaller and purple-tinged. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often scattered or in groups on ground in woods; associated 
primarily if not exclusively with birch and found throughout the range of birch (therefore 
absent in California). It is especially common in northeastern North America in the late 
summer and fall, but I have also seen it in northern Idaho and British Columbia. 
EDIBILITY: A good edible-as I can personally attest. It is one ofthe most distinctive 
of the Cortinarii, but you should be very cautious nevertheless! 
COMMENTS: The hallmarks of this common eastern species are the reddish bracelets 
on the stalk, yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown cap, and association with birch. In the 
Pacific Northwest a slightly smaller conifer-lover, C. haematochel;s, occurs. It also has 
reddish bracelet(s) on the stem, but its spores are much smaller and nearly round. A third 
species with reddish (or vinaceous) fibrillose patches or "bracelets," C. boulderens;s, is 
even smaller (cap 2-5 cm broad, stalk 3-7 mm thick at apex), with a violet-brown to reddish- 
brown or brownish cap and violet-tinged immature gills and stalk apex. It also grows under 
conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but I have found something very similar-if not the 
same-in our area in mixed woods (see photo above). C. subtestaceus is a similar but 
smaller easterner with reddish-brown to brown "bracelets:' Also see C. anomalus 
(under C. alboviolaceus) and C. crocolitus (under the C. col/initus group), both of which 
have more ochraceous-colored bands or patches on the stalk. 
Cortinarius rubripes (Red-Footed Cortinarius) 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface 
hygrophanous but not viscid, watery cinnamon to reddish-brown fading to tawny, ochra- 
ceous, or ochre-buff, sometimes tinged with pink or sometimes with concentric zones; 
finely silky-fibrillose in age, the margin sometimes tinged violet when young. Flesh thin, 
reddish-brown or pallid; odor mild. GILLS fairly well-spaced, adnate to adnexed or 
notched and seceding; often tinged violet in button stage, but soon tawny to cinnamon, and 
finally cinnamon-brown. ST ALK 4-9 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick at apex, enlarged below, 
dry, pallid or brownish above, the base and mycelium fiery orange to red-orange or peach- 
colored. UNIVERSAL VEIL red-orange, leaving remnants at base of stalk. CORTIN A 
disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 
7-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious under hardwoods; originally described 
from Michigan, but it-or something very much like it-also grows in our oak-tanoak- 
449 
450 
CORTINARIACEAE 
madrone woods in December and January. In eastern North America it is sometimes 
abundant after late summer rains. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The bright orange to fiery red stalk base and overall brown to reddish- 
brown color combine to distinguish this Cortinarius from most others. A European 
species, C. bu;ll;ard;, is probably the same, in which case that would be the "correct" name 
for our species. C. armi//atus and C. haematoche/is are somewhat similar, but normally 
show one to four dull reddish bands on the stalk rather than having a bright red-orange 
base. C. m;n;atopus is a small species (cap 1-3 cm broad) with orangish gills when young 
and a slender stalk that is wholly or partially sheathed by vermillion fibrils (densest at the 
base); it is not uncommon under conifers in the Pacific Northwest. 
C ortinarius evernius 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped at first (and scarcely wider than the stalk), then 
becoming convex or obtusely umbonate to plane; surface smooth, markedly hygro- 
phanous: violet or brown with a purple tinge when moist, quickly fading to vinaceous or 
reddish-brown or paler as it loses moisture; margin atfirst with whitish silkiness. Flesh thin, 
at first violet or violet-tinged, butfadingas it dries or ages. GILLSat first violet with whitish 
edges, but quickly fading to brown and then darkening to cinnamon-brown; adnate or 
becoming notched, well-spaced. STALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or 
narrowed toward base, usually rather long and often extending deep into the humus or 
moss; not viscid; pale to deep violet when fresh (darker below), but often covered with veil 
material at first, and fading as it dries. UNIVERSAL VEIL whitish or violet-tinged, 
forming fibrillose patches or zones on stalk which may disappear in age. CORTINA 
whitish, often disappearing. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-10 )( 5-6 microns, 
elliptical, slightly roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers, often in moss; widely distri- 
buted but mainly northern. It is not a common species, but several difficult-to-distinguish 
look-alikes (see comments) are quite ubiquitous, including at least two species in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: This species has been included to represent a large number of medium- 
sized, hygrophanous Cortinarii in the subgenus Telamonia that are violet or violet-tinged 
when fresh and moist. They are very difficult to identify and some are so markedly hygro- 
phanous that they lose their original color in an hour or two-or in the time it takes to bring 
them home! Other "Telamonias" showing violet shades when fresh and moist include: 
C. lucorum, a fairly common conifer-lover that differs from C. evernius only in having 
a more or less club-shaped stem; C. saturn;nus, with a brown cap and more or less equal 
stalk that is violet above and whitish below; C. brunneus, which sometimes shows violet 
at the stalk apex (see comments under C. /aniger) and has an equal to club-shaped stalk; 
C. subpurpureus, with yellow or yellowish-buff veil patches on the lower portion of the 
stalk; C. adustus and C. ;mpenn;s, with little or no veil remnants on the stalk; and C. 
plum;ger, with a grayish-violet to watery violet or grayish-blue-tinged stalk that quickly 
fades to whitish and a cap that is brownish to buff beneath a white to grayish-white, 
fibrillose-hairy layer. All of these are partial to conifers, but another species, C. torvus, 
favors hardwoods and is the most distinctive of the lot. It has broad, widely-spaced gills 
that are deep purplish when young, a brownish to deep purplish cap, sweetish odor, and 
club-shaped or bulbous stalk that often has a well-formed annulus (ring)-an unusual 
feature for a Cortinarius! It is fairly common in eastern North America but I can find no 
mention of it being found in the West. Another species that tends to form an annulus, 
C. urb;cus, does occur in the West, but it has a much paler cap than C. torvus. 
CORTINARIUS 
451 
Cortinarius laniger (Brown Cortinarius) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly convex or some- 
times plane; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid, dark reddish-brown or chest- 
nut-brown to reddish-brown or cinnamon-brown when moist, fading as it loses moisture 
to pale reddish-brown or tan; often covered with a white silky coating when very young, 
especially at margin. Flesh whitish or colored like cap. GILLS fairly close or rather well- 
spaced, adnate to adnexed or notched, pale rusty-brown becoming a beautiful cinnamon- 
brown. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, enlarged at base (at least when young), dry, 
solid, firm; cinnamon to brown (like cap) beneath a coating or patches of fibrillose whitish 
veil remnants. UNIVERSAL VEIL fibrillose or slightly cottony, white, usually leaving a 
whitish silky coating or patches and zones of white fibrils on stalk and sometimes even a 
slight annulus (ring). CORTINA disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. 
SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 )( 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers; widely distributed. I have 
seen large fruitings under spruce in the Rocky Mountains, and have also found it in the 
Pacific Northwest. In our area similar species (see comments) are common under oak. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: This medium-sized brown Cortinarius with the hygrophanous cap is one 
of a multitude of medium-sized brown Cortinarii with hygrophanous caps that belong to 
the baffling subgenus Telamonia. C. laniger is best recognized by its cinnamon-brown 
color and club-shaped stalk that is covered by whitish veil remnants, and by the complete 
absence of violet shades on the fruiting body. Similar "BUM's" (Boring Ubiquitous 
Mushrooms) are legion. Some have an equal to club-shaped or bulbous stalk like that of 
C. laniger. These include: C. bulbosus, with a paler or duller brown, swollen stalk and 
slightly smaller spores, found under both hardwoods and conifers; C. bivelus, especially 
common in the southern Rockies, with a cinnamon-brown to tawny-brown cap and larger 
spores; C. triJormis, with a strongly hygrophanous cap (dark reddish-brown when moist, 
yellow-brown or tan as it dries out), but with a transient veil that leaves only slight traces 
(if any) on the stalk, found under both hardwoods and conifers but favoring oak in Cali- 
fornia; C. distans, with minute branlike scales on the cap and widely spaced gills, found 
under oak, ponderosa pine, etc.; C. armeniacus, with a swollen or bulbous stalk and deep 
yellow-brown cap that fades to orange-buff or pale yellow-orange as it loses moisture; 
C. brunneus, a widespread nondescript conifer-lover with an equal to club-shaped, dull 
brown stalk whose apex sometimes has a slight violet or vinaceous tinge; C. dilutus and C. 
biJormis, both smaller with a more or less equal stalk and deep reddish-brown (moist) to 
buff (dry) cap, favoring northern conifers (the former with nearly round spores); and C. 
pinetorum, a fungal feature of western coniferous forests with a fibrillose, white to silvery- 
gray to pale brownish-gray cap that maybe slightly tacky when wet, plus brownish gills and 
a whitish, more orless club-shaped stalk. Other species ha ve a stalk which is spindle-shaped 
and/ or tapered below (or occasionally equal). These include: C. privignus and C. cacao- 
color, with a dark or dull vinaceous-brown to cocoa-colored cap when moist (the former 
developing a silky whitish sheen as it loses moisture) and stalk which lacks persistent veil 
remnants; C. damascenus, similar to the previous two species but with an equal or tapered 
stalk that is covered with a persistent coating of white veil fibrils; and C. duracinus, which 
has a whitish stalk and a cinnamon-brown cap that fades to buff or pale tan as it dries out. 
The above species are but a few of the hundreds of brownish "Telamonias." As already 
pointed out, recognition of these fungi is very difficult and none should be eaten. For 
medium-sized "Telamonias" with a violet tinge when moist, see C. evernius, and for 
smaller species, see the C. obtusus group. 
452 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Cort;narlus obtusus group (Little Brown Cortinarius) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad, bell-shaped to conical at first, expanding in age but usually retaining 
a blunt umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid, brown to reddish-brown to 
tawny-brown and faintly striate when moist, fading to tan or paler as it loses moisture. 
Flesh thin, brownish; odor usually radish- or iodine-like (but often faint). GILLS light 
to dull brown becoming cinnamon-brown in age, close, adnate to adnexed. STALK 
4-8 cm long, 2 mm thick, equal or often slightly thicker in the middle and tapered below; 
dry, hollow in age, fragile; colored like the cap or often yellower or paler, whitish or pallid 
as it loses moisture. UNIVERSAL VEIL and CORTINA scanty, pallid or whitish, disap- 
pearing or leaving a few fibrils on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown to rusty-brown; spores 
8-10)( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under conifers, especially pine 
and spruce; widely distributed. This species and its numerous look-alikes(see comments) 
are common in most regions, including ours. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: The above description encompasses several small boring, brownish 
Cortinarii ("LBM's") sometimes referred to as the C. obtusus-c. acutus complex. (c. 
acutus is slightly slimmer, smaller, and paler than C. obtusus, with a more acute umbo; 
another species, C. scandens, is bluntly umbonate like C. obtusus, but has smaller spores.) 
The "true" C. obtusus and C. acutus both have rather pale stems (usually paler than the 
cap or even whitish). Because of their small size, they might be confused with Inocybes 
or Galerinas. The former, however. have duller brown spores while the latter usually have 
a yellower fruiting body and typically grow in moss or on wood. Other small..T elamonias" 
are legion, especially under northern or mountain conifers. Even experts have difficulty 
differentiating them from each other and there is absolutely no reason for the amateur to 
even try. Nevertheless, I will mention a few of them for the categorically-inclined: C. 
subcusp;datus and C.fasc;atus resemble C. acUlUS, but the first has yellowish veil material 
on the stalk, or if not, can be told by its dark cinnamon-brown gills when young, and the 
latter has a darker stalk and tends to grow in clusters. C. stemmatus is a slightly larger 
species with a blackish-brown cap that fades to reddish-brown or reddish-cinnamon as it 
loses moisture plus a mild odor and whitish veil material on the stalk (see photograph); 
it is common under conifers (especially pine in our area). C. n;gTocusp;datus can usually 
be told by its dark cap with a prominent black umbo, and C. ;nc;sus by its minutely scaly, 
brownish to reddish-brown cap and white veil remnants on the stalk. C. psammocephalus 
has tawny-brown fibrillose scales or patches on both the cap and stalk. C. paleaceus has 
a blackish-brown cap that fades to dingy brown in age, whitish veil remnants on the cap 
Cortinarius stemmatus (see comments under C. obtusus) is one of dozens of small, brownish, difficult- 
to-demystify Cortinarii. The cap is blackish-brown when moist but turns reddish-brown as it loses 
moisture. Note umbonate cap. 
t 
. 
\ 
. 
\ 
" 
. 
. . 
\ 
., 
CORTIN ARIUS 
453 
margin and stalk (at least when young), and a geranium-like odor; it grows in mossy bogs 
or other wet places under spruce. C. decipiens also has a dark cap (vinaceous-brown or 
darker when moist), but it lacks white veil remnants on the stalk, while C. washingtonensis 
can easily be told by its black-staining gills. All of the above species are especially common 
under northern conifers, but some may also occur with hardwoods. Finally, there are a 
number of small "Telamonias" that are distinctly violet or violet-tinged when fresh and 
moist, including: C. pulchellus, violet overall when young and especially fond of alder; 
and C. subflexipes, which has a rusty-brown to ochraceous cap but shows violet in the 
gills and stalk apex when young. For larger "Telamonias," see C./anigerand C. evernius. 
C ortinarius cinnamomeus group 
CAP 1.5 cm broad, obtusely conical becoming convex to more or less plane or often with 
an umbo; surface dry, finely fibrillose, yellowish to olive-yellow to tawny, ochre-buff, 
yellow-brown, or olive-brown, becoming more cinnamon-colored in age. Flesh thin, 
yellowish or olive-yellow. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, yellow to olive- 
yellow becoming tawny, then rustier in age as spores ripen. ST ALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-5 
(10) mm thick, more or less equal, often curved, dry, finely fibrillose or with small fibrillose 
scales, yellow to yellow-brown or ochraceous, often browner toward base and duller in age. 
CORTINA yellow or yellow-olive, disappearing or leaving inconspicuous hairs on upper 
stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 6-9.5 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, minutely 
roughened. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers, especially pine; 
widely distributed, and common in our area from late fall through early spring. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided! It is said to be edible, but some very similar species (see C. 
gentilis) are deadly poisonous! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Dermocybe cinnamomea, this contrary little Cortinarius 
and its numerous look-alikes are not cinnamon-colored at all. Rather, the dominant colors 
are yellow, yellow-olive, and ochre. The color plus the slender stem, dry cap, and evan- 
escent fibrillose veil (cortina) are characteristic of a large complex of species in the 
subgenus Dermocybe which are best left to the specialist. It may actually be that the "true" 
C. cinnamomeus does not occur here, but a number of very similar species certainly do, 
including: C. cinnamomeo-Iuteus, said to be" very common in the Pacific Northwest; 
C. humboldtensis(from northern California) and C. olivaceopictus, the latter with reddish 
to orange fibrils on the stalk; C. raphanoides, olive-yellow, with a radish odor; and C. 
thiersii, with larger spores, especially common under mountain conifers. Another group of 
Cort;nar;us c;nnamomeus group is common under conifers, but identifying the various species 
in the "complex" is very difficult. Some forms have sharply conical caps (right), others do not (left). 
'- 
.. 
. 
...... 
"" 
.. 
i 
.... 
:, 
It;.. 
s. ."" 
-i- 
454 
CORTINARIACEAE 
species, typified by C. croceofol;us, have saffron to rusty-yellow or orange gills when 
young and a browner or more cinnamon-colored cap. They are just as common as the C. 
cinnamomeus group, and their ranks include: C. aurant;obas;s, with larger spores; C. zak;;, 
with deep orange gills when young and stalk coated with brown tovinaceous-brownfibrils; 
and C. aureifol;us, a very distinctive species that usually grows in sand (often partially 
buried!) under pines, and has orange to brownish-orange ( orin one form, yellowish) gills, a 
cinnamon-brown to dark reddish-brown cap, and larger spores. Finally, there is C. callis- 
teus, a bright yellow to orange-ochre species with a thick club-shaped stem (at least I cm 
thick at apex and 2.5 cm or more thick at base). None of these species should be eaten. 
(Note: some authorities have a concept of C. cinnamomeus which more closely fits the 
C. croceofo/ius of this book, and vice-versa, at least insofar as gill color is concerned.) 
Cortinarius phoeniceus var. occidentalis 
CAP 2.5-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface dry, finely 
fibrillose or silky, maroon-red or dark red to reddish-brown; margin sometimes lobed. 
Flesh thin, reddish near cuticle, olive-brownish near gills; odor mild or slightly radishlike. 
GILLS deep red, vinaceous-red, or blood-red, becoming rustier as spores ripen; adnate to 
adnexed or notched. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.4-1.2 cm thick, more or less equal, dry, 
fibrillose, yellowish or ochre or sometimes brownish in old age. CORTINA scanty, yel- 
lowish, disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; 
spores 6-8 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups under conifers in the Pacific Northwest and 
California; sometimes common in the fall and early winter. In our area it also grows with 
madrone and/ or huckleberry, but never in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended, but an excellent choice for dyeing (not dying!). 
COMMENTS: The beautiful deep red gills and maroon-red to reddish-brown cap are set 
off nicely by the yellowish stem, making this Cortinarius (or Dermocybe) relatively easy to 
identify. Other species: C. sem;sangu;neus also has red gills, but has a slender yellow stem 
and yellowish to ochre or olive-brown cap; it occurs in California, but is more common in 
eastern North America and the Pacific Northwest. Another species, C. californ;cus, has a 
smooth, hygrophanous cap that is dark. rusty-red when moist but fades as it loses moisture. 
It has orange-red to rusty-orange or "burnt sienna" gills, and a rather long(7-15 cm) stalk 
that is paler than the cap (dull orange or even paler, often with orange fibrils from the 
cortina). It is known only from west coast and occurs in a variety of habitats, but seldom in 
large numbers. For completely red species, see C. sanguineus. 
Cortinarius sanguineus (Blood-Red Cortinarius) 
CAP (I) 2-5 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped becoming convex to plane or broadly umbo- 
nate; surface dry, silky or finely fibrillose, colored evenly deep carmine-red to blood-red 
or deep red. Flesh thin, blood-red to reddish-purple; odor mild or faintly pleasant. GILLS 
close, adnate to adnexed, blood-red to dark blood-red, but in age dusted with cinnamon- 
colored spores. STALK 4-10 cm long, 3-5 (8) mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, 
same color as cap or slightly darker, dry, base with yellowish to yellow-orange or some- 
times pinkish downy hairs. CORTINA red or at least tinged red, often scanty and disap- 
pearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE PRINT rusty- to reddish-brown; 
spores 6-9 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT A T Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups, mainly under conifers and 
often in beds of moss; widely distributed but generally rare. In favorable years it fruits in 
the fall under spruce and fir along the northern California coast, but never in large num- 
bers. I have found it as far south as Mendocino County in California. 
CORTINARIUS 
455 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Do not experiment! Like many species in the subgenus Dermo- 
cybe, it can be used to dye wool or yarn, yielding a brilliant array of pinks, reds, and purples. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Dermocybe sangu;nea, this beautiful mushroom is easily 
recognized by its blood-red to dark red color, small size, and evanescent cortina. It might 
be mistaken for a brightly colored Hygrocybe, but the spores are not white and the gills 
are not waxy. There is no yellow in the ca p and/ or stalk as in C. phoeniceus var. occidenta/is 
and C. semisanguineus. and the cap is not hygrophanous as in C. californicus (see 
comments under C. phoeniceus var. occidenta/is). Other completely red Dermocybes 
include: C. pun;ceus, said to differ by its ochraceous to golden-brown cortina, dark red to 
purple-red color, and preference for hardwoods; and C. cinnabar;nus, also favoring 
hardwoods (but not limited to them), with a slightly larger, cinnabar-red to rusty-red 
or dark red fruiting body and larger spores. The latter species has often been reported from 
eastern North America, but according to Cortinarius-experts Alexander Smith and 
Joseph Ammirati, American material differs slightly from the European version. (At least 
one common hardwood-lover has been recognized as a "new" species, C. marylandensis.) 
INOCYBE 
Small to medium-sized, typically terrestrial mushrooms. CAP often umbonate or conical; surface 
typically dry and silky, woolly, scaly, or radially fibrillose; margin often splitting at maturity; odor 
offlesh often distinctive (usually unpleasant). GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, usually brown at 
maturity (but often with whitish edges). STALK central, often rather slender; apex often powdery 
or with small flakes. VEIL absent, or if present then fibrillose or cobwebby and usually evanescent. 
VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT brown. Spores smooth, warty, angular. or nodulose, lacking an 
apical germ pore. Gills with cystidia, at least on edges. Cap cuticle filamentous. 
INOCYBE is a large, listless, and lackluster assemblage of mundane, malodorous brown 
mushrooms that are of little interest to the average mushroom hunter except that many are 
poisonous. The best means of recognizing an Inocybe is by its characteristically silky, 
fibrillose, minutely scaly, and/ or woolly cap which is often umbonate and seldom viscid. 
The spore color is some shade of brown, and is generally duller than that of Cortinarius. In 
addition, most Inocybes have a noticeable odor-occasionally sweet or fruity as in I. 
pyriodora. but more often unpleasant (pungent, spermatic, fishy, or like fresh green corn 
but not often radishlike as in Hebeloma). 
Like Cortinarius. Inocy bes are largely terrestrial and mycorrhizal and are a major fungal 
facet of temperate forests. Unlike Cortinarius. they are not the least bit colorful. They come 
in an endless, senseless procession of boring browns, yucky yellows, gratuitous grays, and 
wishy-washy whites, with only I. lilacina(amongthe common species) deviating from the 
norm. Almost without exception they not only qualify as "LBM's" (p. 32), but as 
"BUM's" ("Boring Ubiquitous Mushrooms"), and it is necessary to know the size and 
shape of the spores and cystidia before an accurate identification can be made. Even then, 
unraveling them is a trying and tedious task whose futility is only exceeded by its 
pointlessness, and underscored by the sad fact that most Inocybes are poisonous. I would 
venture to guess, in fact, that Inocybe contains a higher percentage of poisonous species 
than any other major mushroom genus, including Amanita! The toxin is muscarine, 
which can be fatal in large amounts (see p. 894). It is therefore advisable to avoid all 
Inocybes, even those rumored to be edible. 
Inocybe is a very large genus-almost as immense, in fact, as Cortinarius. (The late 
Daniel Stuntz listed over 400 North American species in section Inocybium alone, i.e., 
those with smooth spores and cystidia on the faces of the gills!) A mere nine Inocybes are 
described here, which for most intents and purposes are eight too many! Several other 
species are keyed out. 
456 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Key to Inocybe 
Odor fragrant or fruity (though sometimes sickening, as in rotten fruit) ................ 2 
Odor spermatic, pungent, fishy, like green corn, mild, etc., but not fragrant or fruity ..... 5 
Cap olive to olive-brown at center _................ I. corydalina (see I. pyriodora, p. 459) 
Not as above ................................................................. 3 
Either cap conical with reddish-brown to wine-red radiating fibrils or cap with a whitish 
patch of universal veil tissue and odor with a green corn component .................. 7 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Odor of sweet peas ............................. I. suaveolens(see I. pyriodora, p. 459) 
4. Odor spicy or fruity or otherwise (but not of sweet peas) ...... I. pyriodora & others, p. 459 
5. Stalk base or lower portion dull bluish-green, olive, or dull greenish .. I. calam;strata, p. 462 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. 
I. 
I. 
2. 
2. 
3. 
6. 
7. 
Cap grayish-lilac to grayish-brown or pinkish-brown with a smooth white or creamy, umbonate 
center( or in one form cap entirely whitish and stalk pinkish); stalk typically pruinose(granular- 
dandruffy) most of its length, with a bulb at base ..... I. albodisca(see I. macu/ata, p. 458) 
Not as above (but may have some of above features) ................................ 7 
Cap small (2-5 cm broad) and yellowish to brown, but with a patch of whitish universal veil 
tissue at the center (or sometimes overall), at least in most specimens; stalk white when young 
and not shaggy or woolly ............... i. lanatodisca & others (see I. macu/ata. p. 458) 
Not as above ................................................................. 8 
Cap 3-8 cm broad, at first covered with a whitish universal veil that leaves patches of tissue near 
margin; stalk 5-10 mm thick, also sheathed with woolly remnants of the veil, dingy brownish 
beneath the remnants; widespread, but especially common in the Rockies ... I. leucoblema 
Not as above ................................................................. 9 
Stalk smooth or fibrillose or occasionally with a few small fibrillose patches or scales .... 10 
Stalk distinctly scaly (i.e., with numerous small scales similar in color to those on cap) ... 25 
Some part offruiting body lilac to violet when fresh (but may fade or discolor in age) ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. I. lilacina & others, p. 461 
Not as above (but stalk or cap may be pink, carmine, vinaceous, etc.) ................. II 
Cap white, smooth to very finely silky and not discoloring appreciably in age or when bruised; 
stalk not pruinose (granular-dandruffy) or pruinose only at apex ...... I. geophylla, p. 460 
Not as above (but cap may be white initially and then discolor in age, or cap may have white veil 
remnants) .................................................................. 12 
Cap and stalk whitish at first, but usually developing pink, red, or orange tones as it ages; very 
common, especially under conifers ................................. .1. pudica, p.460 
Not as above ................................................................ 13 
Cap conical when young, often with a pointed umbo in age, the surface radially fibrillose (and 
often splitting in age) but not woolly or scaly, creamy to straw-colored, yellow-brown or brown 
(but not reddish); gills sometimes with an olive or greenish tinge .................... 14 
Not as above ................................................................ 15 
Odor resembling that offresh green corn; cap creamy to straw-colored .... I. soror;a, p. 457 
Odor spermatic; cap usually somewhat darker (yellow-brown to brown), at least at the center 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I. Jastig;ata & others (see I. sororia. p. 457) 
Cap brownish with a very prominent gray to dark brown or black "nipple" (umbo) at center; 
widely distributed .................................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1. Juscodisca 
Not as above ................................................................ 16 
Cap with reddish-brown to carmine or wine-red fibrils, more or less conical when young; stalk 
whitish at least at apex; found mainly with oak (in California) ........... I. jurana, p.458 
Not as above ................................. _. ......... ...... ........... ... 17 
Stalk pale pink to salmon-pink; cap reddish-brown, at least at center .................... 
. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .1. laetior& I. oblectabilis(see I.jurana, p.458) 
Not as above ................................................................ 18 
7. 
8. 
8. 
9. 
9. 
10. 
10. 
11. 
11. 
12. 
12. 
13. 
13. 
14. 
14. 
15. 
15. 
16. 
16. 
17. 
17. 
INOCYBE 
457 
18. Stalk entirely pruinose (minutely granular-scurfy-dandruffy) and discoloring dark gray to dark 
brown or vinaceous-brown from the base upward in age .............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I. picrosma, /. leucomelaena, & others 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Fruiting body fairly small (cap typically up to 4 cm broad; stalk less than 5 mm thick) ... 20 
19. Fruiting body medium-sized (cap usually at least 3 cm broad and stalk at least 5 mm thick 23 
20. Cap with loosely-arranged or torn-up fibrils that give it a shaggy or ragged appearance, espe- 
cially at margin; color more or less dark brown. . . . . . .. 1.lacera (see I. /anuginosa. p. 462) 
20. Not as above; cap usually woolly or scaly or differently colored ...................... 21 
21. Cap conical to bell-shaped, the surface often splitting radially but not scaly; stalk with a basal 
bulb. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. I. mixtilis(see I. sororia. below) 
21. Not as above; cap usually scaly or woolly ......................................... 22 
22. Cap dark brown to blackish, with small erect scales; often growing on rotten wood; spores 
warty ................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /. lanuginosa, p. 462 
22. Not as above; usually terrestrial ..... I.flocculosa & many others (see I. /anuginosa. p.462) 
23. Cap yellow-brown to ochre or dull cinnamon (sometimes darker at center), fibrillose or in age 
becoming somewhat scaly; stalk similarly colored at first but becoming brown to smoky-brown 
from the base upward; common under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ..... /. olympiana 
23. Not as above; cap usually brown to dark brown or chestnut-brown (but sometimes overlaid 
with whitish veil remnants) ................................................... 24 
24. Stalk with a large turniplike bulb at base; cap usually silky-fibrillose or smooth; spores angular 
. . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /. napipes(see I. sororia. below) 
24. Stalk equal or with small bulb; cap sometimes scaly; spores smooth /. maculata & others, p. 458 
25. Cap relatively large (5-12 cm broad); stalk fairly thick (at least 5 mm); both cap and stalk with 
dark brown scales (those on stalk arranged in more or less concentric rings) .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /. sp. (unidentified)(see I. ca/amistrata. p. 462) 
25. Not as above; smaller ......................................................... 26 
26. Cap and stalk yellowish to yellow-brown to cinnamon ................................. 
................................. /. terrigena&/. caesariata(see I. ca/amistrata. p.462) 
26. Cap and stalk with darker brown scales ............. /. hystrix(see I. ca/amistrata. p. 462) 
Inocybe sororia (Corn Silk Inocybe) 
CAP 2-8 (10) cm broad when expanded, sharply conical or bell-shaped when young, often 
expanding in age but retaining a prominent umbo, the margin usually uplifted or splitting 
in old age; surface dry, silky, radially fibrillose, creamy to pale yellowish, honey-yellow, 
or straw-colored, often somewhat browner at the center or in age. Flesh thin; odor usually 
strongly pungent, like freshly husked or green corn. GILLS close or crowded, pallid 
becoming yellowish, then olive-yellow and finally brownish-gold or brown, the edges 
usually paler; adnate to adnexed, often seceding to free. STALK 3-14 cm long, 2-5 ( 10) mm 
thick, equal or with a slightly enlarged base, white or tinged cap color, fibrillose and often 
scurfy. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 10-13 (17»( 5-8 microns, elliptical or 
bean-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills thin-walled. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in woods; widely distributed. 
In our area it is common in the fall and winter under live oak and pine; farther north it 
favors conifers. I have seen large fruitings locally as well as in Oregon. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! It contains high concentrations of muscarine. 
COMMENTS: A common and prominent Inocybe, easily recognized by its sharply 
conical to umbonate, creamy to yellowish, fibrillose cap and odor of fresh green corn. The 
stem is often quite long and slender. I. Jast;g;ata is a very similar, widespread species with a 
strongly spermatic odor and a slightly darker (yellow-brown to brownish-ochre) cap, at 
least at the center. Other species: I. cooke; has a silky yellowish cap, small but prominent 
bulb at the base of the stem, slight odor, and smaller spores; I. nap;pes has a blunter 
 
I  
.7 , 
,I 
\; 
. " ' 
", 
.{ 
. 
« .. 
it 
" 
. 
.. .1  
F 
., 
 
Inocybe sororia. Left: Young, relatively robust specimens. Right: A slender mature specimen. Note 
the conical or umbonate cap. Green corn odor is also distinctive. 
brownish cap, a cortina (cobwebby veil) when young, a turniplike bulb at the base of the 
stem, and warty (nodulose) spores; I. mixtilis also has warty spores, but is smaller than 
I. napipes and lacks a cortina. The latter two species are fairly common under conifers in 
the Pacific Northwest, but I have not seen them locally. All of the above are poisonous. 
Inocybejurana (Reddish Inocybe) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad when expanded, conical or bell-shaped, expanding in age but usually 
retaining an umbo; surface dry, radially fibrillose, buff or brownish with darker brown 
fibrils, but soon flushed carmine, reddish-brown, or wine-red (vinaceous); center some- 
times with small scales, margin often splitting in age. Flesh tinged pinkish or vinaceous, 
thin; odor mild to somewhat fruity or unpleasant. GILLS pallid becoming grayish-brown 
or dull brown, close, adnate to adnexed or even free. STALK 2-8 cm long, 4-10 (15) mm 
thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base, dry, white or flushed cap color below. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT brown; spores 9-15 )( 5-8 microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth. 
Cystidia on gills thin-walled. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in woods and at their edges; 
widely distributed. In our area I have found it twice under live oak in the winter. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. According to some sources it is edible, but why tempt 
fate? Several similar species are poisonous. 
COMMENTS: The deep reddish or vinaceous-toned cap is the hallmark of this illustrious 
Inocybe. In other respects it rather resembles I. sororia, but does not smell like fresh 
green corn. Other species: I. laetio, has a bright salmon-pink stem and dark reddish-brown 
centered cap with a yellowish margin; it occurs under conifers in the Pacific N orthwestand 
is one of numerous Inocybes "discovered" and named by Daniel Stuntz. I. oblectabilis 
has a pale pink stalk and reddish-brown cap. 
Inocybe macu/ala (Brown Inocybe) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, becoming convex or plane with an obtuse 
umbo; surface dry, radially fibrillose, dark brown to chestnut-brown, at first with whitish 
down (at least at center) which may break up into small scales or wear away; margin often 
lobed, splitting in age. Flesh thin, whitish; odor mild or slightly aromatic. GILLS pale 
458 
INOCYBE 
459 
grayish becoming grayish-brown to olive-brown or dull brown, close, adnate to adnexed 
or seceding. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.5-1.2 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base, 
fibrillose-striate, white or flushed cap color (brownish). VEIL absent except for whitish 
down on cap. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 9-12 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical or bean- 
shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills thin-walled. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in woods and under trees; widely distributed. 
Occasional in our area in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous; it contains muscarine. 
COMMENTS: Any medium-sized to large Inocybe with a dark brown fibrillose or hairy 
cap and smooth spores can be referred here and conveniently forgotten about. I have 
encountered forms with an obnoxious odor, others which were mild and still others with a 
slightly aromatic or truffle-like smell. Undoubtedly more than one species is involved. 
Another fairly large species, I. serot;na, has a brown cap with a whitish to yellowish-buff 
center and a bulb at the base of the stem. I. napipes( see comments under I. sororia) also has 
a basal bulb and can be quite large. There are also several smaller species that feature 
white universal veil tissue at the center ofthe cap. These include: I. /anatodisca, cap brown 
to yellow-brown with a moldy-looking patch of whitish fibrils at the center which may 
disperse in age, a whitish stalk (at least when young), and cystidia only on the edges of the 
gills plus a pungent to sweetish odor, fairly common in our area under oak but also 
occurring with conifers; and I. s;ndon;a, similar to I. lanatodisca, but with cystidia on 
the faces of the gills as well as the edges. Another species, I. a/bod;sca, has a lilac-gray 
to pinkish-brown ( or sometimes whitish) cap with a smooth whitish urn bonate center and a 
basal bulb on the stalk; it is common in northern latitudes under both hardwoods and 
conifers. None ofthe above species should be eaten. 
Inocybe pyriodora (Fragrant Inocybe) 
CAP 2-7 cm broad, bell-shaped or obtusely conical becoming broadly umbonate; surface 
dry, at first silky-smooth but often fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly (especially at center) in age 
(or with torn-up appearance); white, the fibrils becoming dingy ochre to yellow-brown or 
brownish, sometimes pinkish- or reddish-stained in age. Flesh thin, white, slowly staining 
pinkish or reddish when cut; odor fragrant, usually spicy (cinnamon- or matsutake-like) 
but sometimes like overripe pears or unpleasant in old age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or 
notched, close, whitish becoming dull cinnamon, brown, or reddish-tinged. STALK 4-10 
cm long, 3-15 mm thick, more or less equal, white throughout or colored like cap except for 
very apex, sometimes developing pinkish stains; smooth or finely fibrillose. VEIL fibril- 
lose or cobwebby, evanescent. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 7-10 (12) x 4.5-7.5 microns, 
elliptical to bean-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills with slightly thickened walls. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods or at their edges, under brush, 
along trails, etc., favoring hardwoods but also occurring with conifers; widely distributed. 
It is not uncommon in our area in the fall and winter in mixed woods and under oak. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided-despite the enticing odor it is probably poisonous. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several nondescript Inocybes with a spicy or fruity fragrance. 
The odor is often reminiscent of the matsutake (Armillaria ponderosa), but is sometimes 
fruity. Other fragrant species include: I. bongardii, cap scaly, odor fruity, spores larger; 
I. coryda/;na, cap whitish with brownish fibrils and an olive to olive-brown center and 
a strongly pungent or sickeningly sweet odor (like rotting fruit); I. godey;, a reddening 
species with a slight fruity odor and abrupt bulb at the base of the stem; I. cooke;, which 
has a slight fruity odor and abrupt basal bulb but does not redden; I. hute//a, with an 
almond extract or cyanide odor when fresh; and I. suaveo/ens, which smells like sweet 
peas and has nodulose-angular spores and is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest. 
J 
, 
, 
... 
'. 
. 
.. 
Inocybe pudica is a whitish species that develops reddish to salmon-orange tones as it ages. It is 
especially common under conifers. 
Inocybe pudica (Blushing Inocybe) 
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, conical or bell-shaped when young, becoming convex to nearly 
plane at maturity, but usually retaining an umbo; surface dry or tacky, silky-fibrillose to 
nearly smooth, white at first but developing pinkish to reddish or orange stains as it ages. 
Flesh thin, white; odor unpleasant or spermatic. GILLS pallid or flushed pinkish or 
orange, becoming grayish-brown or dull brown as spores mature, close, adnate to 
adnexed, notched, or free. STALK 4-8 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or enlarged at base, 
smooth or silky-fibrillose, firm; white, but discoloring like the cap. VEIL fibrillose or 
cobwebby, whitish, evanescent. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 7-10 x 4-6 microns, ellip- 
tical or bean-shaped, smooth. Gills typically with both thick- and thin-walled cystidia. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups or troops on ground under conifers; widespread, 
but especially common on the est coast. In our area it is often abundant in the late fall, 
winter, and early spring under pine and Douglas-fir. It seems to favor brushy areas or 
immature second-growth stands. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous; like most Inocybes, it contains muscarine. 
COMMENTS: This is one of the most common Inocybes of the western United States 
as well as one of the most easily recognized. The tendency of the white fruiting body to 
"blush" pink, red, or orange plus the growth under conifers and relatively smooth cap are 
the principal fieldmarks. The cap may be slightly tacky or slippery in wet weather, but is 
not truly viscid. I. pyriodora is somewhat similar but has a fragrant or spicy odor. 
Inocybe geophylla (Little White Inocybe) 
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped, expanding in age to plane but often retaining 
an umbo; surface dry, white or sometimes with a slight yellow tinge in age; smooth to silky 
or finely fibrillose; margin sometimes uplifted or split in age. Flesh thin, white; odor disa- 
greeable (spermatic). GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first pallid, then 
grayish, finally dull brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker 
at base, firm, white or grayish-white, finely fibrillose. VEIL fibrillose, whitish, evanescent 
or leaving a slight hairy zone on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 8-10 x 5-6 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground (or occasionally very rotten wood) in 
woods; widely distributed and common. It is abundant in our area throughout the 
mushroom season, especially under live oak, pine, and Douglas-fir. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous; it contains muscarine. 
460 
.. 
.... 
 
lnocybe geophylla is small but common. Note silky white cap and brown gills; odor is spermatic. 
COMMENTS: The small size, white umbonate cap, and dull brown gills at maturity 
characterize this ubiquitous little Inocybe. It might be mistaken at first glance for a smal1 
waxy cap (Camarophyllus), Mycena, or AlboleplOnia, but the spores and mature gills 
are brown. It also resembles l. pudica, but does not "blush." 
Inocybe lilacina (Lilac Inocybe) 
CAP 1.5-4 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical or bell-shaped, expanding in age but often 
retaining an umbo; surface dry, silky-fibrillose to nearly smooth, pale to deep lilac, but 
often with pinkish, gray, or brownish tones (or ochre at center), and often paler or whiterin 
age. Flesh thin, white Or tinged lilac; odor disagreeable (spermatic). GILLS adnate to 
adnexed or notched, close, pallid or tinged lilac, then grayish to dull brown, the edges often 
whitish. STALK 2.5-6 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at base, finely 
fibrillose, firm, colored more or less like cap or with white areas; base whitish. VEIL 
fibrillose, evanescent or leaving a very slight hairy zone on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown; 
spores 7-9)( 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed. In our 
area it can be found in the late fall and winter under pine and Douglas-fir, but is not as 
numerous as its close relative I. geophylla. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous; like most Inocybes it contains muscarine. 
COMMENTS: Also known as f. geophylla var. lilacina, this species is about the only 
common Inocybe that is the least bit colorful, although faded caps can be so pale that they 
resemble I. geophy//a. The umbonate cap, relatively small size, and brown spores distin- 
guish it from the blewit (ClilOcybe nuda) and most other purple or lilac mushrooms. 
Several species of Cortinarius resemble it, but are generally larger and have brighter(rusty- 
brown) spores. There are also several other Inocybes which are violet or violet-tinged 
when fresh.f. obscurioides, for instance, is one of several species with a violet stalk or stalk 
apex and a brownish cap that typically shows violet only at the margin (if at all). 
lnocybe /i/acina is lilac-tinged when fresh. Note umbonate cap of most specimens. 
;,. 
..... 
462 
CORTINARIACEAE 
Inocybe lanuginosa (Woolly Inocybe) 
CAP 1.5-3 (4) em broad, convex to bell-shaped becoming umbonate, plane, or with an 
uplifted margin; surface dry, densely woolly or scaly, dark brown to brownish, the scales 
small and often erect. Flesh thin, watery brownish; odor mild to slightly unpleasant 
(spermatic). GILLS adnate, adnexed, or notched, fairly close, pallid becoming grayish, 
then dull brown or cinnamon-brown. STALK 2-5 (8) em long, 24 (7) mm thick, more or 
less equal, fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, colored more or less like cap except for paler apex. 
VEIL cobwebby, pallid, evanescent. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 8-10.5)( 5-7 microns, 
elliptical with blunt warts (nodulose). Cystidia on gills typically thin-walled. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on very rotten wood or in forest humus; widely 
distributed. It favors conifers but also grows with hardwoods; I have not seen it in our 
area, but there are dozens of similar species. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but do not experiment-it may very well contain muscarine! 
COMMENTS: There are innumerable little brown Inocybes with hairy or minutely scaly 
caps. They are differentiated largely on microscopic characters such as the shape and size 
of their cystidia and spores. Most have an unpleasant or spermatic odor, and none should 
be eaten. This one is distinctive because it often grows on very rotten wood-highly 
unusual behavior for an Inocybe! Other brownish species-all typically terrestrial- 
include: I. lacera, widespread in a variety of habitats but especially common under aspen, 
with a torn-up or raggedly scaly cap and long, nearly cylindrical, sometimes warty spores; 
I. Jlocculosa, one of dozens of species with a hairy cap, smooth (bald) stalk, and smooth 
spores; and I. agardh;;, one of several species with a woolly-scaly cap that hang out with 
alder and willow. For still other species, see the key to Inocybe. 
Inocybe calamistrata (Scaly Inocybe) 
CAP 14 em broad, bell-shaped to convex, expanding only slightly in age; surface dry, 
breaking up into densely-arranged scales, dark brown to coffee-brown; margin not typi- 
cally splitting. Flesh thin; odor spermatic or fishy. GILLS adnatetoadnexed or free, close, 
brown to dull cinnamon-brown or colored like cap, the edges whitish. STALK 4-10 em 
long, 3-5 mm thick, equal or tapering upward, firm, covered with recurved scales (like cap) 
which may be obliterated or wear away in age; brown to dark brown (1ike cap), the base or 
lower portion dingy greenish-blue to olive-green (both inside and out). VEIL disappearing 
(not forming a distinct ring on stalk). SPORE PRINT brown; spores 9-13 )( 4.5-6.5 
microns, elliptical-oblong, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers or some- 
times hardwoods; widely distributed, but not common. I have seen it in several localities, 
but have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. A recent study revealed the presence of psilocybin. 
COMMENTS: The blue-green to olive-green stem base and scaly convex cap which does 
not split radially in age are the main features of this uninteresting agaric. It is included here 
as a representative of those Inocybes with scales on both the cap and the stem. Others 
include: I. hystr;x, with small, brown to dark brown scales on both the cap and stalk; I. 
terr;gena, larger and fleshier (in fact, somewhat reminiscent of a Pholiota), with golden- 
brown to cinnamon scales on the cap and stalk and sometimes a slight annulus( ring), wide- 
spread but especially common under aspen in the southern Rocky Mountains;!. caesar- 
;ata, somewhat similar in color to I. terrigena but with smaller scales, fairly common in 
eastern North America; and finally, a very robust, unidentified local species with a dark 
brown scaly cap and several zones of concentrically-arranged dark brown scales on the 
stem (cap 5-12 em broad, stalk 0.5-1.5 em thick!). None ofthese have the blue-green or 
olive-green stem base of 1. calamistrata. 
463 
HEBELOMA 
Small to medium-sized, terrestrial mushrooms. CAP typically viscid when wet and more or less 
smooth; while to buff, tan. or some shade of brown. Flesh often with a radish like odor. GILLS 
adnate to adnexed or notched, usually brown al maturity; often with whitish edges. STALK fleshy, 
central; apex often powdery or with small flakes. VEIL usually absent or if present then cobwebby- 
fibrillose and evanescent. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT brown (or rarely reddish-brown). 
Spores typically elliptical, smooth or roughened, lacking a germ pore. Cystidia typically present on 
gill edges, often conspicuous. Cap cuticle filamentous. 
THIS is yet another faceless and featureless collection of brownish mushrooms. Those 
that are too large to qualify as "LBM's" most certainly fall into the category of "BUM's" 
("Boring Ubiquitous Mushrooms"). The stalk is fleshy and the gills attached but not 
decurrent, giving the fruiting body the stature of a Trich%ma or Enr%ma. The odor 
is usually mild or radishlike, not spermatic as in Inocybe, and the cap is typically smooth 
and viscid rather than dry and fibrillose or scaly. Hebe/oma is closely related to Cortinarius, 
but that genus has rusty-brown spores and a cobwebby veil (cortina). Some Hebelomas 
have a cortina, but can be distinguished by their duller spore color and/ or the presence of 
sterile cells (cystidia) on the edges of the gills, plus the frequently powdered or flaky stem 
apex. Agrocybe is also similar, but has a cellular cap cuticle and usually grows in grass, 
dung, wood or wood chips, or cultivated soil. Hebelomas, in contrast, are largely mycor': 
rhizal. As a result, they are found in forests or at their edges or on tree-studded lawns and 
cemeteries. (However, H. syriense feeds on decaying corpses and is said to have led to 
the discovery of at least one crime!) 
About 200 species of Hebeloma occur in North America, but none are exceptionally 
distinctive or colorful. Whites, browns, tans, and buffs predominate, making identification 
on the basis of color hopeless. M ore minute measures of individuality must be taken into 
account, such as the size and shape of the cystidia and spores. Many mushroom-hunters, 
however, prefer to recognize only two varieties-the big brown ones and the not-so-big 
brown ones! Hebelomas should not be eaten, as some are definitely poisonous and the 
group as a whole is poorly known. Three widespread species are described here. 
Key to Hebeloma 
I. Spore print reddish to pinkish-brown or pinkish-cinnamon .......................... 2 
1. Not as above; spore print dull brown or at times rusty-brown ......................... 3 
2. Cap whitish when fresh, but often aging ochre, gray, or brownish; spores elliptical (not angular) 
.................. ........ .... . ... . . . H. sarcophyllum(see H. crustu/iniforme, p. 464) 
2. Not as above; spores more or less angular ....................... (see Entoloma, p. 242) 
3. Odor spermatic; cap often (but not always) umbonate and rather small. (seelnocybe, p. 455) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Veil present when young, disappearing or leaving remnants on the cap margin and/ or a slight 
ring (annulus) or fibrillose sheath on the stalk .................................... _ 5 
4. Veil a bsent or rudimentary _........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " 6 
5. Lower portion of stalk sheathed with conspicuous veil remnants; cap often with veil remnants 
also, especially near margin .......... H. strophosum(see H. mesophaeum group, p. 465) 
5. Stalk not conspicuously sheathed with veil remnants ........ H. mesophaeum group, p. 465 
6. Cap small (typically less than 4 cm broad) and white to grayish, often hairy at margin; gills 
adnate to decurrent and peeling easily from cap .......... (see Clitocybe& Allies, p. 148) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Growing on or near corpses, mainly in eastern North America; cap brown to reddish-brown . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H. syriense 
7. Growing in woods, near trees, etc., but not on corpses; cap variously colored (including brown 
or reddish-brown); common and widespread ...................................... 8 
464 
CORTINARIACEAE 
8. Cap typically brown to cinnamon-brown or dark reddish-brown (but sometimes paler brown 
and often shaded with gray or overlaid with a pallid sheen); stalk usually with small protruding 
scales _........................................ H. sinapizans group & others, p. 465 
8. Cap white to buff, pale brown, tan, crust-colored, or yellow-brown; stalk often with a dandruffy 
or scurfy apex but not normally with scales ....................................... 9 
9. Odor sweet ........................... H. sacchariolens(see H. cruslu/iniforme. below) 
9. Odor typically mild or radishlike, etc., but not sweet ............................... IO 
10. Cap viscid or slimy when wet; stalk apex usually dandruffy (with small white flakes); gills often 
with white edges; odor usually (but not always) radishlike; found in woods or on lawns near 
trees .......................................... H. crustuliniforme & others, below 
10. Not as above; cap only slightly viscid; found in wood chips, gardens, etc. (seeAgrocybe, p.467) 
Hebeloma crustulinijorme (Poison Pie) 
CAP 3-11 cm broad, convex or broadly convex with an inrolled margin, becoming plane 
to obtusely umbonate or with an uplifted margin in age; surface viscid when moist, smooth, 
whitish to buff, pale tan, or crust-brown (usually darker toward center and paler at 
margin); margin naked. Flesh thick, white; odor distinctly radishlike. GILLS crowded 
(often appearing to slightly overlap one another), adnate or notched, pallid when young, 
becoming watery brown and finally dull brown; edges white and minutely scalloped, often 
beaded with water droplets in wet weather and brown-spotted when dry. STALK 4-13 cm 
long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, usually equal except for an enlarged base; solid, fibrillose; white 
or tinged cap color; apex powdered or with flakes or granules; base sometimes with white 
mycelial threads. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 9-13 )( 5.5-7.5 microns, 
elliptical or almond-shaped, smooth or minutely roughened. Cystidia abundant on edges 
of gills. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops on ground in woods or at their 
edges and on lawns or cemeteries near trees; widely distributed and common. In our area 
it is usually abundant from late fall through early spring under pine, and to a lesser extent, 
oak. It is by far our most common Hebeloma. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous-it causes mild to severe gastrointestinal distress. 
COMMENTS: In spite of my general disdain for Hebelomas, I must admit this is a most 
attractive mushroom when fresh. The smooth, viscid, pallid to pie-colored cap, attached 
Hebe/oma crusluliniforme is a common poisonous species with a whitish to pale tan cap, brown 
gills (at least at maturity), and radishlike odor. For photo of young buttons, see p. 466. 
".. 
l 
f.... 
.... 
..; 
I' ,\ 
I 
V- 
HEBELOMA 
465 
(usually notched) brown gills, absence of a veil, and radishlike odor( which is usually quite 
pronounced but sometimes slight) are the important field marks. You will undoubtedly 
encounter several subtlely different species which more or less fit the above description, 
but they can only be differentiated microscopically. Other species: H. hiemale is smaller 
(cap about 3 or 4 cm broad), with only a slight radish odor and gills not beaded with drop- 
lets. H. sacchariolens is distinguished by its strong sweet or fruity odor. H. albidulum is 
one of several species with a white or whitish cap and little or no odor. H. sarcophyllum 
is an unusual but distinctive mushroom with a chalk-white cap that may become reddish- 
gray or brownish-tinged in age, deep flesh-colored gills, and reddish-brown spores. It 
resembles Pluteus pellitus, but has attached gills and grows on the ground. It could also 
be mistaken for an Entoloma. but does not have angular spores. None of the above species 
should be eaten. 
Hebe/oma s;nap;zans group (Scaly-Stalked Hebeloma) 
CAP 4-13 (20) cm broad, convex to broadly convex with an inrolled margin, becoming 
plane or with an uplifted, often wavy margin; surface slightly viscid when moist, smooth, 
brown to cinnamon, ochre-brown, pinkish-tan, or dark reddish-brown, but often shaded 
with gray or overlaid with a pallid sheen toward margin, which is at first minutely cottony. 
Flesh thick, whitish; odor usually distinctly radishlike. GILLS close, usually adnexed or 
notched, pallid becoming pale brown, then dull brown or dull cinnamon, the edges 
minutely serrated and often beaded with droplets in wet weather and brownish-dotted 
when dry. STALK 4-13 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually swollen at base, whitish, with distinct 
pallid to brownish flakes or protruding scales; apex usually powdered with small white 
granules; firm, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT dull brown; spores 10-13 )( 6-8 
microns, elliptical, obscurely roughened. Cystidia present on gill edges. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious, sometimes in rings, on ground under both hard woods 
and conifers or near planted trees on lawns; widely distributed. This species "complex" is 
fairly common in our coastal pine forests in the late fall, winter, and early spring. Elsewhere 
it often grows with oak and a related species (see comments) is fond of aspen. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous-it causes nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, etc. 
COMMENTS: This large, sturdy species or species "complex" is best recognized by its 
brown to reddish-brown cap, thick stem adorned with small scales, absence of a veil, and 
dull brown, usually notched gills. It is our largest Hebeloma. more robust than H. crustu- 
liniforme. and not nearly as attractive. It might be mistaken for a dull colored Cortinarius 
were it not for the absence of a cortina even in small buttons. It is sometimes found growing 
with Tricholoma imbricatum. which has a brown cap, white to flesh-colored gills, and 
white spores. Other species: H. insigne is a robust, scaly-stemmed species that occurs 
commonly under aspen and conifers in the mountains of Colorado and New Mexico. 
H ebe/oma mesophaeum group 
(Veiled Hebeloma) 
CAP 2-6.5 cm broad, convex or umbonate, expanding to broadly umbonate, plane, or 
with margin uplifted in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist but soon dry, color variable 
but usually dark brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown at the center and paler 
(grayish, pinkish, buff, or even whitish) at the margin, often fading in age to dingy brown 
or tan and often adorned with thin filmy or fibrillose patches of veil material at or near the 
margin, which is inrolled when young. Flesh watery brownish or whitish; odor and taste 
typically radishlike (but in some variants mild and in others pungent and/ or bitter). 
GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, whitish or grayish becoming brown, finally 
dull brown; edges usually whitish. STALK 3-8 cm long, 3-8 (10) mm thick, more or less 
equal, fibrillose, whitish to dingy brownish, slowly become dark brown from base upward; 
... 
J 
'4 
-"" 
" 
\ 
}\ 
, I' 
>.-. 
. 
... . 
'\ 
, 
'I, 
\ 
." . 
, -... 
 
j 
 
,.. 
t 
, 
. 
Left: HebeJuma crusluJiniforme (p. 464). Note brown gills and shape of buttons (bottom). Right: 
HebeJuma mesuphaeum group. The evanescent veil (not visible here) often leaves fibrils on stalk. 
apex often mealy. VEIL cobwebby-fibrillose, white to grayish or buff-colored, thin, 
disappearing or forming a slight fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 
7-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. Cystidia present on gill edges. 
HABITAT: Widely scattered to densely gregarious on ground in woods and neartrees; 
widely distributed. In the northern United States this species and its numerouslook-alikes 
are common under conifers, especially in cool weather (fall, spring). In our area they occur 
only sporadically, but I have seen thousands of specimens in a cottonwood-willow 
woodland adjacent to a small reservoir, in February and March. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided-several Hebelomas are poisonous and all are difficult to 
identify. 
COMMENTS: The presence of a cortina (cobwebby veil) in young specimens distin- 
guishes this species and its close relatives from the larger, more prominent members ofthe 
genus such as H. crustuliniforme and H. sinapizans, but leads to confusion with Inocybe 
and Cortinarius. The former, however, usually has a silky to fibrillose or scaly cap, while 
the latter has a brighter (rusty-brown) spore print and lacks cystidia on the gill edges. 
There are dozens of equally drab veiled Hebelomas which are best differentiated from 
H. mesophaeum microscopically. (A recent monograph by Alexander Smith, Verna 
Stucky Evenson, and Duane Mitchell recognizes nearly 100 veiled species in the western 
United States alone!) Among them are: H. strophosum, very similar and widespread, 
with a thicker, more persistent veil that forms a woolly sheath on the stem below the fibril- 
lose annulus (ring); and H. jastibi[e, one of several larger, fleshier species with a reddish- 
brown cap with paler inrolled margin and a thicker (1-1.5 cm) stalk. 
BOLBITIACEAE 
QD 
pores 
T:WO microscopic features separate this rather small brown-spored family from the 
Cortinariaceae: the cap cuticle is typically cellular (composed of round to pear-shaped 
cells) and the spores are smooth and usually furnished with a large germ pore that gives 
them a truncate (chopped-of 0 appearance. People not armed with a microscope are better 
off learning the three genera in the Bolbitiaceae (Bolbitius, Agrocybe, and Conocybe) 
individually, rather than trying to devise an unwieldy set of ifs, buts. and ands for 
distinguishing them as a unit in the field. The Coprinaceae also have a cellular cap cuticle 
and spores with a germ pore, but give a much darker(purple-brown to black) spore print. 
Like the Coprinaceae, the Bolbitiaceae are mostly frail, saprophytic fungi. They grow in 
466 
BOLBITIACEAE 
467 
grass, dung, decaying wood, and humus and are among our most common suburban 
mushrooms. In contrast, the bulk of the Cortinariaceae are mycorrhizal sylvan fungi. 
Owing to their fragile consistency, the Bolbitiaceae have little food value. The three 
common genera are keyed below. If your "LBM" does not key out persuasively, check 
Ga/erina, Tubaria, & Allies (p. 399), and see comments on p. 32 
Key to the Bolbitiaceae 
1. Cap viscid when moist and conspicuously striate at maturity, at least at margin; fruiting body 
soft, sometimes dissolving somewhat in wet weather .................. Bolbi/ius, p. 473 
1. Not as above (cap may be viscid or striate but generally not both) ..................... 2 
2. Cap typically conical to bell-shaped, at least when young; spore print ochre-brown to bright 
rusty to cinnamon-brown........ ... . ..... . ......... ... .... ...... Conocybe, p. 470 
2. Spore print dull brown to rich brown ("coffee-brown," "cigar-brown," "earth brown," etc.), or 
if brighter than cap convex to plane ............................................. 3 
3. Gills yellowish to orangish; spore print more or less rusty-orange.. (see Gymnopilus, p. 407) 
3. Not as above; spore print dull brown to rich brown .................... Agrocybe, below 
AGROCYBE 
Small to medium-sized, saprophytic mushrooms. CAP convex 10 plane or broadly umbonate. 
smooth or cracked but not truly scaly. dry or slightly tacky, rarely striate. GILLS typically attached. 
brown to rusty-brown at maturity. STALK central, thick or thin, not markedly fragile (usually 
pliant). VEIL present or absent, sometimes forming an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. 
SPORE PRINT brown. Spores smooth, usually with a germ pore. Cap cuticle typicalIy celIular. 
AGROCYBE is a difficult genus to characterize. The most common species are best 
recognized by their smooth or cracked (but not scaly), convex to plane cap, brown spores, 
and occurrence in grass, manure, wood chips, or cultivated ground. In some types a 
membranous veil is present and in others it is not. Some species resemble Hebeloma and 
Pho/iota and have been keyed out with those genera (several Agrocybes were originally 
placed in Pholiota); others resemble Stropharia, but can be distinguished by their browner 
or brighter spore color. 
Several Agrocybes are edible, but extreme care must be taken not to confuse them with 
the metagrobolizing masses of nondescript brown-spored mushrooms-particularly the 
poisonous Hebelomas. The two species described here are among our most common 
urban and suburban fungi, but also grow in rural and wooded habitats. 
Key to Agrocybe 
1. Stalk 5-15 mm thick, with a prominent basal bulb; found in manure, greenhouses, mushroom 
farms, etc. _................................................ (see Conocybe, p.470) 
I. Not as above (but may grow in manure) ........................................... 2 
2. Partial veil present and membranous or kleenexlike (check young specimens if unsure!), often 
(but not always!) forming a ring on stalk or leaving pieces of tissue on cap margin. . . . . .. 3 
2. Not as above; partial veil absent or rudimentary and evanescent ...................... 8 
3. Growing on ground in woods; cap dark brown to rusty-brown, often viscid orslimy when moist; 
cap margin often striate in age, gills often decurrent A. erebia (see A. praecox group, p. 469) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Cap margin striate when moist; cap usually less than 5 cm broad and usually hygrophanous 
(fading markedly as it dries) .................... (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Found in swamps and other wet places; cap typically 3 (4) cm broad or less; stalk24 mm thick 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. paludosa 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Growing on hardwoods, often clustered; southern A. aegerita(see A. praecox group, p. 469) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
468 
BOLBITIACEAE 
7. Cap olive-brown to yellow-brown, tan, creamy, or whitish; veil membranous or kleenexlike( not 
fibrillose); stalk lacking scales; cap not normally viscid; found in grassy or cultivated 
areas or on wood chips or sometimes in woods ................ A. praecox group. p.469 
7. Not as above ................................................ (see Pho/iota, p. 384) 
8. Fresh cap dark brown to grayish-brown; in groups or clusters on dead hardwoods . A.Jirma 
8. Not as above ... _ . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9 
9. Cap medium-sized (5 cm or more); stalk usually 4 mm thick or more ..................... 
. . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. A. sororia (see A. pediades group, below) 
9. Cap small; stalk generally less than 5 mm thick .................................... 10 
10. Eithercap translucent-striate when moist orcap hygrophanous(brown fading to buff or whitish 
as it loses moisture) and gills adnate to decurrent .. (see Ga/erina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
II. Spore print rusty-brown or brighter; stalk white and/ or cap 3-6 cm broad; found on dung and 
manure; not common ....................................... (see Conocybe, p. 470) 
11. Not as above; found in grassy or open places, also in dung .......................... 12 
12. Cap wrinkled or pitted, white to pale tan; subtropical and tropical (on lawns, etc.) A. retigera 
12. Not as above; widespread and common ...................... .A.pediadesgroup, below 
Agrocybepediadesgroup (Common Agrocybe) 
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, hemispherical (rounded) to convex, or sometimes broadly convex 
to plane in age; surface dry or slightly viscid, smooth or sometimes fissured (with cracks) 
in age, usually ochre to golden-brown or yellow-brown, but varying to yellowish-buff, 
creamy, or even rusty-brown; margin not striate, but sometimes with whitish veil rem- 
nants. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild or farinaceous. GILLS close, at first adnate but often 
seceding; pallid, soon becoming brown to rusty-brown dr cinnamon-brown. STALK 2-5 
(7) cm long, 1.5-3 (6) mm thick, more or less equal, dry, pallid or buff to yellow-brown (often 
paler at apex, darker below); often longitudinally striate. VEIL absent, or if present then 
evanescent and fibrillose (not membranous) and either disappearing or leaving slight 
remnants on the cap margin and/ or stalk. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 9-13 x 6.5-8 
microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from an apical germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in grass and cultivated ground, dung or manure, or 
in sand; widely distributed and common, flourishing in our area whenever conditions are 
conducive. In warm weather it can often be found mingling with Marasmius oreades, 
Agrocybe pediades group. A nondescript little agaric common in dung, lawns, and other grassy areas. 
_.'i.il I 
,", I . 
", 
 / ...-:'f:' 
I 'I't\'" 
-\ 
'- 
...... .. 
AGROCYBE 
469 
Panaeolus foenisecii, and Conocybe lactea; in cool weather it associates with Psilocybe 
coprophila, Stropharia semiglobata, and the Panaeolus campanulatus group. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended; it is easily confused withpoisonous..LBM's." 
COMMENTS: The yellowish cap, brown spores, absence of a ring, and small size typify 
this commonplace, lawn-loving "LBM" and its close relatives. The cap is not conical as in 
Conocybe and Panaeolus, and the spores are neither purple-brown nor purple-black 
as in Stropharia, nor white as in Marasmius. Small Hebeloma species are similar, but 
generally grow near trees orin the woods and have a filamentous cap cuticle. Other species: 
A. pediades var. p/atysperma has larger spores and frequently has watery spots or streaks 
on the cap; A. semiorbicu/aris (=Naucoria semiorbicu/aris) is said to have a slightly viscid 
cap and broader spores, but is otherwise identical;A. arva/is(=A. tuberosa) is a rare species 
that arises from a small, black, easily-overlooked ..tuber" (sclerotium); A. amara has a 
bitter taste and grows indense grou ps in manure or greenhouses;A. sororia is a much larger 
species (cap 5-15 cm broad, stalk 0.5-1.2 cm thick) with a tan to tawny cap and bitter taste. 
It resembles A. praecox but lacks a veil. I have found it fruiting abundantly on wood chips 
in a garden. For another photo of the A. pediades group, see p. 43. 
Agrocybe praecox group Color Plate 102 
(Spring Agrocybe; Early Agrocybe) 
CAP(2)3-10 cm or more broad, convex or broadly umbonate to plane, orat times withan 
uplifted margin in age; surface dry or slightly tacky, smooth or in age sometimes cracked or 
fissured; creamy to creamy-ochre, yellow-brown, tan, hazel-brown, or olive-brown; 
margin often with veil remnants, not striate. Flesh white or pale ochre, soft; odor mild to 
farinaceous; taste mild or more often somewhat bitter to farinaceous. GILLS close, broad, 
adnate but often seceding; at first pallid, then light brown to grayish, finally dull brown or 
ochre-brown. STALK 3-13 cm long, 0.3-1 or more cm thick, equal or tapered below (or 
occasionally enlarged below), white or pallid, but often brownish-stained below in age; 
fibrillose-striate, the base usually with white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous but thin; 
forming a fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk or leaving remnants on cap margin or 
gills or disappearing entirely. SPORE PRINT rich brown ("cigar-brown"); spores 8-12)( 5- 
7 microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from the apical germ pore. Cap cuticle cellular. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in grassy or cultivated areas, along roads, in 
wood chips, gardens, woods, etc.; widely distributed, fruiting mainly in the spring. In our 
area this species "complex" is among the very common early spring mushrooms mush- 
rooms (February-April), but occurs at other times also. The largest fruitings I've seen 
were in iceplant along a freeway offramp and on a parkway mulched with wood chips. It 
also occurs fairly commonly under mountain conifers in the spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. The taste is mediocre at best, disgusting at 
worst, and there are a number of variants in this group whose edibility is unknown. 
COMMENTS: Originally called Pho/iota praecox, this attractive fungus can be found 
almost anywhere but is especially common in towns and along rural roads. The creamy to 
brownish cap, membranous veil (check young specimens!), brown spores, and habitat are 
the telltate traits. Both slender and fairly robust forms occur, and both are quite attractive 
in their prime. Specimens with a well-formed ring are reminiscent of Agaricus, but the gills 
are adnate (at least when young) and never pink or chocolate-brown. Stropharia species 
(e.g., Stropharia semiglobata and relatives) are also very similar, but have a darker(purple- 
brown to black) spore print an stickier cap. Confusion with Pho/iota and Rozites is also 
possible, but the habitat and absence of scales or fibrils on the cap and stem should 
distinguish it. In my experience, the veilforms a distinct ring on the stalk less than 50% ofthe 
, 
 
.. 
, 
 
Left: This member of the Agrocybe praecox group is darker and more robust than the typical form 
shown in the color plate. It usually grows in wood chips and may well be a distinct species. Right: 
Agrocybe erebia (see comments below) has an even darker (brown) cap and slightly decurrent gills. 
time, but usually leaves at least some vestiges on the cap margin or gills. The "typical" 
form has a creamy cap (see color plate) and ranges from slender to fairly robust. Another 
common form (probably a distinct species) favors wood chips, is usually gregarious or 
clustered, has a darker (hazel-brown to olive-brown) cap when young, and is fairly robust 
(see photo above). Also similar are: A. acerico/a, with a yellow-brown cap when young 
and better-formed ring, growing on decayed wood; and A. dura (formerly Pho/iota ver- 
mif/ua), with a whitish to ochre-tinged, often cracked cap and slightly larger spores, found 
in cultivated and disturbed ground. Other species with a membranous veil include: A. 
erebia, a terrestrial woodland species with a dark brown. often viscid cap and/ or slightly 
decurrent gills (see above photo); and A. aegerita (=A. cy/indracea), a medium-sized to 
large edible southern species that usually grows in clusters on hardwoods (often living) 
such as willow, poplar, and box elder. The latter species is prized in Europe and grown 
there commercially. It has a yellowish to grayish-brown to fulvous-tinged, often wrinkled 
cap and typically has a well-formed annulus (ring) on the stalk. 
CONOCYBE (Cone Heads) 
Mostly fragile, little brown mushrooms saprophytic on grass, dung, moss, and humus. CAP some- 
times convex but usually conical or bell-shaped. GILLS attached or free, usually rusty-brown to 
cinnamon-brown at maturity. ST ALK central, usually thin andfragile, often hollow. VEIL present 
or absent, sometimes forming an annulus (ring) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT rusty- 
brown to cinnamon-brown to ochraceous. Spores smooth or rough. typically with a germ pore. 
Cap cuticle cellular. 
CONOCYBES are often called "dunce caps" or "cone heads" because they usually have a 
conical or bell-shaped cap. They are mostly fragile, often ephemeral, Mycena-like mush- 
rooms with a slender stem and rusty-brown to ochre-brown spores. They are some- 
times confused with Psilocybe, but have brighter brown spores. Among the brown- 
spored mushrooms, they are apt to be confused with Bolbilius. which usually has a dis- 
tinctly viscid, striate cap, and Galerina. which has a filamentous rather than cellular cap 
cuticle and an often viscid and/ or translucent-striate cap. One prominent exception to the 
above is C. intrusa (keyed below), a rather fleshy mushroom with a thick stalk and convex 
cap. It resembles a Hebeloma and was originally classified as a Cortinarius. but micro- 
scopic characteristics plus its rusty-colored spore print relate it to Conocybe. 
The "cone heads" are partial to warm weather and fruit in great abundance on watered 
CONOCYBE 
471 
lawns. Some, such as C lactea, are so frail that they shrivel up or topple over a few hours 
after appearing. The edibility of most Conocybes is unknown, but they are much too small 
to be of food value and at least one species, Cfilaris, is dangerously poisonous. Conocybe 
is a fairly large genus with over 50 species in North America. As these are largely differ- 
entiated on microscopic characters, only three are described here. 
Key to Conocybe 
I. Veil present, usually forming a distinct ring (annulus) on stalk ........................ 2 
I. Veil absent or evanescent, not forming an annulus .................................. 4 
2. Growing on dung or manure .................. C. stereoraria (see C. filaris group, below) 
2. Growing in grass, woody chips, moss, etc. ......................................... 3 
3. Cap tawny-brown to orange-brown to brown; annulus often prominent and movable ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. c. lilaris group, below 
3. Cap reddish-brown to reddish-cinnamon when moist or sometimes yellower, fading as it dries; 
annulus not movable, usually small or obscure .... (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
4. Stalk 0.5-1.5 cm thick, usually with a bulbous or thickened base; cap convex to nearly plane, 
2.5-9 cm broad, viscid when moist, whitish to tawny to ochre-brown or even reddish-brown; 
growing in hothouses, mushroom farms, compost, etc. ...................... C. intrusa 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Base of stalk aging or slowly bruising blue to bluish-green .............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. smithii& C. eyanopus(see C. tenera group, p. 472) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Gills crisped, with prominent veins in between; found on lawns C. erispa(see C. lactea, p.472) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Cap white to buff (or often darker at center), often wrinkled; fruiting body lasting only a few 
hours before toppling over or withering .......-....................... C.laetea, p_ 472 
7. Cap brown to tan, yellow-brown, or cinnamon, but often fading to buff, more or less smooth 8 
8. Cap 3-6 cm broad, broadly conical to bell-shaped or convex; growing in compost in a garden 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. c. sp. (unidentified) 
8. Cap typically smaller and/ or habitat different ...................................... 9 
9. Cap convex; growing in dung or manure ....... C. eoprophila(see C. tenera group, p. 472) 
9. Cap conical to bell-shaped; growing in many habitats .............................. 10 
10. Cap translucent-striate when moist, not growing in dung or manure ..................... 
. .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
10. Not as above; growing in many habitats. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . C. teneragroup, p.472 
Conocybe Ii/oris group (Ringed Cone Head) 
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, expanding to convex or plane but usually 
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, not viscid, tawny-brown to orange-brown or brown; 
margin faintly striate when moist. Flesh thin, brown. GILLS pallid soon becoming brown- 
ish to rusty-brown, close, adnexed or notched, sometimes seceding. STALK 1-6 cm long, 
1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, fragile, yellow-brown to brown; smooth. VEIL mem- 
branous, brown, forming a prominent but delicate, movable, median to superior ring on 
stalk; ring often stained by spores and sometimes falling off. SPORE PRINT cinnamon- 
brown to rusty-brown; spores 7.5-13 x 3.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with germ pore. 
HABITAT: Scattered to gregarious on lawns and other grassy places, also in moss, on 
decayed wood and wood chips, etc.; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific 
Northwest. In our area I ha ve found it only once, on a la wn in October, but a large number 
of fruiting bodies were present. 
EDIBILITY: POISONOUS-potentially fatal! It will not tempt most mushroom hunters 
because of its small size, but is dangerous to toddlers in the so-called "grazing stage," 
particularly because it grows on lawns. Analysis has revealed the presence of amanita- 
472 
BOLBITIACEAE 
toxins, and 20-30 caps are equivalent to about half of one cap of Amanita pha//oides- 
a compelling reason not to eat "LBM's!" 
COMMENTS: Also known as Pho/iotina fi/aris, this species and its close relatives are 
distinguished from other Conocybes by the membranous ring on the stalk. Inage, however, 
the ring may fall off or be otherwise obliterated. Several poisonous Ga/erina species have 
a ring, but they usually grow on wood and/ or have a somewhat viscid, translucent-striate 
cap (see G. autumnalis). There are also several Conocybes withanannulus(ring) that grow 
on dung and manure (especially of horses), including C. stercoraria, fairly common, 
with a yellow-brown to buff-colored cap. 
Conocybe tenera group (Brown Dunce Cap; Common Cone Head) 
CAP 1-2.5 cm broad and tall, conical to bell-shaped, sometimes expanding slightly in age; 
surface smooth, not viscid, brown to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown, usually fading 
in age or as it dries to tan, yellowish, or buff; margin finely striate when moist. Flesh thin, 
brownish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, pallid soon becoming pale brown, then 
cinnamon-brown or rusty-brown. STALK 4-9 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal or with a 
swollen base, smooth or minutely mealy, colored like cap or paler, fragile. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown; spores 8-14 )( 5-7 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, with an apical germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious on lawns, in gardens, fields, rich soil, dung, 
and humus; widely distributed. This species and its close relatives occur practically year- 
round in our area in a variety of habitats (including the woods), but are not particularly 
numerous. I've seen more than 100 fruiting bodies crowded into a small planter box filled 
with lettuce seedlings. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but do not experiment-the similar Cfi/aris is poisonous! 
COMMENTS: The above description will fit a large number of brownish Conocybes with 
a cute (but not necessarily acute) conical to bell-shaped cap, thin fragile stem, and no veil 
or ring (annulus). They are reminiscent of Mycena and Panaeo/us (with which they may 
grow), but have rusty-brown gills at maturity and rusty-brown spores. The cap is darker 
than that of C /actea and not as wrinkled, and is not viscid as in Bo/bitius. Other species: 
C. coprophi/a has a slightly viscid convex cap and grows in dung or manure; C. smithiiand 
C. cyanopus are two rather rare "pupil-dilating" species with a blue to blue-green stem 
base, at least in age. The former grows in bogs, the latter ingrass or sometimes moss. Neither 
should be eaten by "magic mushroom" hunters because of their close resemblance to 
ringless representatives ofthe poisonous Cfi/aris. 
Conocybe lactea (White Dunce Cap; White Cone Head) 
CAP 1-2.5 cm broad and/ or tall, narrowly to bluntly conical (like a dunce cap), then 
bell-shaped or thimble-shaped, the margin usually flaring; surface typically not viscid, 
radially wrinkled or striate when moist, white to creamy or tinged buff to pale cinnamon, 
especially at the center. Flesh very thin, whitish. GILLS very narrow, adnexed or free, 
close, pallid soon becoming cinnamon-brown to tawny-ochre or brown. STALK 3-11 cm 
long, 1-2 mm thick, very thin and fragile, equal or with a small basal bulb, hollow, white or 
whitish, often powdery or scurfy above. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT reddish-brown or 
cinnamon; spores 11-16)( 6-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an apical germ pore. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in troops on lawns, base ball fields, and other grassy places; widely 
distributed and common in muggy weather. It usually appears in the early morning and 
topples over or shrivels up by afternoon; it is one of our common summer lawn mushrooms. 
\ 
Conocybe lactea is abundant on lawns in warm weather. These are rather mature specimens; younger 
ones can have even narrower caps. The fruiting bodies collapse within a few hours. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but worthless as food-to say it lacks substance is a gross under- 
statement. As Alexander Smith points out, toddlers would be the only ones tempted to 
eat it, and if it were poisonous, we would probably know by now. 
COMMENTS: This frail mushroom is easily told by its pallid "dunce cap" and thin, fragile 
stem. The striate or wrinkled cap is not as viscid as in Bolbitius, and is paler than that ofthe 
C. tenera group. The stem is so feeble that it is practically impossible to bring home speci- 
mens without breaking them. C. crispa is a somewhat similar widespread species with an 
ochre-tinged cap and crisped, veined gills. 
BOLBITIUS 
Small, fragile, rapidly-decaying mushrooms found on dung, humus, grass, or wood. CAP viscid 
when moist and usually conspicuously striate at maturity; usually yellow, white, or purple-gray. 
GILLS typically adnexed or free at maturity, often dissolving somewhat in wet weather. STALK 
slender,fragile, hollow. VEIL and VaLVA absent. SPORE PRINT rusty-brown to ochraceous. 
Spores smooth, with a germ pore. Cap cuticle cellular. 
THIS small genus of fragile, flaccid, putrescent fungi is reminiscent of Coprinus (particu- 
lady in the striate cap and tendency of the gills to liquefy somewhat), but has rusty-brown to 
bright yellow-brown rather than black spores. The viscid striate cap separates Bolbitius 
from Conocybe. The cap is rarely brown as in Galerina and the habitat is quite different. 
Bolbitius species are worthless as food. The most common types fruit during wet weather 
in dung, manure heaps, straw, tall grass, and other vegetable matter; a few grow on wood. 
Two species are described here. 
Key to Bolbitius 
I. Cap bright yellow to pale yellow, at least when fresh ................. B. vitellinus, p. 474 
I. Cap differently colored ......................................................... 2 
2. Usually growing on lawns or dung, rarely in woods ................................. 3 
2. Growing in woods or on rotten wood ............................................. 6 
474 
BOLBITIACEAE 
3. Cap pinkish-grayish-cinnamon in age; on dung. . . . . B. coprophilus(see B. v;lellinus, below) 
3. Not as above; growing on lawns or in grass ........................................ 4 
4. Cap milky white or with a tinge of buff, especially in age . B. lacteus(see B. v;lellinus, below) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Cap conical or oval, very soft, some shade of brown; gills veined and often fused together; stalk 
very fragile, often bending over; fruiting body ephemeral; found in hot, humid weather _... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Gastrocybe later;tia 
5. Not as above ... . . . .. .... . .. . ... ..... ... . . _.. (see Galerina, Tubaria, & Allies, p. 399) 
6. Cap white; growing on wood or wood chips ............................... B. sordidus 
6. Cap not white ................................................................ 7 
7. Cap chocolate-brown to rusty-brown; stalk 3-10 mm thick and brown over lower portion ... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (seeAgrocybe, p. 467) 
7. Not as above; stalk white or yellow, thin and fragile .......... B. aleuriatus& others, p. 475 
Bolbitius vilellinus (Sunny Side Up) 
CAP 1.5-7 cm broad when expanded, oval to conical or bell-shaped when young, often 
becoming plane in old age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, bright yellow to 
pale yellow (the center sometimes yellow-orange), but often fading in age or as it dries to 
whitish, brownish, grayish, etc.; margin striate, at times conspicuously grooved nearly to 
the center. Flesh very thin, soft, yellowish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, soft, 
dissolving somewhat in wet weather; pallid or pale yellow to pale brown, becoming rusty- 
ochre to cinnamon-brown in age. STALK (3) 5-12 cm long, 2-8 (10) mm thick, equal or 
thicker below, hollow, very fragile when thin (readily collapsing), whitish to pale yellow; 
often delicately powdered or scurfy. SPORE PRINT rusty-orange to rusty-brown; spores 
10-16 )( 6-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from the large apical germ pore. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (or even tufted) on dung, manure, straw, 
lawns, in tall grass, cultivated ground, etc.; widely distributed and ubiquitous, fruiting 
throughout the mushroom season in our area. The most luxuriant fruiting I've seen was in 
a horse corral where dozens of large, robust specimens were interspersed with massive 
Bolb;l;us v;lellinus varies considerably in size and shape, as evidenced by these photographs and 
the one on p. 475. However, it is always viscid, yellow (when fresh), and very fragile. Left: Slender, 
long-stemmed specimens such as these are common in lawns and other grassy areas. Right: Relatively 
robust specimens found on horse dung. In old age the cap often becomes plane (flat). 
.' 
..... 
'"' 
,,' 
"- 
tIi. 
'. 
. 
., 
, 
j 
... 
-'111.-' 
BOLBITIUS 
475 
clusters of Peziza vesicu/osa (a cup fungus). Greg Wright, who coined the common name, 
says that in southern California it commonly occurs on decayed wood. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless, but fleshless and flavorless. 
COMMENTS: This fragile ephemeral mushroom varies greatly in size, shape, and habitat 
but can generally be recognized by its viscid, yellow, striate cap, plus its rust-colored gills 
(in age) and soft, fragile texture. The stems often collapse of their own accord, and in wet 
weather the cap and gills tend to dissolve, much as in Coprinus (but not as the result of an 
autodigesting enzyme). As a rule, those growing in grass tend to be quite slender and fragile 
(see photo), while those growing in a nitrogen-rich environment such as horse manure are 
larger and more robust. Other species include: B. coprophilus, with a grayish-pinkish- 
cinnamon cap in age, usually found on dung; and B. lacteus, with a small whitish or buff- 
tinged cap, found in dung, grass, straw, etc., but not nearly as common as B. vilel/inus. 
Bolbitius aleuriatus 
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, soon broadly convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface smooth, 
viscid when moist, gray to grayish-brown, often with a purplish or lilac tint (center some- 
times darker); sometimes fading in age; conspicuously striate, at least at margin. Flesh 
very thin, whitish. GILLS adnexed to free, narrow, close, pallid soon becoming pinkish to 
brown or cinnamon-brown. ST ALK 2.5-7 cm long, 2-3 mm thick, equal or thicker at base, 
very fragile, smooth or minutely scurfy or powdery; entirely white or tinged yellow at base. 
SPORE PRINT rusty-brown; spores 9-12 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an 
apical germ pore. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups (rarely more than three) on rotting wood, sa wd ust, 
and humus. It is fairly common in our area in the fall and winter, mainly under oak and 
madrone, and probably has a much wider distribution. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Pluteolus aleuriatus, this species is a fairly frequent but 
oft-overlooked fungal feature of our oak wondlands. When the gills are free and pinkish, 
confusion with P/Uleus is likely. However, its extreme fragility and viscid, striate cap are 
good fieldmarks. A form with a yellow stem-possibly distinct-also occurs in our area. 
Other woodland species include: B. reticulatus, similarly colored but with a reticulate 
(veined or netted) cap; and B. (=Pluteolus) callisteus, with a yellow stalk and a yellow- 
olive to rusty-orange cap. 
Left: Bo/bitius vite//inus. young specimens with rounded yellow caps. (Nancy Burnett) Right: 
Bo/bitius a/euriatus is a fragile, slender-stemmed woodland species with a grayish to purple-gray cap 
that is prominently striate (lined). 
.s_ 
... 
'- 
476 
P AXILLACEAE 
(fJ 0 
 cjo 
 
 
spores  
Fleshy medium-sized mushrooms growing on wood or ground. CAP convex to plane or depressed, 
margin sometimes strongly inrolled. GILLS typically decurrent. oftenforked or veined. yellow to 
orange ordull-colored; often peeling easily fromcap( Paxillus). ST ALK fleshy;, central or off-center 
to lateral or even absent. VEILandVOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT yellowish to brown(Paxillus& 
Phylloporus). or white (Hygrophoropsis). Spores mostly elliptical, smooth, without a germ pore, 
often dextrinoid. 
THIS is a small family of medium-sized mushrooms with decurrent gills and yellowish to 
brown (or in Hygrophoropsis, white) spores. The flesh is not dry, white, and brittle as in 
Russula, and there is no latex as in Lactarius. The spore print is not rusty-orange as in 
Gymnopilus, the stem is much fleshier than in Tubaria, and other brown-spored agarics 
without a veil do not normally have decurrent gills. 
There are three genera in the Paxillaceae. In the central genus, Paxil/us, the margin of the 
cap is usually inrolled when young and the gills are often veined or poroid near the stem and 
peel rather easily from the cap. Like the dark-spored genera Chroogomphus and Gom- 
phidius, Paxil/us is thought to be closely allied to the boletes. The second genus, Phyllo- 
porus, includes several species which, despite the presence of gills, are considered true 
boletes by many mycologists. The gills are bright yellow and often bruise slightly bluish 
like the tubes in many species of Boletus, and the spores are ..boletoid" (narrowly 
elliptical to spindle-shaped). The third genus, Hygrophoropsis, resembles Paxil/us but 
has unpigmented (white) spores. It includes the fungus popularly known as the false 
chanterelle, and has traditionally been placed in the T richolomataceae (it is also keyed 
out there). 
The Paxillaceae are woodland fungi like the boletes, but are not nearly as numerous or 
conspicuous. In South America the situation is reversed-Paxil/us is a fairly prominent 
group while the boletes are few and far between. In case you hadn't noticed, this is not a 
field guide to the fleshy fungi of South America, so only five members of the Paxillaceae 
are described. They are not particularly good eating and at least one species, Paxil/us 
involutus, can be very poisonous. 
Key to the Paxillaceae 
I. Gills yellow and rather thick, broad, and widely spaced, often staining blue or greenish (some- 
times slowly) when bruised ......................... Phylloporus rhodoxanthus, p.480 
I. Not as above; gills usually close or crowded ..................................... _ .. 2 
2. Stalk velvety from a dense coating of rusty-brown to brown or blackish-brown hairs, typically 
1-3 em thick; growing on or around conifer stumps, logs, etc. Paxillusatrotomentosus, p.478 
2. -Not as above; stalk not brown and velvety ......................................... 3 
3. Odor fragrant (reminiscent of root beer); fruiting body pinkish to whitish ................ 
... . . .... ...... ... ..... . . . . . ......... Hygrophoropsis olida(see H. aurantiaca, p. 479) 
3. Odor mild or at least not fragrant ................................................ 4 
4. S pore print white or creamy; stalk normally present; gills usually orange or orangish (but some- 
times differently colored) .......................... Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca, p. 479 
4. Spore print yellowish to brown; stalk present or absent; gills not orange ................ 5 
5. Stalk lateral to absent; found on wood or lignin-rich humus ..... Paxil/us panuoides, below 
5. Stalk present, central to off-center; usually terrestrial .., Paxillus involutus & others, p. 477 
Paxillus panuoides (Fan Pax) 
CAP 1.5-7 (10) cm broad, petal-shaped to mussel- or fan-shaped, attached laterally to 
su bstrate or with a stemlike base; surface minutely hairy or downy becoming smooth, not 
viscid; buff to dingy yellowish, yellow-brown, olive-yellow, or dingy ochre; margin often 
lobed and at first incurved. Flesh thin, soft, whitish to ochraceous. GILLS radiating from 
 
I' ; 
. 
 
) '" 
I> o\;'! 
, 
\, 
' . ' \ \\ 
 > '\'\ 
:. 
'\ll7l./ I I 
t 1 !' 
;f t"'.,/ 
? 
t. 
,.. 
" 
t- 
Paxi//us panuoides grows on wood and has little or no stalk. Note how gills are poroid near base of cap. 
base of cap, close, pale or dingy yellowish to ochre or pinkish-buff, often crimped and 
forked or connected by cross-veins, especially toward base. STALK absent or present 
only as a small, narrowed, lateral base. SPORE PRINT yellowish-buff to brown or dingy 
ochraceous; spores 4-6 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, many of them dextrinoid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clumps on coniferous logs, stumps, debris, and humus 
rich in lignin; widely distributed but not particularly common. In our area I have found it 
several times on dead pine in the fall and winter. It is also said to occur on mine timbers, 
causing a bright yellow discoloration in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-do not experiment! 
COMMENTS: The fan-shaped cap and absence or near absence of a stalk rescue this 
listless little brown mushroom from the obscurity it so richly deserves. It might be mis- 
taken for a Crepidotus or Phyllotopsis. but the gills are usually forked or veined. The latter 
feature can lead to confusion with the chant ere lies, but the growth on wood, dingy color, 
and poorly-developed stalk distinguish it. The false chanterelle (Hygrophoropsis 
aurantiaca) is also somewhat similar, but has oranger gills, white spores, and a stalk. 
Paxillus involutus (Poison Pax; Inrolled Pax) 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, at first broadly convex withastronglyinrolled margin, then plane 
or centrally depressed with the margin eventually unfurled; surface viscid when moist but 
otherwise dry; smooth or with soft matted hairs that wear a way, sometimes cracked (areo- 
late) in age; brown to dingy yellow-brown, olive-brown, or dingy reddish-brown, often 
with darker brown stains; margin often slightly velvety or obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick, 
firm, pale buff to yellowish, but usually staining reddish to brown when cut. GILLS usually 
decurrent, close or crowded, pallid to pale yellowish becoming dingy yellow to olive, 
brownish, or yellow-brown, staining dark brown or reddish-brown when bruised or in old 
Paxil/us invo/utus is easily told by the strongly inrolled cap margin when young and the tendency 
of the entire mushroom (especially the gills and flesh) to stain dark brown. Birch is one of its favorite 
tree associates. See p. 41 for another photo, and see p. 478 for close-up of gills. 
, 
" 
.. 
I 
, /J / / 
I'!P'/ 
/ --:=-  
- 
 ' ., 
  : 
,,. -----  
  - - 
.\  
  -. 
,....- 
\' 
.,\,!Oo 
" 
i 
\ 
\   : \ 
\, '\ 
. ' 
, \1 
 .  
.' 
/ f I 
I '. 
\ 
::::   
..",."",..---- -..,... 
.......- 
I' 
.. I",,-'t- 
\. 
 
':1. 
Left: The close relationship of Paxi//us to the boletes is suggested by this close-up of the gills (and 
"pores") of Paxil/us invo/utus. Right: Paxi//us atrotomentosus is a wood-inhabiting species with 
decurrent gills and a dark velvety stalk. 
age; often forking and/ or forming pores near the stalk. STALK 2-7 (10) cm long, 0.5-4 
cm thick, usually shorter than width of mature cap, equal or tapered at either end, central 
to somewhat off-center, solid, firm, dry, smooth; colored like ca p or paler, often with dingy 
reddish to dark brown stains. SPORE PRINT brown to yellow-brown; spores 7-10 x 4-6 
microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Usually scattered to densely gregarious on ground in woods, around the edges 
of bogs, and in tree-studded parks or lawns; widely distributed, and by far the most 
common member of the genus. Two possibly distinct forms occur in our area: the typical 
one (shown in photo at bottom of p. 477) fruits mainly with planted birch trees in the fall, 
while a larger form occurs with oak and pine in the late fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Dangerous! It is often eaten in Europe and by transplanted Europeans in 
America, but it can cause hemolysis (destruction of red blood cells) and kidney failure if 
eaten raw, and sometimes even when thoroughly cooked! (A pparently the human body can 
develop a devastating sensitivity to it.) It often has a sour taste anyway, soitis best avoided 
and should never be eaten raw. The one recorded instance of a bonafide mycologist dying 
of mushroom-poisoning was attributed to this fungus! 
COMMENTS: The dingy brownish cap with inrolled margin when young plus the decur- 
rent gills that stain brown and are usually forked or veined near the stem are the 
unappealing features of this unappealing fungus. Actually, its symmetry and compactness 
are quite intriguing, but its choice of color is downright disastrous-an unbecoming blend 
of dingy browns and murky yellows. The stature is reminiscent of a Lactarius or Russula, 
but the gills do not exude a latex when broken and the flesh is not chalky or exceptionally 
brittle. Other species: P. verna/is is similar but larger, with a paler cap when young and 
reddish-brown to chocolate-brown spores. It grows mainly with aspen. 
Paxillus atrotomentosus (Velvet Pax) 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, 
unpolished, velvety or with matted hairs, yellow-brown to rusty-brown to dingy reddish- 
brown becoming dull brown, dark brown, or blackish-brown in age; margin at first in- 
rolled. Flesh thick, rather firm or tough, pallid to ochre or buff. GILLS close or crowded, 
usually decurrent, tan to dull ochre, dingy yellowish, or paler; often forked or veined near 
478 
P AXILL US 
479 
stalk. ST ALK 2-9 ( 12) cm long. 1-3 (5) cm thick. often short and usually off-center or even 
lateral; solid, tough, densely velvety from a coating of brown to dark brown or blackish- 
brown, often matted hairs; apex often paler or yellowish. SPORE PRINT yellowish to 
brownish; spores 5-6.5 )( 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, many of them dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or tufts on oraround conifers ( usually dead) or madrone; 
northern in distribution. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest in the late summer 
and fall, but rare in our area. It causes a carbonizing decay (brown rot) in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some people apparently collect it for the table, but the 
same can be said of P. involUlus, which has caused several deaths! (See comments on 
edibility ofthat species.) 
COMMENTS: The combination of brown cap, dark brown velvety stem, decurrent gills, 
and growth on rotting conifers makes this one of the Pacific Northwest's most distinctive 
agarics. It does not discolor as much as P. involuluS, and is quite attractive when fresh. 
Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca (False Chanterelle) Color Plate 110 
CAP 2-8 (14) cm broad, convex becoming plane or somewhat depressed, the margin at 
first inrolled; surface dry, often somewhat felty or velvety, typically some shade of dark 
orange, brownish-orange, brownish-yellow, yellowish-brown, olive-brown, or dark 
brown (often darker or browner at center and orange to yellowish-orange at margin), 
but in one form whitish and in another blackish. Flesh thin, pallid or tinged orange or cap 
color; odor mild. GILLS decurrent, close, fairly thin and narrowat maturity(may be blunt 
when young); usually forked dichotomously; typically deep orange to bright orange, but 
sometimes pale orange or in one form yellowish. STALK 2-10 cm long, (0.2) 0.5-1 (2) cm 
thick, central or off-center, equal or enlarged toward base, often curved; dry, yellowish 
to orange or brownish-orange or colored more or less like cap. SPORE PRINT white to 
creamy; spores 5-8 )( 2.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, often dextrinoid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in humus and on rotting wood, 
usually under conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits from the fall through early 
spring, but seems most abundant in cool, dry weather when there are few other fleshy fungi 
out and about. I usually find it under pine or redwood. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. In my experience it is edible-but far from incredible. Some 
sources, however, list it as mildly poisonous (whether or not this is a result of confusion 
with Omphalolus. as has been suggested, is unclear). 
Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca. The cap is usually brown at the center and lighter or brighter toward 
the margin, but in some forms it is completely brown (or even black) and in others it is whitish. For 
a close-up of the forked gills, see color plate. 
\\)1, 
...."'... 
; 
, 
t. , 
. , 
\ 
.,:". 
%1  
\ 
 
480 
P AXILLACEAE 
COMMENTS: The typically bright orange, decurrent, dichotomously forked gills (see 
color plate) and white spore print are the principal fieldmarks ofthis attractive but variable 
fungus. In spite of its common name, it is difficult to confuse with the true chanterelle 
(Cantharellus cibarius) if the following is kept in mind: the gills are thinner, crowded, and 
bladelike at maturity (but often blunter when young), and are usually orangerthan those 
of the chanterelle. In other words, the false chanterelle has "true" gills while the true 
chanterelle has "false" gills. Also, Hygrophoropsis has flimsier flesh, a browner cap, is less 
robust, differently shaped (not as wavy or frilled) and sometimes grows on rotten wood. 
The jack-o-lantern mushrooms (Omphalotus species) are also similar, but have brightly 
colored flesh, typically grow in clusters on or under hardwoods, and do not have forked 
gills. The false chanterelle was originally placed in Cantharellus, and is listed in many 
mushroom books as Clitocybeaurantiaca, but the forked gills, frequently off-centerstalk, 
and dextrinoid spores connote a closer kinship to Paxil/us. Other species: H. olida(=Cli- 
tocybe morganii) is a small (cap 1-4 cm) species with a pinkish cap and stalk (that may fade 
to buff), whitish to pinkish gills, and a flagrantly fragrant odor that is reminiscent of root 
beer or cinnamon candy. At least some of its gills are forked and/ or have cross-veins, its 
stalk can be central or off-center, and its spores are white and dextrinoid. Like H. auran- 
tiaca, it favors conifers and is widely distributed, but seems to be rather rare. I have seen 
it only once in California, near Mount Shasta, in June. 
Phylloporus rhodoxanthus (Gilled Bolete) Color Plate III 
CAP 2-5 (12) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or with uplifted margin in age; surface 
dry, minutely velvety to nearly smooth, dull brown to olive-brown or yellow-brown in one 
form, red to reddish-brown in another; sometimes developing pallid to yellowish cracks or 
fissures. Flesh thick, pallid to yellowish. GILLS widely spaced, broad, fairly thick, adnate 
to decurrent but sometimes seceding; sometimes forked or with cross-veins; bright yellow 
to ochre, typically bruising green or blue (but often slowly, sometimes not at all), some- 
times also staining brownish. STALK 3-10 cmlong, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or tapered 
below, dry, solid, yellow to dingy yellowish-buff or reddish, often stained dingy brown or 
reddish-brown below; smooth. SPORE PRINT brown to yellowish- or olive-tinged; 
spores 9-15 x 3-6 microns, narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups (usually twos or threes) on 
ground in woods, widely distributed. The brown-capped form can be found nearly every 
year in our area, but seldom in quantity. Like the related Boletus subtomentosus, it fruits 
throughout the mushroom seaso, often along roads and trails. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rarely found in sufficient numbers to be more than just a curious- 
ity. Some "bolete-your-meat'ers" rate it highly, but I've found it to be slimy and insipid. 
COMMENTS: This evolutionary oddity is an adamant nonconformist. The dry, minutely 
velvety brownish to reddish cap is an almost exact replica of Boletus subtomentosus and 
relatives, yet the underside of the cap has gills! These are thicker than the gills of many 
agarics, and are bright yellow and often bruise blue like the tubes of many boletes (it may 
take several minutes, however, for the color change to show). What's more, the spores 
are "boletoid"-long, narrow, and spindle-shaped-causing some taxonomists to place it 
in the Boletaceae. Thus Phylloporus, like many other mushrooms, has been denied a stable 
family and is at the complete mercy of the "authorities." Like baseball's itinerant tobacco- 
chewing utility infielders of southern rural origin, its group affiliation is in a state of con- 
stant flux as it is systematically shuttled back and forth between one "team" and another. 
Other species: P. arenicola is a very similar species with an olive-brown to olive-yellow cap 
and adnexed (not decurrent) gills which don't blue when bruised. It was originally de- 
scribed from coastal Oregon under pine, but I have not seen it. 
481 
GOMPHIDIACEAE 
" 1# 
¥ 
spores 
THIS is a small but prominent family of fleshy-stemmed mushrooms with decurrent gills 
and smoky-olive to black spores. No other group of black-spored mushrooms has con- 
sistently decurrent gills. Gomphos, meaning "peg" or "stake," refers to the shape of the 
young mushrooms, which look like tent stakes with their long stems and small, rounded to 
conical caps. The spores are typically "boletoid"-i.e., long, narrow, and more or less 
spindle-shaped, and the Gomphidiaceae are thought to be more closely related to the 
boletes than to other gilled fungi. They are mycorrhizal exclusively with conifers and often 
occur with the bolete genus Suil/us. This may be purely coincidental, since Suil/us is also 
mycorrhizal with conifers, or it may be that the fungal mycelia are in some way associated 
with each other as well as with their mutual host. 
As far as is known the family is completely safe from an edibility standpoint. There are 
two common genera, Gomphidius and Chroogomphus, but the latter is listed under 
Gomphidius in many older books. A closely related gastroid genus, Brauniellula (see 
p. 732) also occurs, but it often grows underground and does not have true gills. 
Key to the Gomphidiaceae 
I. Immature gills and flesh in the cap white to grayish ................. Gomphidius, below 
1. Immature gills and flesh in the cap some shade of yellow, orange, buff, salmon, reddish, etc. . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chroogomphus, p.484 
GOMPHIDIUS 
Fairly small to medium-large terrestrial mushrooms associated with conifers. CAP viscid or slimy 
when moist. usually smooth. Flesh white to grayish. GILLS decurrent. soft or somewhat waxy, 
fairly close to well-spaced, pallid or white when young but blackening in age. STALK fleshy, more 
or less central; lower portion or base usually bright yellow( especially within). VEIL usually present, 
but often disappearing or leaving only a slight ring (annulus) on stalk. VOL V A absent. SPORE 
PRINT smoky-gray to black. Spores narrowly elliptical, smooth. Cap tissue not amyloid. 
THIS genus is readily recognized by its soft, somewhat waxy decurrent gills, slimy-viscid 
cap, white or pallid flesh, and smoky-black spores. In addition, the base or lower portion of 
the stem is brilliant yellow in most species-a very striking and telltale feature. Gomphidius 
is most likely to be confused with Chroogomphus, which has orange to yellowish or pinkish 
flesh, and the waxy caps (Hygrophoraceae), which have white spores. 
Gomphidius species are mycorrhizal exclusively with conifers-particularly fir, 
spruce, Douglas-fir, hemlock, and larch- but in pine forests they are largely supplanted by 
Chroogomphus. November rains can mean Gomphidius galore in our area, with large 
numbers of the glutinous fruiting bodies littering our Douglas-fir forests, along with 
maggoty Suil/us species and assorted Russulas. 
Gomphidius species are edible but not often collected-perhaps because they are soft, 
sluglike, insipid, and putrescent. Also, they do not dry nicely like Chroogomphus, and 
often blacken when cooked- but some people relish them nonetheless (maybe they can't 
find anything better!). A bout ten species occur in North America, all of them rather similar 
in appearance. Two are described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Gomphidius 
1. Slimy veil present in young specimens; stalk usually viscid when moist (from veil remains); 
associated with various conifers ................................................ 2 
1. Veil absent; stalk not viscid; associated primarily (but not exclusively) with larch or tamarack; 
found in northern North America ............................................... 5 
482 
GOMPHIDIACEAE 
2. Cap pink to rosy-red or red, not large (up to 7 cm broad); stalk usually 1.5 cm thick or less .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G. subroseus, p. 483 
2. Cap sometimes pinkish or salmon, but usually dingier or darker in color (whitish, grayish, 
brownish, vinaceous, purplish. etc.); small to large ................................. 3 
3. Stalk with little or no yellow at base; fruiting body medium-sized to fairly small ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . G. sm;thii(see G. subroseus, p. 483) 
3. Base or lower portion of stalk typically bright yellow; medium-sized to fairly large ....... 4 
4. Often growing in small clumps, stalk often rooted deeply in soil; associated primarily with 
Douglas-fir; spores typically less than 14 microns long. . . . . . . . . . .. G. oregonensis, below 
4. Not as above; found with various conifers (including Douglas-fir); spores longer than 14 
microns; widely distributed ........... G. glut;nosus& others (see G. oregonens;s, below) 
5. Cap whitish to yellowish when young; found in eastern North America; rare ... G. n;gr;cans 
5. Cap pale cinnamon to brownish, etc., when young; widely distributed in northern latitudes 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G. maculatus(see G. oregonens;s, below) 
Gomphidius oregonensis (Insidious Gomphidius) 
CAP 2-15 (18) cm broad, at first peglike, then broadly convex to plane or depressed; sur- 
face viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, color variable: whitish to salmon-buff to 
ochraceous-salmon to dull pinkish when young, becoming dingier(brownish to purplish- 
or vinaceous-gray to dark reddish-brown) in age, often spotted or stained smoky-gray to 
black. Flesh rather soft, white or grayish ( or tinged cap color under cuticle), but brilliant 
yellow in lower part of stalk or at base. GILLS decurrent, soft and rather waxy, close to 
fairly well-spaced, white or pallid, then gray and finally blackish as spores ripen. ST ALK 5- 
15 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, equal or tapered below( or occasionally swollen), solid, rather firm 
or even tough, dry and white above the veil, whitish or dingy below and viscid when wet, 
sometimes with darker streaks; lower portion bright yellow. VEIL whitish and fibrillose 
beneath a layer of slime; disappearing or forming a slight hairy-slimy superior ring on stalk 
which is subsequently blackened by falling spores. SPORE PRINT smoky-gray to black; 
spores 10-14 (16) x 4.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground under Douglas-fir and other 
conifers, often in small clumps which originate deep in the soil and may include one or more 
aborted fruiting bodies; known only from western North America and very common, 
(along with G. glutinosus-see comments) on the Pacific Coast. In our area it grows with 
Douglas-fir, often mingling with Suil/us species (S. caerulescens, S. lakei, S. ponderosus), 
from the fall through early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but its sliminess makes it undesirable-except as a possible escargot 
substitute. To clean the cap, simply peel off the slimy pellicle (skin). 
CO MMENTS: The intensely yellow flesh in the lower stem plus the whitish flesh elsewhere, 
viscid-slimy cap, soft decurrent gills, and smoky-black spores immediately identify this 
mushroom as a Gomphidius. However, distinguishing it from its brethren (see below), 
especially when it is not growing in clumps, can be difficult unless the spores-the shortest 
in the genus-are measured. In age the fruiting body is often quite murky and insidious- 
looking, hence its common name. The cap is quite variable in color but is usually dingier 
and dirtier than that of G. subroseus, and the stalk is usually thicker-but not necessarily 
slicker. Other species: The ..Glutinous Gomphidius," G. glutinosus, is probably the most 
common and widespread member of the genus. It is mycorrhizal with a variety of 
conifers, including spruce, fir, and in our area, Douglas-fir. It is quite similar to G. oregon- 
ensis, but has longer spores (over 14 microns), does not often grow in clumps, and usually 
has a darker cap when young (purplish to purple-brown, brownish-gray, purplish-gray, 
etc.). Another western species, G. largus, is essentially a giant version of G. glutinosus. and 
also grows with spruce and fir, mainly at higher elevations. Finally, there is the..Hideous 
Gomphidius," G. maculatus, which has a pale cinnamon to reddish-brown to murky brown 
, .";11 
.. 
.. 
.". 
.. 
.. 
......... 
#I .' 
..... 
,; .' 
'\ 
\ 
.- 
. . 
( 
, 
. .. 
\ 
'" 
"".. 
,. 
.,. 
Gomphidius oregonensis, a common associate of Douglas-fir. Gills are decurrent and darken in old 
age, a veil is present when young (visible in specimen on right), and cap is slimy when moist. Specimen 
at lower left has been sliced open to show the flesh, which is white in the cap and bright yellow in lower 
part of stalk. Buttons (top left) of this species are often found in tight clumps. 
or blackish-spotted cap and dark-fibered stalk. It lacks the slimy veil characteristic of 
other Gomphidii and features both robust and very slender forms. It is a northern species 
that grows mainly with larch, often in the company of Suil/us cavipes and S. grevil/ei. 
Gomphidius subroseus 
(Rosy Gomphidius) 
Color Plate 112 
CAP 2.5-7.5 cm broad, at first peglike, then broadly convex becoming plane or broadly 
depressed; surface viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, dull to bright pink to rosy-red or 
even red, often spotted grayish in old age. Flesh white (or tinged pink under cuticle), but 
yellow in base of stalk and sometimes pinkish in extreme base. GILLS typically decurrent, 
soft and rather waxy, fairly well-spaced, white becoming pale gray to smoky-gray or even 
blackish as spores ripen. STALK 3-7.5 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed 
slightly at base, dry and white above the veil, usually viscid below and white to dingy- 
colored with a pale yellow to bright yellow base; smooth or fibrillose, solid. VEIL white 
and fibrillose beneath a layer of slime; disappearing or forming an obscure hairy-slimy 
superior ring on stalk which is blackened by spores. SPORE PRINT smoky-gray to black; 
spores (II) 15-21 x 4.5-7 microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious or occasionally tufted on ground under 
conifers (especially Douglas-fir), northern North America. It can be found throughout the 
range of Douglas-fir and is fairly common in our area in the fall and winter. Itis also said to 
occur with spruce, fir, and hemlock. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rather bland; peel off the slimy pellicle (skin) before cooking it. 
COMMENTS: The beautiful rosy-red to pink cap and modest size separate this fungus 
from other Gomphidius species, and make it the most attractive member of its clan. It 
typically shows less yellow in the stem than either G. oregonensisor G. glUlinosus, but more 
than G. smithii(see below). It is often mistaken for a waxy cap (Hygrophoraceae) because 
of its brightly colored cap and soft waxy gills. However, the smoky-gray to blacksporeprint 
distinguishes it. Other species: G. roseus has a redder cap and longer spores, but has not yet 
been recorded in North America; G. smithii can also be rather small, but shows little or no 
yellow in the base of the stalk and has a grayish to vinaceous-gray or brownish cap. The 
latter occurs with Douglas-fir in coastal California but grows with other conifers as well. 
484 GOMPHIDIACEAE 
CHROOGOMPHUS (Pine Spikes) 
Medium-sized terrestrial mushrooms associated with conifers. CAP convex to conical, umbonate, 
plane, or depressed; smooth or woolly, viscid or dry. Flesh colored (pale orange to yellow-orange. 
buff. salmon. pinkish. reddish. etc.). GILLS usually decurrent. fairly well-spaced, dull orange to 
yellow-orange or ochraceous when young. blackening in age. STALK fleshy, more or less central. 
dry. VEIL present but usually disappearing, fibrillose. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT olive to 
smoky-gray to black. Spores long and narrow (narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped). Gills with 
prominent cystidia. Cap tissue amyloid. 
A FLAGRANT fungal feature of our coastal pine forests, Chroogomphus (crow-oh- 
gom-fus) is easily recognized by its decurrent gills, ochraceous to orange, salmon, buff- 
colored, or reddish flesh, and smoky-olive to black spores. The fruiting bodies, in contrast 
to Gomphidius, are very attractive: brightly colored with a lean, clean look and a ten- 
dency to become reddish or wine-colored in old age. The stem and gills are typically yellow- 
orange to orange to orange-buff, but the latter blacken as the spores ripen. 
Chroogomphus species grow exclusively with pine in our area and usually mingle with 
slippery jacks (Suillus pungens, S. fuscotomentosus, etc.). They have an unusually long 
growing season-from the onset of the fall rains through the spring-and may even turn 
up in the summertime. They often seem quite abundant when other fleshy fungi are scarce. 
They do not decay as rapidly as their cousins the Gomphidii and are usually free of 
maggots. However, they are susceptible to attack by a greenish mold. 
Chroogomphus is an excellent genus for beginners because all of its species are edible 
and highly distinctive. True, fresh specimens are slimy and insipid when cooked (not to 
mention purple), but they acquire a pleasant, chewy texture that is perfect for tomato 
sauces if they are chopped up finely and then dried. At least that is the gospel according to 
"Saint Ciro," a wondrously demented and exceptionally resourceful toadstool-tester of 
Sicilian extraction. With a large family to feed and an immense forest of un picked Chroo- 
gomphus across the street, he isn't the least bit deterred by their lack of renown. Every year 
he gathers trunkloads and dries them for summer use! About ten species of Chroogomphus 
occur in North America; most of these are keyed out here. Dr. Frank Dutra of Los Gatos, 
California, reports that eating them can turn one's urine red (just like beets!). This pheno- 
menon is harmless, but can cause anxiety if one mistakes the red pigment for blood. 
Chroogomphus vinic%r is a common sight in pine forests and on lawns where pines have been 
planted. Note the shape, which is very characteristic. 
 ( 
>\\ I 
I )  
.' . ... 
...:' . 
\. 
If 
--- -, 
CHROOGOMPHUS 
485 
Key to Chroogomphus 
I. Fruiting body robust (stalk at least 2 cm thick); cap and/ or stalk usually decorated with orange 
to reddish to wine-colored fibrillose or felty patches or zones; cap convex (not umbonate), 
not viscid or only very slightly so; spore print often olive-tinged . C. pseudov;n;c%r, p. 486 
I. Fruiting body not so robust, or if so then not as above ............................... 2 
2. Cap not viscid or only slightly so, covered with flattened woolly or felty fibrils or fibrillose 
scales; often associated with conifers other than pine (but also with pine) .............. 3 
2. Cap usually smooth and viscid when moist, often lustrous when dry (but sometimes minutely 
scaly or faintly fibrillose); associated principally with pine .................. _ . . . . . .. 4 
3. Cap pale to dull orange, yellow-orange, or ochraceous ............. C. tomentosus, p. 487 
3. Cap usually grayish, at least at margin ........... C./eptocyst;s(see C. tomentosus, p.487) 
4. Cap small (1-4 cm broad) and usually pinkish- or vinaceous-tinged when young; restricted to 
eastern North America; rare ........................................... C. f/av;pes 
4. Not as above; widespread and common ........................................... 5 
5. Cap often brightly colored (buff, yellow-orange, orange, ochre) until fairly mature; cystidia 
thin-walled ................................... C. ochraceus(see C. v;n;c%r, below) 
5. Not as above(but cap may be orangish when very young); cystidia thin- or thick-walled . _ 6 
6. Cap often vinaceous (wine-colored) in old age; cystidia thick-walled .... c. v;n;c%r, below 
6. Cap usually dull reddish-brown in age; cystidia thin-walled C. ruti/us (see C. v;n;c%r, below) 
Chroogomphus v;n;color (Pine Spike) Color Plate 113 
CAP (I) 2-10 (13) cm broad, peglike to nearly conical or convex when young, becoming 
somewhat top-shaped to plane or even shallowly depressed (but often with a slight umbo); 
surface smooth to finely fibrillose (or sometimes scaly in age), viscid when'wet, often 
lustrous or silky when dry; color variable: dull orange to ochraceous to grayish, brownish, 
yellow-brown, olive-brown, bister, or reddish-brown, often wine-red to dark vinaceous- 
brown in age and tending to developing wine-red stains where rotten or when dried; mar- 
gin at first incurved. Flesh thick, usually pale orange but varying to buff, salmon, or 
ochraceous-buff( often somewhat yellower in lower portion of stalk); often becoming wine- 
red in old age or where injured. GILLS broad, fairly well-spaced, decurrent or occasionally 
adnate, pale to dull orange or ochraceous when young, then clouded gray with spores and 
finally blackish in old age. STALK typically long, slender, and sometimes sinuous, but at 
other times short and rather thick; 2.5-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-2 (6) cm thick; equal or more 
often tapered downward; dry, solid, firm; pale orange to yellow-orange to orange-buff, 
ochraceous, or reddish-tinted when young, often more vinaceous-red in age and/ or with 
reddish fibrils. VEIL dry, fibrillose, ochraceous to orange, soon disappearing or leaving a 
slight hairy ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT smoky-gray to smoky-black, sometimes with an 
olive tinge; spores (14) 17-23 x 4.5-7.5 microns, more or less spindle-shaped, smooth. 
Cystidia on gills large, thick-walled. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under conifers, particularly pine; 
widely distri buted, but especially common in northern and western North America. Along 
with C. ruti/us (see comments), it is a prominent fungal facet of our pine forests and is also 
frequent in yards and lawns where pines have been planted. The major crop is usually in 
the late fall or winter and is often accompanied by masses of mushy slippery jacks (Suillus 
species), but it can be found most any time. It is quite sporadic in its fruiting habits- 
overwhelmingly abundant some years, very sparse during others. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but like all pine spikes, better dried than fresh (see comments on 
p. 484). It is usually very clean, and unlike Suillus, is shunned by maggots. 
COMMENTS: Anyone who hunts our coastal pine forests will come across this common 
mushroom and its equally edible look-alike, C. rutilus (see next page). The variable color 
or mixture of colors (orange, gray, brown, and/ or wine-red) plus the pale orange flesh, 
\: 
.:. 
"" 
... 
\ 
" 
 
., 
i 
. 
",' 
.. 
"- " 
 
,. 
Chroogomphus rurilus is easily confused with C. vinic%r in the field. The critical difference is 
microscopic (see coments below). 
decurrent gills, and smoky-black spores make it as distinctive as it is attractive. The fruiting 
body is often quite slender and long-stemmed, but robust forms also occur. C. rutilus 
(formerly Gomphidius viscidus) is a very similar, widespread species with thin-walled 
rather than thick-walled cystidia. It can often be told in the field by its slightly duller or less 
vinaceous color and broader or flatter cap, but both species are so variable in shape and 
color that a microscopic examination is often necessary to positively distinguish them. 
Both differ from C. lomenlosus and C. pseudovinicolor in their smoother cap that is viscid 
or slimy when wet and often shiny when dry. Other smooth, viscid-capped species: C. 
ochraceus, widely distributed, is closely related to C. ruti/us (i.e., it has thin-walled cyst i- 
dia), but is smaller, with a yellow-orange to buff, ochre, orange, or grayish cap, at least 
when young; it also occurs in our area with pine. See also C.j1avipes (in the key). 
Chroogomphus pseudovinicolor (Robust Pine Spike) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex, sometimes becoming plane in age; surface dry to very slightly 
viscid, orange-buffto dull orange to ochraceous-orange, sometimes flushed red in places or 
often mottled with reddish or orangish patches of felty or woolly material, and often be- 
coming entirely dark dull red in old age; margin often fringed with veil remnants at first. 
Flesh thick, quite firm, pale to dull orange or orange-buff (but often brighter or yellower 
in base of stalk), reddening in old age or around maggot tunnels. GILLS fairly well-spaced, 
decurrent or sometimes ad nate, often forked; pale orange to dingy ochraceous, then 
clouded olive to gray or black by spores. ST ALK 6-12 cm long, 2-5 cm thick at (or near) 
apex; usually tapered below, solid, firm, dull orange to orange-buff orochraceous, usually 
with zones or patches of reddish to wine-colored fibrils or woolly-felty material; often 
dingier, darker, or redder overall in age. VEIL scanty, fibrillose, soon disappearing or 
leaving a slight zone of hairs at thickest part of stalk Oust below apex). SPORE PRINT 
greenish to smoky-olive to blackish (occasionally lacking olive tinge); spores 15-20 x 5-7.5 
microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups (often in small clumps) on ground under 
conifers; known only from western North America, not common. In our area it seems to 
occur only with ponderosa pine-usually in the fall and early winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It is firmer and meatier than other Chroogomphus species, but 
unfortunately, not as numerous. 
'\' 
. " 
,", \ 
.' 
'. « 
.. 
>I'- 
 
. 1 
{, 
.. 
f 
......  
.. 
. 
Left: Chroogomphus pseudov;n;c%r, a robust orange to reddish species with patches of fibrils on 
the cap and stalk. Right: Chroogomphus tomentosus has a dry fibrillose, orangish to ochraceous 
cap. It is very common under northern conifers. 
COMMENTS: This robust but relatively rare Chroogomphus is a very beautiful mush- 
room when fresh-easily distinguished from other Chroogomphus species by its dry, 
convex (never conical or umbonate) cap and thick, woolly-scaly stalk. Also, the spore 
print is usually greener than that of its brethren, and it often grows in small clumps of 
24 individuals rather than in the scattered fashion typical of other pine spikes. 
Chroogomphus tomentosus (W oolly Pine Spike) 
CAP 2-9 cm broad, peglike becoming broadly conical to convex, umbonate, or plane; 
surface dry to very slightly viscid, covered with flattened woolly or felty fibrils or fibrillose 
scales; pale buffy-orange to pale or bright ochraceous to ochraceous-orange, the fibrils 
sometimes vinaceous-tinged; sometimes purple-stained in age. Flesh yellow-orange to dull 
orange or pale orange-buff. GILLS well-spaced, usually decurrent but sometimes ad nate, 
yellow-orange to ochraceous or colored like cap, becoming smoky-gray to smoky-brown 
as spores mature. STALK 4-18 cm long, (0.3) 0.7-1.5 (2) cm thick; equal or more often 
narrowed below; solid, dry and somewhat fibrillose, colored more or less like cap. VEIL 
dry, fibrillose, scanty, colored like cap; disappearing or leaving slight hairy remnants on 
stalk near apex. SPORE PRINT smoky-gray to blackish; spores 15-25 x 6-9 microns, 
narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills with fairly thick walls. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground underconifers(hemlock, 
fir, Douglas-fir, pine); common in the mixed coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest 
and northern Rocky Mountains from late summer through early winter; also common at 
times in northern California. It does not seem to occur in our area, but has been found on 
the University of California campus in Los Angeles. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but better dried than fresh (see comments on p. 484). 
COMMENTS: The dry, woolly-fibrillose cap, overall dull orange to ochraceous color, 
decurrent gills, smoky-black spores, and growth with conifers form a distinctive set of 
characteristics. The cap is drier and woollier than that of C. vinic%r and C. rutilus, and 
not as variable in color, while the stalk is not as thick as that of C. pseudovinic%r. Also, it 
seems to favor mixed coniferous forests, whereas the others grow almost exclusively with 
pine. Other species: C. leptocystis of western North America tends to have a grayer cap 
and thin-walled cystidia, but is otherwise quite similar. 
487 
488 
BOLETACEAE 
 &? 
,DQoo  
o 
.00  
spores  
Boletes 
BOLETES have a spongelike layer of tubes on the underside of the cap instead of gills. 
Otherwise they resemble agarics: medium-sized to large, mostly terrestrial fungi with a 
cap and central stalk. Polypores also possess a tube layer, but are tough or leathery and 
usually grow on wood. The few polypores that are fleshy and terrestrial typically have an 
off-center stalk and tubes which do not peel easily from the cap. 
The tube layer in the boletes, on the other hand, usually peels away cleanlyfromthecap. 
The spores are produced on basidia which line the inner surfaces of the tubes, which are 
vertically arranged so that the spores, when discharged, drop into the air. The mouths 
of the tubes are known as pores. They are sometimes stuffed with a pith when young, 
making the pore surface appear smooth. In some species the pores are radially arranged 
(arranged in rows which radiate from the stalk), giving a somewhat gill-like effect. This 
is carried to an extreme in Phylloporus rhodoxanthus (po 480), a "bolete" with true gills, 
which serves to illustrate why boletes are thought to have more in common with gilled 
mushrooms than with, say, the coral fungi, teeth fungi, or polypores. 
Boletes used to be lumped together in one giant and unwieldy genus, Boletus. Several 
genera are now recognized. the most prominent being Suillus. Leccinum. Tylopilus, and 
Boletus. The common term "bolete," however, is still applicable to any member of the 
Boletaceae, not just those still retained in Boletus. 
The salient characters for identification are much the same as for agarics. It is particu- 
larly important, however, to note color changes on the pore surface, cap, stalk, and flesh. 
Many boletes will stain blue or greenish-blue when bruised (see Color Plate 135);afewwill 
stain brown or some other color, while others will not stain at all. In a number of boletes 
the cap is typically areolate, i.e., it develops an extensive system of shallow cracks or 
fissures as it matures, exposing the flesh beneath. 
Another important feature to note is the type of stalk ornamentation, if any. In Boletus 
and Tylopilus, the upper portion or sometimes the entire stalk is frequently reticulate 
or "netted": covered with a network of veins. Some species are coarsely reticulate (see 
Color Plate 139), others are very finely so (see photo on p. 489). In Leccinum, the stalk is 
Close-up of the pores (tube mouths) in Boletus subtomentosus. Boletes are one of two groups of 
fungi that produce their spores in tubes. The other group is the polypores (p. 549). 
-:,  
 
t 
, . 
. 
. 
I 
.4 
 
... 
... 
.. 
, 
, 
. 
.  
.. 
.. 
...' 
. 
<. '-' 
.'t. 
, 
,. 
. 
. '\ 
, "'/' 
't. t 
11 
1 
., 
\ 
, \. 
..... 
Close-up of the finely reticulate (netted) stalk of a young Boletus edulis. 
always scabrous: decorated with tufted hairs or rough, scurfy scales (scabers) which 
typically darken at maturity (see Color Plates 145-147). In Suillus, on the other hand, the 
stalk is often speckled or smeared with glandular dots (see Color Plate 120). These pinkish 
to brown or blackish spots exude a resinous substance that will stain your fingers brown. 
Spore color range; from yellow to olive, brown, reddish-brown, chocolate-brown, or 
black. A spore print is easily obtained, but pigmentation in the tubes may stain the paper, 
making the spore color look brighter (usually yellower or greener) than it actually is. The 
spore shape is characteristically "boletoid": long and narrowly elliptical or spindle-shaped 
in face view, inequilateral in profile. Viewed through the microscope, a bolete spore is an 
unusually large, handsome, and healthy-looking specimen, somewhat reminiscent of a 
surfer with a good tan. 
The boletes are one ofthe safest groups for the table, as well as one ofthe most substantial 
and rewarding. A few members of the genus Boletus are poisonous, but the majority are 
edible (though some are distinctly better than others). Since they are large and fleshy, 
boletes are a popular picnicground for maggots. These may enter in the usual manner, via 
the stem, or surreptitiously, through the tubes. Always check for maggots in the field, and 
cut away soggy or infested areas (assuming you already know the species) before popping 
them in your basket. That way you are less likely to have a maggot-infested mush two days 
later. Some people peel offthe tubes-when old and spongytheyaremostlywateranyway. 
Also, boletes are vulnerable to attack by a variety of moldy-looking parasites. Discard 
all such individuals when picking for the table. For more on hunting boletes, see p. 546. 
The boletes attain their greatest diversity in the deciduous forests of eastern North 
America, but are also a conspicuous and colorful component of the West's woodland 
fungi. The cap can be very hefty and the pores are often brightly colored. The vast majority 
are mycorrhizal. Several hundred species occur in North America, more than 80 on the 
west coast. Though not complete (what book is?) and more than a trifle expensive (what 
book isn't?), Harry Thiers' California Mushrooms: A Field Guide to the Boletes is a 
definitive must for the serious and self-respecting bolete buff. (Thiers hasalsoco-a uthored, 
with Alexander Smith, the bolete bible for easterners, entitled The Boletes of Michigan.) 
Key to the Boletaceae 
I. Fruiting body often appearing aborted or misshapen and often buried or partially buried in the 
humus; tubes at least somewhat disoriented (i.e., not necessarily arranged vertically); spore 
print unobtainable; not common. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Gastroboletus, p. 544 
I. Not as above; tubes vertically arranged; spore print usually obtainable; usually found above 
the ground when mature ....................................................... 2 
489 
490 BOLET ACEAE 
2. Cap and stalk shaggy or coarsely scaly, the scales gray to brown or black; pores whitish becoming 
gray or black in age; veil present when young; spore print dark brown to black; spores spiny, 
warty, or reticulate; found in eastern North America and Southwest . Strobilomyces, p. 543 
2. Not as above ................................................................ 3 
3. Stalk roughened by small tufted hairs or scales (scabers) which are usually gray to dark brown 
or black by maturity (but differently colored or remaining pallid in a few species); stalk not 
glandular-dotted and typically not reticulate; pores rarely yellow ........ Leccinum, p. 536 
3. Not as above; stalk typically without scabers ....................................... 4 
4. Bright yellow, dry, cottony-powdery or cobwebby veil present when young, usually leaving 
cottony remnants on cap and/ or stalk; pores and flesh usually blueing (sometimes slowly) 
when bruised .............................................. Pulveroboletus, p. 509 
4. Veil absent, or if present then not as above ....................................... 5 
5. Veil present when young, sometimes forming a ring (annulus) on stalk, at other times clinging 
to the margin of cap, and in still other cases disappearing in age ...................... 9 
5. Veil absent( check young specimens if unsure), but cap sometimes fringed with sterile tissue 6 
6. Stalk with glandular dots or smears at least when mature (the dots often slightly resinous to the 
touch); stalk usually more or less equal or at least not markedly bulbous; cap often (but not 
always) viscid; spore print olive to brown or dull cinnamon .............. Suitlus, p. 491 
6. Stalk not glandular-dotted (or very rarely so, but then with much darker spores) ......... 7 
7. Pores often radially elongated. sinuous. arranged in rows. and/ or veined; tubes often (but not 
always) decurrent; taste of cap not peppery ....................................... 8 
7. Pores not as above, or if so then taste peppery ..................................... 10 
8. Veil absent when young; tube layer often difficult to separate from cap; stalk often short, 
curved, and/ or off-center; spores broadly elliptical to nearly round; associated with hard- 
woods (mainly ash and alder); common in eastern North America, rare in the West .... 14 
8. Not with above features; veil present or absent; spores elliptical to spindle-shaped; associated 
with conifers or less commonly hardwoods; widespread and common ................. 9 
9. Spore print dark grayish-brown to dark reddish-brown, chocolate-brown, or vinaceous-brown; 
veil typically prese'nt (at least when young) and glandular dots typically absent(rarely present); 
associated with larch and other northern conifers ................ Fuscoboletinus, p. 505 
9. Spore print olive-brown to brown, yellowish, or dull cinnamon; veil present or absent; stalk 
glandular-dotted or not; found with many kinds of trees (including larch) .. Suitlus, p. 491 
10. Cap viscid to very slimy when moist; stalk glandular-dotted or if not then stalk typically white 
to yellow and not reticulate; associated with conifers .................... Suit Ius, p. 491 
10. Not with above features ....................................................... II 
II. Spore print flesh-colored to pinkish-brown, reddish-brown, vinaceous, or chocolate-brown; 
pores typically white to pinkish, vinaceous, gray, or brown but not red and only rarely yellow 
(pores if pallid often but not always staining brown when bruised); common in eastern North 
America but rather infrequent in the West ........................... Tylopilus, p. 532 
II. Not as above; spore print yellow to yellow-brown, olive-brown, olive, brown, or more rarely 
cinnamon-brown; pores white, yellow, olive, red, orange, or sometimes gray or brown (but if 
pallid then not typically staining brown when bruised) ............................. 12 
12. Spore print pale yellow to yellow; stalk often hollow or partially hollow at maturity ( especially 
near the base); common in eastern North America, rare in the West ..... Gyroporus, p. 510 
12. S pore print olive-brown to olive or brown, or occasionally yellow-brown or cinnamon-brown; 
stalk not normally hollow; common and widespread .............................. 13 
13. Spores ornamented with ridges, grooves, pits, etc.; stalk usually relatively long (7 cm or more) 
and slender and coarsely reticulate or conspicuously lined with jagged ridges for most of its 
length; pores yellow to greenish-yellow, not usually blueing when bruised; typically terrestrial; 
found in eastern North America and the Southwest .... Boletellus& Austroboletus, p. 508 
13. Not with above combination of features; spores typically smooth; widespread Boletus, p. 51 I 
14. Common under hardwoods( especially ash) in eastern North America; cap olive todingy yellow- 
brown or brown; flesh not blueing or blueing only slightly; stalk often quite dark in old age, 
off-center or lateral ............................. Boletinellus(=Gyrodonj merulioides 
14. Associated with alder; known from southern California (and Europe), apparerltly rare; cap 
yellowish to reddish-brown; flesh usually blueing when bruised ......... Gyrodon lividus 
491 
SUILLUS (Slippery Jacks) 
Medium-sized to fairly large, fleshy, terrestrial boletes associated almost exclusively with conifers. 
CAP usually viscid or slimy, but sometimes dry and scaly. PORES and tubes typically white to 
yellow, sometimes radially arranged, rarely bruising blue. STALK typically more or less equal 
(rarely bulbous), rarely reticulate; often with resinous brown IOpinkishglandular dots and smears. 
VEILfrequently present andformingan annulus (ring) on stalk, but often absent. SPORE PRINT 
brown ( usually olive-brown becoming dull cinnamon-brown as moisture escapes). Spores typically 
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. Bundles of cystidia on inner surfaces of tubes staining dark 
brown to black in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
MOST slippery jacks have a veil ora glandular-dotted stem (see Color Plate 120) or both. 
In addition, the cap is often "slippery" (viscid or slimy), the pores are radially elongated 
in some species (that is, in rows radiating from the stalk toward the cap margin), the 
stalk is neither conspicuously bulbous nor reticulate as is commonly the case in Boletus, 
and they are mycorrhizal almost exclusively with conifers. Suil/us is a genus of exceptions, 
however: several species are not slippery, others lack a veil, still others are not glandular- 
dotted, many do not have radially-arranged pores, and two or three species in eastern 
North America occur with hardwoods. However, by using the above features in combi- 
nation, you should have little trouble distinguishing Suil/us from other bolete genera with 
the exception of Fuscoboletinus, which has darker spores and doesn't occur in California. 
Like other boletes, Suil/us can be found in older mushroom books under Boletus. It is 
perhaps the most primitive genus in the Boletaceae, leading to Boletus on the one hand and 
to the Gomphidiaceae (via Fuscoboletinus) on the other. Suil/us splits neatly into two 
groups. In the first (the genus Boletinus of some authors), a veil is always present and the 
cap is frequently dry and fibrillose, thus belying the moniker"slippery jack." Also, the stalk 
is not glandular-dotted and the pores are often elongated and/ or radially arranged. In our 
area this group occurs only with Douglas-fir, where it is often accompanied by species of 
Gomphidius. Elsewhere it also occurs with larch and various pines. The second group 
includes the "true" slippery jacks-or "slippery jills" as they are sometimes called. They 
have a slimy cap or glandular-dotted stem or both, and a veil mayor may not be present. 
They occur principally with pines, often mingling with species of Chroogomphus. 
Slippery jacks are remarkable for their fecundity. Under favorable conditions they 
fruit in quantities that must be seen to be believed. Bushels can be harvested from a single 
row of pine trees and truckloads from a pine plantation. They are indisputably among 
the most prominent fungal facets of temperate coniferous forests, and in fact, wherever 
there are conifers of the pine family (Pinaceae)- be it in a forest or park, on a lawn or by a 
freeway-there are bound to be one or more Suil/us species also. They are partial to cool 
weather and generally fruit later than Boletus and Tylopilus species, which like it warmer. 
In our area they can be found most any time but peak in the late fall and winter. 
None of the slippery jacks is known to be poisonous, but a few have caused "allergic" 
reactions. In my experience even the so-called ..choice" species are insipid and slimy when 
cooked, but one novel solution is to take advantage of their inherent wetness by using 
them as an escargot substitute. (Y ou can boil them, flavor them with herbs, stuff them into 
empty snail shells, and call it ..Parsley, Sage, Rosemary, and Slime.") Slippery jacks also 
tend to be wormy and do not dry well in the tasty tradition of Boletus edulis. They are 
indisputably available, however, so I heartily recommend that you try them.lfyou find a 
species that pleases you, you'll never have to worry about a mushroom shortage again! 
Nearly half of the 70+ North American species of Suil/us have been found in California. 
As they pose a threat to those who don't watch where they step (they are at least as 
dangerous as banana peels!) and inevitably arouse the curiosity of fungophiles and other 
weird elements (for their prodigious numbers as well as their slipperiness), I'm offering a 
generous selection here. Fourteen species are described and many others are keyed out. 
492 
BOLETACEAE 
Key to Suillus 
I. Veil present (check young specimens if possible!), either completely covering the pores when 
young (and often forming an annulus or ring on stalk after rupturing) or present only as a roll 
of cottony tissue on cap margin or patches on cap (and not forming an annulus) ........ 2 
I. Veil and annulus absent; margin of cap naked, even when young ..................... 28 
2. Glandular dots or smears present on stalk and conspicuous at least in age; associated mainly 
with pine, sometimes with spruce .............................................. II 
2. Stalk lacking glandular dots (or occasionally with a few visible in old age); found with Douglas- 
fir, larch, hemlock, or sometimes pine in the West and with larch, pine, and oak in East .. 3 
3. Stalk usually hollow or partially hollow, at least at base; cap not viscid; associated only with 
larch .......................................................... s. cav;pes, p.494 
3. Not as above; stalk not normally hollow .......................................... 4 
4. Cap with ta wny to orangish, red, reddish-brown, pink, or purple-red scales orfibrils, dryorwith 
a viscid layer beneath the scales (i.e., can be viscid in wet weather if fibrils are obliterated) 5 
4. Cap more or less smooth (but sometimes streaked) and viscid to slimy when moist ....... 7 
5. Found in eastern North America, mainly with pine ................................ 43 
5. Found in western North America, principally with Douglas-fir ....................... 6 
6. Cap fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, the fibrils reddish-brown to brick-red or pinkish, or sometimes 
orange-buff or tawny; surface dry, or viscid only in wet weather or old age .. S.lake;, p.495 
6. Cap with only scattered fibrils, but often streaked; surface usually viscid when moist, not reddish 
but often cinnamon-brown, orangish, greenish, etc. ....... S. caerulescens & others, p. 496 
7. Associated with hard woods (e.g., oak) in Great Lakes region; veil thick, tough, often gelatinous; 
spore print olive-yellow to yellow-brown; spores more or less round ..... S. sphaerosporus 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Base or lower portion of stalk often (but not always) staining blue or green when cut (often 
staining slowly or weakly); associated primarily with Douglas-fir ..................... 9 
8. Not as above; stalk not blueing and/ or associated with larch or pine .................. to 
9. Veil viscid and yellow to bright orange while still covering the pores; cap more or less smooth 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S. ponderosus & others (see S. caeru/escens, p. 496) 
9. Veil dry and whitish while covering the pores; cap smooth or fibrillose S. caerulescens, p.496 
10. Cap yellow to golden-yellow to dark red or bay-red; flesh usually yellow when young; associated 
with larch ..................................................... S. greville;, p.497 
10. Cap duller (honey-colored to dingy yellow-brown, brown, etc.); flesh white becoming pale 
yellow in age; associated primarily with pine ..................................... II 
II. Cap at first covered with a whitish veil that usually leaves small patches or scales on the surface 
of cap, especially near margin; found mostly with white (5-needle) pines in northern Rocky 
Mountains (particularly common in northern Idaho) ..................... S. alb;velatus 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Pores large (many of them typically I mm or more broad at maturity), often (but not always!) 
elongated and at least somewhat radially arranged (in radiating rows) ................ 13 
12. Pores mostly less than I mm broad and not radially arranged ........................ 15 
13. Veil typically forming a gelatinous annulus(ring) on stalk; cap often umbonate, dingy-colored, 
and rather small; found mainly with lodgepole and beach pines ..... S. umbonatus, p.498 
13. Not as above; veil not forming a gelatinous annulus or forming only a very slight one ... _ 14 
14. Stalk often short, poorly developed, and/ or off-center; pores often elongated and irregular; 
associated with pines and other conifers in the Sierra Nevada and other mountains ........ 
. . ... . . . . ... .. . . .. .. . ....... . .. .. S. r;par;us& S. megapor;nus(see S. sibiricus, p. 498) 
14. Not as above; stalk typically well-developed; found with 5-needle (white) pines; widespread 45 
15. Veil usually forming a distinct annulus (ring) on stalk .............................. 16 
15. Veil typically attached only to margin of cap or if attached to stalk when young then typically 
forming only a slight or very obscure annulus .................................... 20 
16. Annulus usually thin and, or fibrillose; glandular dots on stalk often inconspicuous until old 
age ..................................................... S. pseudobrev;pes, p. 500 
16. Annulus usually well-formed; stalk with conspicuous glandular dots (unless very young) . 17 
SUILLUS 
493 
17. Stalk and! or underside of veil (annulus) often with purplish or dull lilac shades; cap reddish- 
brown to dark reddish-brown or sometimes yellow-brown .............. S. /uteus, p. 500 
17. Not as above; purplish shades absent; cap white to dingy yellowish, olive-brown, etc. .... 18 
18. Found in eastern North Amenca (including the Gulf Coast) ......................... 19 
18. Found in the West (especially common in Pacific Northwest) ....... S. subo/;vaceus, p. 499 
19. Annulus tall (i.e., broad) and baggy or bandlike (both lower and upper edges often flaring 
out) ............................... S. sub/uteus& others (see S. subo/ivaceus, p. 499) 
19. Not as above; annulus not baggy; stalk slender; cap whitish to pale yellow, pale cinnamon, etc., 
the slime strongly acidic-tasting ........................................... S. acidus 
20. Veil purplish to lilac-brown on its underside; cap soon brown to dark brown; associated mainly 
with western white pine ..................... S. borealis (see S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500) 
20. Not as above ................................................................ 21 
21. Cap white becoming olive-gray or olive, then spotted, streaked, or becoming entirely yellow, 
cinnamon, orange, etc.; common with various pines in central and southern California, and in 
regions where Monterey pine has been planted ...................... S. pungens, p. 503 
21. Not as above; cap not olive or grayish-olive when young ............................ 22 
22. Veil rudimentary (not well-developed); cap yellow to dingy yellowish, mustard-yellow, or 
orange-buff, often with brown to reddish spots, streaks, orscales orwith well-developed brown 
to grayish fibrils; known only from eastern North America and the Southwest ......... 34 
22. Not asabove; if similarly colored then veil well-developed at least when young(asa roll of cottony 
tissue extending from cap margin toward stalk, or as a true partial veil covering the pores) 23 
23. Cap yellow to dingy olive-yellow or mustard-yellow (even in age), often with reddish to brown 
scales, spots, or streaks; stalk markedly glandular-dotted; found with 5-needle pines ... 45 
23. Not with above features ....................................................... 24 
24. Young specimens with yellowish to pale tan caps and very dense, conspicuous gland ular dots on 
stalk ................................ S. g/andu/osipes(see S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500) 
24. Not as above; young specimens differently colored or with inconspicuous glandular dots . 25 
25. Slime on cap becoming chocolate-brown in age; associated mainly with sugar pine on the west 
coast, lodgepole pine in Rocky Mountains . S. brunnescens(see S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500) 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Growing in volcanic soil, often buried; cap yellow to tawny, often fibrillose or streaked and 
often developing pinkish to reddish-brown areas S. vo/cana/is(see S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500) 
26. Not as above; habitat different ................................................. 27 
27. Veil material present only on margin of cap, never attached to stalk; cap whitish to buff'or at 
times brown to tawny or cinnamon ........... S. a/bidipes(see S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500) 
27. Veil attached to the stalk when young; cap dingy yellowish to honey-colored or brown, but 
not whitish .............................................. S. pseudobrevipes, p. 500 
28. Pores large (many of them 1-3 mm in widest dimension), often elongated radially or arranged 
in radiating rows and often decurrent ........................................... 29 
28. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
29. Cap hairy or velvety and brown to vinaceous-brown; found under hardwoods in southeastern 
United States ...................................................... S. castanet/us 
29. Not as above ................................................................ 46 
30. Cap dry to viscid but not thickly slimy, with hairs, fibrils, or scattered fibrillose scales when 
young (but these often absent in age or rainy weather); pores typically dark brown to yellow- 
brown, pale cinnamon, or orangish when young (but often dingy yellowish in age) ..... 31 
30. Cap viscid to very slimy when moist, smooth (bald) or streaked; fibrils typically absent on cap 
(occasionally present, but if so then pores typically white to pale yellow when young) ... 35 
31. Flesh and/ or pores staining blue when bruised or cut (but sometimes staining slowly or only 
slightly-check several specimens if unsure!) ..................... S. tomentosus, p. 504 
31. Not as above ................................................................ 32 
32. Found in eastern North America and the Southwest; cap sometimes yellow or orangish .. 33 
32. Found in California and the Pacific Northwest; cap not yellow . S.Juscotomentosus, p. 504 
33. Pores dark brown when young; cap soon more or less bald; associated with conifers, often in 
boggy areas; odor often fragrant when several specimens are put together .... S. punct;pes 
33. Not as above; cap usually with scales or colored fibrils; found with hardwoods and conifers 34 . 
494 BOLET ACEAE 
34. Associated with conifers (mainly pine); cap scales or fibrils usually conspicuous and glandular 
dots on stalk prominent at maturity ..................................... s. h;rtellus 
34. Favoring hardwoods; scales on cap usually small and glandular dots obscure . S. subaureus 
35. Glandular dots or smears present on stalk and usually conspicuous by maturity ........ 36 
35. Glandular dots absent or obscure (in old age sometimes visible at apex) ............... 40 
36. Cap white when young, whitish to pale yellowish in age (or with darker slime); associated with 
white pines in eastern North America; common ..... S. plac;dus(see S. granuialUs. p. 502) 
36. Not as above; cap darker, at least in age, and/ or found in the West ................... 37 
37. Cap smooth, at first white but soon becoming olive to olive-gray and then orange, cinnamon, 
yellow, brown, etc. (or splashed with these colors); found with various pines in coastal central 
and southern California, or in regions where Monterey pine is planted .. S. pungens, p. 503 
37. Not with above features; cap variously colored but lacking an olive or olive-gray phase .. 38 
38. Cap with grayish to dark brown streaks, fibrils, or scales; found with pine (especially Monterey 
pine) in California; taste harsh, unpleasant .... S. acerb us (see S.fuscotumenlOsus. p. 504) 
38. Not as above ................................................................ 39 
39. Cap buff to yellowish or pale cinnamon at maturity; common with ponderosa pine in the 
Southwest ................................. S. ka;babens;s(see S. granulatus. p. 502) 
39. Not as above; either found elsewhere or cap darker at maturity S. granulatus & others, p. 502 
40. Taste peppery (chew on a small piece of cap) and base of stalk usually bright yellow or pores 
brilliant yellow to intense greenish-yellow and associated with hardwoods (see Boletus, p. 511) 
40. Not as above ................................................................ 41 
41. Stalk typically white to yellow (not brown or red) and not viscid or slimy; associated with 
conifers (mainly pine); pores not blueing when bruised ............................ 42 
41. Stalk viscid or slimy and cap sometimes yellow, or if not then not as above (see Boletus, p. 511) 
42. Cap dark brown to reddish-brown to dull cinnamon when young ....... S. brev;pes, p. 501 
42. Cap whitish or at least paler than above when young .................................. 
................................ S.pallid;ceps&S. ocddental;s(seeS. brevipes. p.501) 
43. Pores and flesh typically blueing when bruised; spores ridged or otherwise ornamented ..... 
... . . ..... .. . . . . .. .. ......................... (see Boletellus& Austroboletus, p.508) 
43. Pores and flesh not blueing; spores smooth ....................................... 44 
44. Cap fibrils pink to reddish to purple-red; growing with white pine S. p;ctus(see S. lakei, p.495) 
44. Not as above; cap dull yellowish to orangish or pinkish-orange; especially common along the 
Gulf Coast ........................................ S. dec;p;ens(see S. lakei, p.495) 
45. Veil sometimes forming a slight annulus (ring) on stalk; base of stalk often vinaceous-stained; 
common in western North America, including the Southwest .......... S. s;b;r;cus, p. 498 
45. Not as above; veil typically not forming an annulus; common in eastern North America and 
also found in the Southwest ..................... S. amer;canus(see S. sibiricus, p. 498) 
46. Cap small (up to 5 cm broad) and stalk slender ....... S. helenae(see S. umbonatus, p.498) 
46. Cap medium-sized to large; stalk usually quite thick S. punctat;pes (see S. granulatus, p. 502) 
Sui/Ius cavipes (Hollow-Foot) Color Plate 122 
CAP 3-12 em broad, convex or broadly umbonate becoming plane or slightly uplifted; 
surface dry (not viscid), densely hairy-fibrillose, often with a suede-like or felty texture; 
typically dark brown to reddish-brown to orange-brown or tawny (rarely paler), the 
margin and/ or tips of the fibrils often paler. Flesh firm, white or pale yellow, not blueing 
when bruised. PORES arranged more or less radially, large, angular (elongated); pale 
yellow becoming dark yellow or greenish-yellow, not blueing; tubes same color, usually 
decurrent. STALK 4-9 em long, 0 .5-2 em thick, equal or swollen below, dry, lemon-yellow 
above the ring, colored like cap or paler below; gland ular dots absent; lower portion hollow 
inside, at least in age; not blueing when cut. VEIL fibrillose-cottony, white, forming a thin, 
fragile, fibrillose ring on stalk and/ or leaving remnants on cap margin. SPORE PRINT 
dark olive to brown; spores 7-10 )( 3.5-4 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
SUILLUS 
495 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground in late summer and fall, associated with 
larch trees; common throughout the northern hemisphere wherever larch occurs. I have 
seen it in Oregon and Idaho, but not in California. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and "choice" according to some sources, but I find it bland. Its one 
saving grace is that it isn't as slimy as many slippery jacks. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Boletinus cavipes, this is the only Suilluswithaconsistently 
hollow stem and dry, densely hairy, brown to tawny cap. Its growth with larch is alsodiag- 
nostic. Fresh specimens ha ve an unusually clean, pristine appearance thatis readily notice- 
able but difficult to describe (see color plate); the pale pores contrast strikingly with the 
darker cap, making it one of our most beautiful boletes. Since larch does not occur in 
California, S. cavipes probably doesn't either. However, it is a prominent feature of the 
coniferous forests of Idaho, Montana, and the Cascades, as well as the northeastern 
United States and Canada. For other larch-loving boletes, see S. grevillei and the genus 
Fuscobo/etinus(particularly F. ochraceoroseus and F. aeruginascens). 
S uillus lake; 
(Western Painted Suillus) 
Color Plate 124 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface covered 
with reddish-brown to brick-red to pinkish or ta wny fibrils orfibrillose scales on a yellow 
to dingy orange or tan background; dry, but in one form viscid in wet weather beneath the 
fibrils; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, yellow, often discoloring 
pinkish when bruised. PORES large (1-3 mm in length), sometimes radially arranged, 
yellow when young becoming dingy yellow or ochre and usually discoloring reddish to 
dingy reddish-brown where bruised or in age; tubes same color as pores, adnate to de- 
current. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, more or less equal, firm, dry, solid; 
yellow above the ring, usually with reddish to brown streaks below; glandulardotsabsent; 
interior usually staining weakly blue or green when cut, at least near base. VEIL white or 
becoming cap color, dry, usually forming a fibrillose ring or ragged zone on stalk, but 
sometimes disappearing. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-11 )( 34 
microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; associated with Douglas-fir 
and common throughout the West where its host occurs. In the Rocky Mountains it fruits 
in the summer and early fall and is the most common bolete associated with Douglas-fir. 
In our area it is frequent in the fall and winter, but is not as numerous as S. caerulescens 
and S. ponderosus, which also grow with Douglas-fir. It prefers poor, exposed soil and 
often fruits on road banks or in campgrounds. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice. 
COMMENTS: This is one "slippery jack" that is not slippery except in very wet weather. 
The dark red to reddish-brown fibrils or scales on the cap plus the presence of a veil and 
association with Douglas-fir set it apart. When young it is quite attractive, the scales often 
being more pink then red. Heavy rain will wash them off, however, and gelatinize the cap 
surface. Then the yellow to dingy orange-brown background color predominates, making 
it resemble S. caerulescens and S. ponderosus. In the Pacific Northwest it can also be 
confused with two larch-Iovers-S. cavipes, which has a hollow stalk, and Fuscobo/etinus 
ochraceoroseus, which is more brightly colored and has darker spores. The "Painted 
Suillus" of eastern North America, S. pictus, is a similar but more brightly colored species 
associated with white pine. It has a dry cap with pink to red fibrillose scales, a somewhat 
longer stalk with similarly colored fibrils, and a soft, white, cottony annulus (ring). It is 
edible and highly touted by some, mediocre according to others. Another dry-capped 
eastern species, S. decipiens, has an orangish to dingy ochraceous to pinkish-orange, 
fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly cap. 
. \ 
. ' 
.. 
,'- 
Suil/us caeru/escens commonly occurs with Douglas-fir. Note the presence of a veil which mayor 
may not form a distinct annulus (ring) on the stalk. A closely related and equally common species, 
S. ponderosus. is shown in color plate. 
Sui/Ius caerulescens (Douglas-Fir Suillus) 
CAP 5-18 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface viscid when 
moist, with scattered fibrils, scales, or streaks, color variable: dull cinnamon to yellowish, 
but most often dull reddish-brown, orange-brown, or yellow-brown toward the center and 
yellowish to buff near the margin, with dingy greenish stains sometimes developing in cold 
weather; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pale yellow or dis- 
coloring pinkish to vinaceous. PORES yellow when young, dingier in age, fairly large 
(1 mm or more in diameter at maturity) and sometimes radially arranged, not blueing 
when bruised but often discoloring dingy reddish-brown or brown; tubes same color, 
adnate to decurrent. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 1.5-3 (4)cm thick, equal or tapered at either 
end, firm, solid, dry, yellow above the ring, fibrillose and dingier below and often mottled 
with reddish or brown stains and usually staining brownish after handling; sometimes 
spotted but not glandular-dotted; flesh near or at base usually staining blue or green when 
cut (sometimes slowly). VEIL white or pallid when young, becoming colored like the cap 
in age, not slimy, usually forming a slight to distinct ring on stalk; ring fibrillose or bandlike, 
median to superior. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-11 x 3-5 microns, 
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under Or near Douglas-fir; known 
only from the Pacific Northwest and California, very common. In our area it is sporadi- 
cally abundant, along with S. ponderosus (see comments), from the fall through early 
spring. The largest fruiting is usually around Thanksgiving. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It is generally listed as mediocre, but one collection I sampled had 
a rather pleasing lemony flavor. 
COMMENTS: If you hunt Douglas-fir forests regularly, you will soon tire offinding this 
mundane mushroom. The dull cinnamon to orange-brown or yellowish cap, presence of a 
veil, tendency of the stalk base to stain blue when cut, and association with Douglas-fir are 
key characteristics. A very similar species, S. ponderosus(COLOR PLATE 117), is just 
as common in our area and just as mediocre an addition to a meal. It differs in having a 
viscid, yellow to orange veil (before breaking) and a smoother, viscid to slimy cap which 
ranges from reddish-brown to dull yellowish. Its name refers to its sometimes ponderous 
SUILLUS 
497 
size, and not to the fact that it isn't associated with ponderosa pine. In fact, it is associated 
with Douglas-fir just like S. caerulescens. and the two sometimes mix company. A third 
very similar species, S. ;m;tatus, has a smooth viscid cap and shorter spores; it occurs 
under conifers in the Pacific Northwest. A dark or dingy greenish variety (S. ;m;tatus var. 
v;r;descens) also occurs, and both S. caerulescens and S. ponderosus can develop greenish 
stains on the cap and stalk in cold weather. This in no way affects their edibility, however. 
S uillus grevillei 
(Tamarack Jack) 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, 
often shiny when dry; color variable: deep red to reddish-brown with a yellow margin, 
varying to gOlden-yellow throughout or yellow with a cinnamon- or rusty-tinged center; 
margin sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh thick, yellow but often aging or staining pink- 
ish to reddish; not blueing. PORES creamy when young becoming yellow and finally dingy 
ochre or olive-yellow, not blueing but usually turning brownish or rusty where bruised; 
often somewhat radially arranged; tubes same color, adnate to decurrent. ST ALK 4-10 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, solid, firm, pale yellow when young 
but soon mottled reddish to deep brown or cinnamon below the veil and often staining 
brown when handled; glandular dots absent. VEIL yellowish before breaking, the under- 
side often viscid in wet weather; usuallyforminga median to superior, cottony, whitish ring 
on stalk. SPORE PRINT olive-brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-10 x 3-3.5 microns, 
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in small clusters in woods or bogs, associated 
exclusively with larch (tamarack); common from late summer through early winter 
throughout the northern half of the northern hemisphere wherever larch occurs. It i 
very common in Idaho and Montana and also grows on the eastern slope of the Cascades 
(frequently in the company of S. cavipes), but is not known from California. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but like most slippery jacks, far from incredible. 
COMMENTS: Also known as S. elegans, this attractive slippery jack is easily told by its 
smooth golden-yellow to deep red cap, presence of a veil, absence of glandular dots on the 
stem, and monogamy with larch. In the West the cap tends to be dark red to cinnamon, 
while in Europe and eastern North America it is yellower. S. ponderosus and S. caeru- 
lescens are somewhat similar but prefer Douglas-fir. Other species: S. prox;mus of 
eastern North America is closely related, but its spore print is chestnut-brown when moist 
and its stalk often stains greenish when cut open (at least below); it also favors larch. 
SuiJ/us greviJ/ei, a slippery jack that grows only with larch. Note slimy cap and prominent annulus 
(ring). This is the eastern form with a golden cap; in the West the cap is usually reddish-brown. 
 
" 
;, 
\ 
\-... 
-'ft 
\, 
'\ 
\ 
,I' 
. , «'- 
, 
4.-. :.... 
. "ill 
'4: 
, " 
;;,  
.. 
£ 
. 
',.  
. ;'1;';.0 
", :4 
'# /',.. 
ill 
. . 
\ 
\ 
"\ 
Suil/us umbonatus is a small slippery jack that favors lodgepole pine. Note the glutinous (slimy) 
ring on the stalk and the rather large pores. 
Suillus umbonatus (Umbonate Slippery Jack) 
CAP 3-9 cm broad, obtusely convex becoming convex or plane, often with a low umbo, the 
margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, often 
streaked, olive-buff to dingy tan ord ull yellowish-brown, often more olive in age, especially 
toward margin. Flesh soft, pale yellow to buff, bruising dingy pinkish-brown. PORES 
large, more or less radially arranged, pale yellow when young, dingy greenish-yellow in old 
age; sometimes staining dingy pinkish-brown when bruised; tubes same color. STALK 3-8 
cm long, 4-9 mm thick, more or less equal, solid, usually slender; pale yellow or tan above 
the ring, same color or paler below, with pallid to yellow-brown, often obscure glandular 
dots; often brownish-stained where handled. VEIL viscid-gelatinous, pale brownish, 
forming a median to superior gelatinous ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT olive-brown toduH 
cinnamon-brown; spores 7-11 )( 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps under conifers, particularly lodge- 
pole and beach pines (Pinus contorta), often in large numbers; fruiting in the late summer 
and fall or early winter, western North America. It is common in the Sierra Nevada and 
on the California coast north of San Francisco; it has also been taken in eastern Canada. 
EDIBILITY: Too gooey and gluey to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This species is one of our most distinctive slippery jacks, easily recog- 
nized by its dingy yellow-brown to olive-buff color, frequently umbonate cap, viscid 
annulus (ring), and rather small, slender stature. The glandular dots are quite obscure 
when young bu t typically darken as the fungus matures. I t is closely related to S. sibiricus 
and S. american us, which, however, are more brightly colored and have reddish scales on 
the cap. Other species: S. flavidus is slightly yellower but otherwise similar if not the 
same; S. helenae, found under lodgepole (beach) pine in coastal Oregon, is also very 
similar but lacks a veil. 
S uillus sibiricus 
(Siberian Slippery Jack) 
Color Plate 116 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or broadly umbonate; surface viscid or 
slimy when moist, bright yellow to dull yellowish, olive-yellow, ochre-yellow, or dark yel- 
low, with scattered reddish to cinnamon-brown or dark brown spots, scales, streaks, or 
patches of fibrils, especially toward the margin (but these sometimes washed off by rain); 
margin incurved and usually hung with cottony veil remnants. Flesh soft, thin, yellow, not 
bl ueing but often staining vinaceous or pinkish when bruised. PO R ES large ( 1-2 mm wide) 
498 
SUILLUS 
499 
when mature, often somewhat radially arranged, mustard-yellow becoming duller or 
darker (ochre to yellow-brown) in age, not blueing when bruised (but may stain vinaceous 
or pinkish); tubes same color or dingier. STALK 3-11 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, more or 
less equal, often curved, solid or sometimes hollow in age, yellow to ochre-yellow, often 
staining vinaceous or brown when handled and often vinaceous-stained at or in the base; 
gland ular dots and smears present, often inconspicuous when young but typically brown to 
cinnamon and quite conspicuous in age. VEIL cottony, whitish to pale yellow or in age 
sometimes brownish, usually remaining attached to margin of cap, but sometimes forming 
a slight ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon-brown; spores8-12)( 3.54.5 
microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or clustered under conifers, associated with white 
(5-needle) pines; widely distributed, but especially common in the summer and fall with 
western white pine in the Pacific Northwest and northern California. It is also found in 
the Southwest with southwestern white pine and limber pine.The very similar S. ameri- 
canus(see comments) replaces it in eastern North America. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but thin-fleshed, insipid, and slimy. Alexander Smith relates the case 
of one person who cannot even touch it without suffering an acute allergic reaction. 
COMMENTS: The combination of viscid yellow cap with reddish to brown spots or 
plaques, cottony veil, and glandular-dotted stalk make this one of the most distinctive of 
all the slippery jacks. The cap is usually bright yellow in dry weather and duller or dingier 
when moist. The closely related S. amer;canus is often abundant with eastern white pine 
and also occurs in the Southwest. Its cap is often more streaked than spotted and its stalk 
is usually thinner (3-10 mm), plus it lacks an annulus because its veil normally doesn't come 
into contact with the stalk (instead it extends in from the cap margin asa roll of cottony tis- 
sue). In the Southwest the two species seem to intergrade; the color plate may represent one 
such "hybrid." In the Sierra Nevada two somewhat similar species, S. ripar;us and S. 
megapor;nus, are often common. Both have very large, irregular or even gill-like pores 
(up to 5 mm long and 3 mm broad) and yellow to brownish caps with brown to rusty-brown 
scales, streaks, and/ or fibrils. S. riparius usually has a well-developed stalk while in S. 
megaporinus the stalk is often poorly developed and off-center and the cap is usually small. 
S uillus subolivaceus 
(Slippery Jill) 
Color Plate 121 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex or obtusely umbonate becoming plane or broadly umbonate; 
surface smooth but often streaked or with flattened darker fibrils, viscid or slimy when 
moist; dull olive to olive-brown, grayish-olive-brown, dingy yellow-brown, or dingy tan. 
Flesh pallid to yellowish or tinged olive-gray, not bruising blue. PORES fairly large at 
maturity, grayish-olive to grayish-buff or olive-buff when young and often beaded with 
clear droplets in wet weather, becoming dingy yellowish to brownish-yellow in age (and 
droplets often drying blackish); not bruising blue; tubes same color or yellower. ST ALK 
6-12 (17) cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or thicker below, solid, white or yellowish above 
the ring, whitish to brownish below; densely covered throughout with prominent pinkish- 
brown to blackish glandular dots and smears. VEIL membranous, whitish, with a gelatin- 
ous olive to brownish underside; forming a large bandlike, median to superior ring on stalk 
which may shrink considerably in age. SPORE PRINT brown to dingy cinnamon; spores 
8-11 )( 34 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under conifers, particularly western white pine; 
known only from western North America. In the Pacific Northwest it is often common in 
the late summer and fall. It probably occurs in California, but I have not seen it south of 
the Cascades. Similar species occur in eastern North America (see comments). 
500 
BOLETACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but of poor quality. 
COMMENTS: The large bandlike ring, overall dingy olive-brown to yellow-brown color, 
slimy ca p, and very conspicuous gland ular dots on the stem which become blackish in age 
make this slippery jack easier to identifythanitistogrip! Theglandulardotsareoftenquite 
sticky and resinous and will stain your fingers brown more quickly than those of other 
slippery jacks. S. umbonalus is somewhat similar but grows with lodgepole pine and has a 
gelatinous annulus (ring) and pale yellowish pores when young. S. luteus is easily distin- 
guished by its reddish-brown cap and sheathing, purplish-tinged veiL In eastern North 
America there is a group of "slippery jills" with a yellowish to olive-brown cap and 
strikingly broad (1-2 cm high), thick annulus that is baggy (flares at both the bottom and 
top edges) when young and bandlike in age. The most common northern member ofthis 
group is S. subluteus. Several species are common in the South, includingS. cothurnatus, 
S. salmonicolor (with salmon-tinged pores), and S. pinorigidus. N one are worth eating. 
Suillus luteus (Slippery Jack) Color Plate 118 
CAP 5-12 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy 
when moist, often shiny when dry; typically reddish-brown to dark reddish-brown or 
chestnut-brown, but ranging sometimes toward yellow-brown or rusty-brown, especially 
in age, and sometimes streaked; margin often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white to 
pale yellow, not bruising. PORES minute, white at first, becoming yellow and finally dark 
yellowish, often brownish-spotted in age; not bruising blue; tubes same color. ST ALK 3-10 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, more or less equal, solid, white to pale yellow above, often purplish 
below or with a purplish zone; prominent pinkish to brown gland ulardotsand smears soon 
developing both above and below. VEIL sheathing the stalk, membranous, persistent, 
white above, purplish to dull lilac below and viscid when wet; usually forming a large, often 
flaring or sleevelike ring that turns brown from falling spores. SPORE PRINT brown to 
dull cinnamon; spores 6-10 )( 2.5-3.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in cool wet weather under conifers, particularly pine 
but also spruce; widely distributed. It is abundant in pine plantations in northeastern North 
America, and has also been reported from the Pacific North west and South west. A fa vored 
associate is Scots pine (Pinus sylveslris), and it may very well turn up in California where 
Scots pine has been planted. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and widely collected, though some people are apparently"allergic" to 
it. According to one source it is "the best of the slippery jacks"-a classic case of damning 
with faint praise, if you ask me. As in most slippery jacks, the slimy skin peels off easily. 
CO MM ENTS: This species is the" original" slippery jack, i.e., the one from which all the 
others take their name. It can be told by its reddish-brown cap, glandular-dotted stem,and 
sheathing veil which typically forms a prominent annulus (ring) on the stalk. The dull 
purplish color of the lower stalk or underside of the ring is also distinctive. S. borealis 
(see comments under S. pseudobrevipes) is a closely related westerner with no annulus. 
Suillus pseudobrevipes (Veiled Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface slimy or viscid 
when moist, smooth or with a few patches of veil tissue near margin, but often appearing 
fibrillose or streaked; dingy yellowish to yellow-brown, dark yellow-brown, or honey- 
colored, often becoming darker or more cinnamon in age; margin often hung with whitish 
veil remnants. Flesh thick, white to pale yellow, not blueing. PORES and tubes pale yellow 
to yellow becoming dingy yellowish in age, not blueing. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1-3 cm 
" 
.... 
\ 
. . 
.. 
4' 
Suillus pseudobrevipes, a widespread slippery jack with a thin veil and inconspicuous glandular dots. 
The veil may form a slight ring on the stalk and/ or leave remnants on the margin of the cap, or even 
disappear entirely. The;se are rather small specimens. 
thick, often rather short and thick, equal or tapered downward, solid, firm, white when 
young, yellowish in age; glandular dots absent or obscure when young but tending to 
become brown and more visible in age. VEIL white to dingy lavender or lavender-brown, 
usually forming a median fibrillose ring on stalk, but the ring often slight or collapsed; 
sometimes forming a sheath over the base of stalk or merely leaving remnants on cap 
margin. SPORE PRINT brown to pale brownish; spores 7-9 x 2.54 microns, spindle- 
shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious under pines (mainly ponderosa and lodgepole); 
known only from western North America. In our area it fruits only in scattered localities 
with ponderosa pine, in the fall and winter. In the Southwest and Rocky Mountains it is 
quite abundant, however, and I've also seen it in the Sierra Nevada. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. 
COMMENTS: This slippery jack tends to have a short, stocky stem like its namesake, 
S. brevipes. but the presence of a veil and paler ca p color distinguish it. Sometimes the veil 
persists as a roll of cottony tissue on the cap margin instead offorming a distinct annulus 
(ring), leading to confusion with several species that typically boast veil remnants on the 
margin of the cap but not the stalk. These species include: S. volcanalis, glandular dots 
obscure, cap yellowish or tawny (or often with pinkish to reddish-brown areas), growing 
in volcanic soil (often buried) with Jeffrey pine in Mt. Lassen National Park, California; 
S. brunnescens, cap white with the slime becoming chocolate-brown, glandular dots small, 
associated with sugar and lodgepole pines; S. borealis, cap dark brown, veil dull lavender 
or purplish (as in S. /ureus), stalk glandular-dotted in age, associated with western white 
pine; S. glandulosipes, cap fibrillose and pale ochre to cinnamon, glandular dots very 
conspicuous, locally common in northern coastal California; andS. albidipes, whose cap 
is whitish to buff, brownish, or dull cinnnamon and has a roll of cottony veil tissue on the 
margin when young. I have seen enormous fruitings of the latter species under lodgepole 
pine in Oregon and Washington. 
Suillus brevipes (Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack) Color Plate 115 
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid 
or very slimy when moist, often shiny when dry; dark vinaceous-brown to dark brown 
when young, often fading in age to reddish-brown, dull cinnamon, or even tan (or in one 
form yellow-brown) and sometimes appearing streaked; margin naked. Flesh thick, white 
or often becoming yellow in age, soft, not blueing when bruised. PORES and tubes pale 
when young, becoming darker or dingier yellow in age and finally olive-yellow; not blueing. 
ST ALK 2-7 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below and often quite short; 
firm, solid, white becoming pale yellow in age; glandular dots absent or sometimes barely 
visible in age (never.prominent). VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; 
spores 7-10 x 34 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious under conifers (particularly 2- and 3-needle 
501 
502 
BOLETACEAE 
pines, also spruce); very widespread and common. In the West it is especially abundant 
with lodgepole and bishop pines. In our area it fruits in the fall and winter but is en- 
countered infrequently, perhaps due to the superabundance of S. pungens. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and perhaps the best of our local slippery jacks-which is hardly a 
compliment. Peel the slimy pellicle (skin) before cooking it. 
COMMENTS: This widespread and often abundant slippery jack is best recognized by 
its smooth, slimy, dark brown to reddish-browncap(whichmayfade in age), absence ofa 
veil, and absence of obvious glandular dots on the stem. True to its name, the stalk is often 
rather short, but it is a variable species and longer-stemmed individuals are not unusual. 
The viscid cap and non-reticulate, more or less equal stalk distinguish it from Boletus; the 
cap is never olive-gray as in S. pungens, and there is no veil as in S. pseudobrevipes, while 
S. granulatus and its relatives have a distinctly glandular-dotted stem. Other species witha 
smooth viscid cap, no veil, and absent or inconspicuous glandular dots include: S. pallidi- 
eeps of the Rocky Mountains, with a white cap when young that becomes pale cinnamon 
or yellowish in age; and S. oeeidentalis, common under ponderosa pine in the Southwest, 
with a paler (buff to light brown or pinkish-brown) cap that is not white when young. 
Suillus granulatus (Granulated Slippery Jack) 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly wavy; surface smooth, viscid or very slimy 
when moist, often shiny when dry; cinnamon-brown to brown, orange-brown, rusty- 
cinnamon, or yellow-brown (but in some forms whitish when young), often streaked or 
mottled and paler or duller in old age; margin naked. Flesh thick, soft, white when young 
but soon pale yellow. PORES and tubes whitish when very young and often beaded with 
milky droplets, soon becoming buff or yellow and eventually dingy yellowish or brownish- 
spotted when mature. ST ALK 3-8 cm long.O.7-2.5 cm thick, moreorlessequal, firm, solid, 
whitish when young, becoming yellow above and dingy cinnamon- or reddish-stained 
toward base; covered with pinkish to reddish-tan or brown glandular dots and smears in 
age. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon or ochre; spores 7 -10 )( 2.54 
microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under pines in the summer, fall, 
and early winter; very widespread and common, but replaced in our area by S. pungens. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but bland (see S. pungens). 
COMMENTS: This widespread slippery jack can be found almost anywhere where there 
are pines. It is closely related to S. pungens, but lacks the olive-gray tones so characteristic 
of that species. The combination of gland ular-dotted stem, slimy or shiny cap, and absence 
of a veil are quite distinctive, but there are a number of closely related species which are 
rather difficult to distinguish (fort unately, allare apparently edible). These variants, which 
are especially numerous and confusing in the pine forests of the Rocky Mountains and 
Southwest, include: S.flavogranulatus of the Rockies, with a yellowish to dingy ochre cap 
at maturity and largerpores;S. kaibabensis, common in the Southwest, with a buff to pale 
cinnamon or yellowish cap; and S. wasatehieus, with reddish pores when young that 
become yellowish in age. In the Pacific Northwest another species, S. punetatipes, is quite 
common under various conifers. It also has glandular dots or smears and lacks a veil, but 
is larger and thicker-stemmed with larger yellow pores that are often somewhat radially 
elongated and/ or decurrent. Its flesh is white and its cap color variable: orange-brown to 
dark brown, dingy tan, pinkish-brown, gray, vinaceous-gray, or purple-tinged. S. mon- 
tieolus of the Sierra Nevada resembles S. granulatus but has a swollen or bulbous stem. 
S. plaeidus of eastern North America is very similar, but its cap remains whitish for a long 
time before darkening or turning yellowish. Also see S. albidipes (under S. pseudobrevi- 
pes), which differs in having veil tissue on the cap margin when young. 
 
... 
"-- 
" . 
" 
\ 
.. 
Suil/us pungens. Note slimy cap and presence of milky droplets on pore surface of young specimens, 
plus the glandular-dotted stem. Cap color is variable (see color plate and description). (Joel Leivick) 
Suillus pungens 
(Pungent Slippery Jack) 
Color Plate 114 
CAP 4-18 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface smooth, slimy or 
viscid when moist, often shiny when dry; color extremely variable: usually white when very 
young but soon olive to gra yish-olive and then becoming yellow, ta wny-cinnamon, rusty- 
brown, orange, reddish-brown, or often mottled and streaked with various combinations 
of the above colors; margin typically naked or with a slight roll of cottony tissue when 
young. Flesh thick, white when young, soon becoming lemon-yellow and soft, not blueing; 
odor pungent or pleasant (somewhat banana-like). PORES white when young and often 
beaded with white to pinkish droplets in wet weather, becoming yellow and finally dark 
yellow-brown or dingy ochre in age, not blueing when bruised; tubes same color. STALK 
2-10 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or with a-slightly tapered or swollen base, firm, solid, 
white when young becoming yellow in age, with conspicuous reddish to brown glandular 
dots and smears. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT olive-brown to dull cinnamon-brown; 
spores 9-10 x 3-3.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on ground near or under M on- 
terey pine; apparently endemic to our area, but also occurring where Monterey pines ha ve 
been planted (it is a common "lawn mushroom" in our area, often growing with Chroo- 
gomphus vinic%r and He/vella /acunosa). It is most abundant in the fall and winter but 
can be found whenever it's damp enough. It is also quite common under knobcone and 
ponderosa pines-but apparently only within the geographical range of Monterey pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible; disdained by some due to its"harsh, unpleasant, subna useous" taste, 
but prized by others. In my opinion its soft flesh and slimy texture are much bigger draw- 
backs than its flavor. Since it occurs in such large quantities and is easy to identify, it is 
definitely worth experimenting with. To remove the slime, simply peel off the skin. 
COMMENTS: Locally this is our most prolific bolete, appearing in colossal numbers 
wherever there are pines. The remarkable series of color changes it undergoes is apt to 
baffle the color-conscious beginner. On the other hand, when several individuals are 
present it affords an instant means of recognition! It is closely rela ted to S. granu/atus, but 
that species is never grayish-olive when young. The glandular-dotted stem and milky 
droplets on the pore surface of young specimens are also distinctive. 
S. pungens vies with Hygrophorus eburneus and the "Insidious Gomphidius" (Gom- 
phidius oregonensis) for the title of "Slipperiest and Slimiest Fungus Among Us." An 
organic version of hockey or caroms can be played on a wet surface, using the caps of young 
S. pungens for pucks. Overmature individuals, on the other hand, are more aptly called 
S. "spongens" than S. pungens-they literally seethe with fat, agitated maggots and sag 
with so much excess moisture that they practically demand to be wrung out like a sponge! 
503 
504 BOLETACEAE 
SuillusJuscotomentosus Color Plates 119, 120 
(Poor Man's Slippery Jack) 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, or viscid in age or wet weather, at first 
covered with olive-brown to dark brown or fuscous (deep grayish-brown) fibrils or small 
fibrillose scales (in this stage usually dry), the scales often sparserinage, revealing the paler 
(dull ochre to buff) background, sometimes more cinnamon-colored overall at maturity 
or appearing streaked; margin naked. Flesh thick, yellow to pale orange or orange-buff, 
not blueing when bruised; taste mild to slightly unpleasant. PORES typically orange-buff 
when young and sometimes beaded with droplets, becoming yellowish-buff to dark dingy 
yellow or olive-yellow in old age, not blueing when bruised; tubes same color. STALK 
4-12 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or somewhat thicker below, solid, firm, pallid to yellow 
or brownish-buff or often pinkish-orange to pale orange, especially toward base; glandular 
dots and smears present and usually conspicuous at least in age, often elongated, same 
color as stalk or darker (brown to cinnamon). VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT olive-brown 
to dull cinnamon-brown; spores 9-12 )( 3-4 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under pines, often in large num- 
bersr; originally described from Santa Cruz County , California, but occurring in the Sierra 
Nevada and Cascades as well. In our area it is often abundant in the late fall and winter 
under ponderosa, knobcone, and digger pine, while the very similar S. acerb us (see 
comments) favors Monterey pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but slimy and insipid. In blind tastings of local edible boletes, it has 
consistently placed last. Asked to rate each bolete on a scale of 1-10, several tasters gave 
it a zero and one, a minus five! 
COMMENTS: This common bolete resembles S. tomentosus but does not stain blue. The 
pores are usually orange-buff when young, rather than white as in S. pungens and S. 
granulatus. and the brownish to grayish-brown cap fibrils and absence of a veil are also 
distinctive. The "Starving Man's Slippery Jack," S. acerbus, is a very similar species with 
a more viscid, less fibrillose-scaly cap. It is supposedly associated exclusively with Mon- 
terey pine, but I wonder whether it is really distinct fromS.fuscolOmentosus. The degree 
of viscidity seems to depend on age and weather conditions, and I've found specimens 
under Monterey, knobcone, and digger pines which could be referred to either species. 
Suillus tomentosus (Blue-Staining Slippery Jack) 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, but in wet weather or age often 
viscid, at first covered with a dense coating of minute hairs (fibrils) which break up to form 
scattered scales and are often quite sparse (or even absent) in age; fibrils or scales usually 
grayish-brown to brown (reddish in one form), sometimes pallid or buff when young; back- 
ground usually pale yellow to yellow-orange, orange-buff, or dark dull orange; margin 
naked. Flesh thick, pallid to yellow, usually blueing(but sometimes slightly or slowly) when 
bruised; taste mild or acidic. PORES dingy brown to dark cinnamon when young, 
becoming dingy yellow to buff or olive-yellow in age; usually blueing at least slightly when 
bruised (at least in age); tubes yellowish to olive-yellow. ST ALK 3-11 (15) cm long, 1-3 cm 
thick, equal or thicker below, firm, solid, colored like background of cap ororanger, with 
numerous small glandular dots which may be same colororbrownerand are often obvious 
in age; base sometimes reddish-stained. VEIL absent. SPORE PRINT dark olive-brown 
to dull cinnamon; spores 7-1 I )( 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or in troops on ground underpinesand other conifers, 
late summer through early winter; widely distributed, but especially common in the West, 
where it is one of the most common of all the slippery jacks. I have seenenormousfruitings 
, 
" 
Suil/us tomentosus is a common and widespread species easily told by the tendency of its pores and! 
or flesh to stain bluish when bruised. Note presence of fibrillose scales on cap. Older or rain-battered 
specimens, however, may be practically bald (without scales or hairs). 
in Idaho, Washington, northern California, and the Sierra Nevada, especially with lodge- 
pole pine and in mixed forests of aspen and pine. In our area, however, it is largely re- 
placed by the similar S.fuscotomentosus. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and every bit the equal of S. fuscotomentosus (see comments on 
the edibility of that species). 
COMMENTS: The fibrillose to scaly cap, brownish pores when young, absence of a veil, 
glandular-dotted stem, and tendency of the poresandj orthe flesh to stain blue or greenish- 
blue when bruised form a distinctive combina tion of characters. It is one of the commonest 
and most variable slippery jacks, with several slightly different color forms. Other species: 
S. var;egatus of Europe is very similar if not the same; S. ret;culatus is a rare, reticulate- 
stalked species that stains blue. 
FUSCOBOLETINUS (Larch Boletes) 
Medium-sized, fleshy, terrestrial boletes associated mainly M,ith larch. CAP viscid, or if dry then 
fibrillose. PORES pallid to yellowish, gray, or grayish-brown, often large and radially arranged. 
ST ALK not usually reticulate or glandular-dotted; not scabrous. VEILpresenr,frequenrly forming 
an annulus (ring) on stalk. SPORE PRINT dark grayish-brown to dark reddish-brown to 
chocolate-brown or chocolate-gray. Spores elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on inner 
surfaces of tubes staining dark brown in KOH (potassium hydroxide). 
THIS small genus is an off-shoot of Sui//us. It differs principally in its darker spore color, 
and is included in Sui//us by some boletologists. A veil is present in aU species but the stalk 
usually lacks glandular dots. The cap varies from smooth and slimy to dry and fibrillose. 
Fuscoboletinus species are mycorrhizal mainly with larch or tamarack (Larix). This is a 
helpful feature in identification, though several Sui//us species (e.g., S. grevi//ei and S. 
cavipes) also grow with larch. Some Fuscoboletinus species grow with other northern 
conifers, but their geographical range still corresponds to that of larch. As larch does not 
occur in California, Fuscoboletinus probably doesn't either. However, it could con- 
ceivably appear where larches have been planted. Only two species are known from the 
western United S tates, and they are described here; most ofthe other species occur in the 
Northeast and Canada. Like slippery jacks, they are edible but of mediocre quality. 
505 
506 
BOLETACEAE 
Key to Fuscoboletinus 
Cap viscid or slimy when moist and more or less smooth ............................. 5 
Cap dry (not viscid) and fibrillose or scaly ......................................... 8 
Flesh in lower stalk staining greenish when cut (see Sui/lus proximus under S. grevi//ei, p.497) 
Not as above ................................................................. 6 
Very common with larch in both eastern and western North America; spore print olive-brown 
to dull cinnamon ....................................... (see Sui/lus grevi/lei, p. 497) 
Found in northeastern U.S., Canada, and Alaska, usually with conifers other than larch; spore 
print darker than above ....................................................... 7 
Veil (and stalk below veil) viscid; cap red-brown to mahogany, the stalk often with reddish spots 
when young; found under conifers in Alaska, Canada, and northeastern U.S. F. g/andu/osus 
7. Not as above; stalk dry (not viscid) ................................. F. sinuspau/ianus 
8. Stalk typically becoming hollow in lower portion; cap color variable: dark brown to reddish- 
brown, tawny, etc.; spore print dark olive-brown to brown .... (see Suillus cavipes, p.494) 
8. Stalk not normally hollow; cap rosy to dark red (but sometimes overlaid with white) when 
fresh; spore print dark reddish-brown to dark vinaceous-brown ...................... 9 
9. Stalk typically 1-3 cm thick and cap 6-20 cm broad; known only from western North America 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F. ochraceoroseus, below 
9. Not as above; typically smaller and eastern ...... F. pa/uster(see F. ochraceoroseus, below) 
10. Cap only slightly viscid; flesh not blueing when bruised; pores usually elongated near the stalk 
or forming gill-like rows; found in the eastern United States and Canada, usually in bogs 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F. grise/lus (see F. aeruginascens. p. 507) 
10. Not as above; cap viscid to slimy when moist; flesh often (but not always) staining bluish or 
bluish-green when exposed; found in both eastern and western North America ........ II 
Cap more or less chocolate-brown when fresh; known from the eastern United States and 
Canada ................................... F. serotinus(see F. aeruginascens, p. 507) 
II. Not as above; widespread .................................... F. aeruginascens, p. 507 
I. Stalk distinctly glandular-dotted (the dots dark); known from Minnesota; rare . F. weaverae 
I. Stalk not glandular-dotted (but may have reddish spots when young); common ......... 2 
2. Tubes and pores yellow to yellow-brown or yellow-olive when fresh ................... 3 
2. Tubes and pores whitish to grayish or grayish-brown, not yellowish .................. 10 
3. Cap 4-10 cm broad, at first covered by cottony grayish to yellow or red veil material which breaks 
up to form coarse scales, streaks, or plaques; cap viscid beneath the veil material and usually 
dark red to brownish or red-and-yellow in age; partial veil with both a cottony and a viscid or 
gelatinous layer; stalk with veil remnants (like cap), usually a mixture of red, yellow, and/ or 
gray; pores and tubes yellow; associated with larch (tamarack), usually growing in bogs; 
found in the northeastern United States and Canada (a very striking mushroom-see Color 
Plate 126) ......................................................... F. spectabi/is 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. 
4. 
5. 
5. 
6. 
6. 
7. 
II. 
Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus 
(Rosy Larch Bolete) 
CAP 7 -20 (25) cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate, or in age the margin some- 
times uplifted; surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly and often uneven or pitted; 
rosy-red to bright pink, but often overlaid with whitish hairs (fibrils), and oftendarkerand 
duller (brick-red) in age; margin sometimes yellowish and hung with veil remnants. Flesh 
thick, yellow or tinged pink under cap cuticle, bruising slightly greenish-blue or not at all; 
taste often slightly bitter or acrid. PORES large, elongated (2-5 mm long) and usually 
arranged radially; yellow becoming dark yellow to olive-ochre and finally dingy brown in 
old age, not bruising blue; tubes shallow, same color, adnate to decurrent. ST ALK3-7 (10) 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base (and often a flaring apex); solid, 
firm, yellow ( colored like pores) or with reddish to brownish stains, base often whitish and 
Color Plate 123 
FUSCOBOLETINUS 
507 
fibrillose; apex often slightly reticulate from tubes; glandular dots absent. VEIL 
membranous, white or yellowish, thin, sometimes forming a slight ring on stalk but more 
often clinging to margin of cap. SPORE PRINT dark reddish-brown to dark vinaceous- 
brown; spores 7.5-9.5 x 2.5-3 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, associated with 
larch; known only from the northern Rocky Mountains and Pacific Northwest. I ha ve seen 
large fruitings in Idaho in September, but apparently it isn't common every year. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but of very poor quality due to the slightly bitter taste. 
COMMENTS: The beautiful rosy-red to pink cap, radially arranged pores, presence of a 
veil, and association with larch are the most distinctive characters of this most distinctive 
bolete.lts color is somewhat reminiscent of Suil/us pictus, which grows with eastern white 
pine, and S. lakei, which grows with Douglas-fir, but the spore print is darkerand the stalk 
usually thicker. Other species: F. paluster of northeastern North America is somewhat 
similar (cap deep red) but much smaller and more slender, with even larger pores; it grows 
in swamps and bogs. Another very striking bog-lover, F. spectabi/is(COLOR PLATE 
126), is also restricted to the Northeast and Canada. One glance is usually sufficient to 
identify it (as evidenced by the color plate), but see the key to Fuscoboletinus for details. 
Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens (Grayish Larch Bolete) 
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface viscid or slimy 
when moist, smooth or streaked with flattened fibrils, or at times with darker fibrillose 
scales, sometimes cracking in dry weather; grayish-white to gray, grayish-brown, olive- 
gray, or dingy yellowish, sometimes with darker scales or developing grayish to dingy olive 
spots; margin usually hung with veil remnants. Flesh soft in age, white to yellowish, 
typically turning bluish-green when bruised (but often slowly or only very slightly), at 
least in the stalk. PORES small and round when young but often ra ther large and somewha t 
radially arranged in age; white at first becoming gray to grayish-brown at maturity, usually 
staining blue to dingy greenish when bruised (but often only slightly or slowly); tubes same 
color. STALK 4-6 (9) cm long, 0.7-1.5 cm thick, equal or tapering upward or sometimes 
pinched at base; solid, pallid or tinged olive above the ring, gray to olive-grayish to 
brownish below and usually somewhat viscid; glandular dots absent, apex often reticulate 
from tubes. VEIL membranous, white to gray or yellowish, usually forming a median to 
superior ring on stalk. SPORE PRINT dark reddish-brown or vinaceous-brown; spores 
8-12 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in woods and around the edges of bogs, asso- 
ciated with larch (or tamarack) and common wherever larch occurs-the most widespread 
member of the genus. In the Pacific Northwest it is often common in the springand again in 
the late summer and fall; it probably does not occur in California. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but unappealing because of its sliminess, thin flesh, and dingy color. 
COMMENTS: The whitish to grayish to yellowish cap, white (never yellow!) pores that 
become gra yish in age, presence of a veil, and tendency to bruise weakly bluish-green are the 
distinguishing fieldmarks of this undistinguished larch-lover. It is likely to be mistaken for 
a Sui/lus (and is even placed in that genus by some mycologists), but the spore print is 
vinaceous-brown. In eastern North America it often grows with F. spectabilis, a very 
striking species described in the key to Fuscoboletinus and shown in Color Plate 126. 
F. serot;nus is a similar species with chocolate-brown slime on the cap; F. grisellus is 
colored like F. aeruginascens but does not normally bruise bluish-green, has a more conical 
and less viscid cap, and more elongated pores. Both species are associated with tamarack 
(eastern larch) and are fairly common in the northeastern U.S. and Canada. 
508 
BOLETACEAE 
BOLETELLUS & AUSTROBOLETUS 
Medium-sized woodland boletes. CAP fleshy, dry or viscid, sometimes areolate or scaly. PORES 
and tubes usually (but not always) yellow, sometimes blueing when bruised. STALK fleshy but 
usually long, slender, and more or less equal; lacking glandular dots or dark s('abers but often 
longitudinally ridged or jaggedly reticulate. VEIL absent (except in B. ananas). SPORE PRINT 
olive to brown or cinnamon-brown. Spores elliptical to spindle-shaped, longitudinally wrinkled, 
ridged, grooved, or "winged" (Boletellus) or minutely pitted (AustrobolelUs). 
THESE are gracile (slender-stemmed) boletes with ornamented spores (ridged or wrin- 
kled in Boletel/us, pitted in Austroboletus). The stalk is usually long in relation to the cap 
and not bulbous as in many species of Boletus. In addition, it is often raggedly or jaggedly 
reticulate or ridged. Both genera are centered in the tropics. In the United States they are 
most prevalent in the southeastern sector and along the Gulf of Mexico. A few species 
range north to Canada and west to southern Arizona, but none have been found in Cali- 
fornia. One Boletel/us is depicted here; several other species are keyed out. 
Key to Boletellus & Austroboletus 
l. Stalk smooth to fibrillose or scurfy but not reticulate, jagged, or markedly ridged; pores and 
flesh usually blueing when bruised; often growing at or near the bases of trees .......... 2 
l. Stalk markedly or jaggedly reticulate or ridged; flesh and pores not blueing; terrestrial .... 3 
2. Veil present when young, usually leaving white flaps on cap margin; cap coarsely scaly or fibril- 
lose-scaly; usually growing on or near pine trees ........ B. ananas (see B. russe/lii, below) 
2. Veil absent; cap often areolate but not fibrillose-scaly or shaggy ......... B. chrysenteroides 
3. Cap and stalk whitish to pale yellow or buff; stalk prominently and coarsely reticulate; taste 
bitter; usually found in sandy soil in southern U.S. (subtropical) .......... A. subf/avidus 
3. Not as above; cap and stalk darker or brighter ..................................... 4 
4. Cap smooth and viscid when fresh and moist ..... A. betu/a (see Bo/etel/us russellii, below) 
4. Cap not viscid, often areolate (cracked) in age ........................ B. russellii, below 
Boletellus russellii (Jagged-Stemmed Bolete) Color Plate 125 
CAP 3-9 (13) cm broad, convex to broadly convex or rarely plane; surface dry, yellow- 
brown to buffy-brown or olive-gray, varying to brownish, reddish, or cinnamon-brown; 
minutely velvety to obscurely scaly, often becoming areolate (breaking up into small 
scales) in age, revealing the flesh beneath; margin at first incurved. Flesh yellow, not 
blueing when bruised. PORES rather large (1 mm broad or more), yellow when young, 
greenish-yellow in age, not blueing; tubes same color. STALK 10-20 cm long, 0.8-2 cm 
thick, equal or slightly thickened downward, typically long and slender, often curved at 
base; coarsely reticulate-lacerate (ragged and deeply ridged) more or less throughout; dull 
reddish to reddish-brown or cinnamon; solid, dry or with a viscid base when fresh. VEIL 
absent. SPORE PRINT dark olive to olive-brown; spores 15-20 x 7-11 microns, elliptical 
to spindle-shaped, deeply ridged or wrinkled longitudinally, with a cleft at apex. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under hardwoods (espe- 
cially oak) or occasionally conifers; fairly common in the summer and early fall in eastern 
North America, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It also occurs in southern Arizona, 
like many other "eastern" species. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rather soft and bland. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive bolete is easily recognized by its long, slender, lacerated 
(ragged or jagged) stalk (see the color plate), dry cap that is frequently areolate, and 
yellow to greenish-yellow pores that do not stain blue. Another species with a long, slim, 
lacerated stalk, Austroboletus(=Boletus, Boletellus) betula, differs in having a smooth, 
viscid, yellow-orange to reddish-brown cap, a more southern distribution, and pitted 
BOLETELLUS 
509 
spores. Another southerner, Boletellus ananas, is quite different. It has a fibrillose to 
coarsely scaly or shaggy, purplish to reddish (or sometimes yellowish) cap plus a whitish 
veil when young. The veil usually leaves remnants on the cap margin rather than forming 
a ring. The stalk is whitish to tan and smooth to slightly fibrillose, and the flesh and pores 
turn blue when bruised or cut. Neither ofthe above species is worth eating. 
PULVEROBOLETUS 
AS DEFINED here, Pulveroboletus contains an awesome total of one common species. 
The prefix pulvero means pulverulent, which in turns means "powdery." It pertains to 
the powdery to somewhat cottony or cobwebby consistency of the bright yellow veil that 
covers the cap and stalk of the young fruiting body-a unique feature among the boletes. 
Some mycologists. however, broaden the genus concept to include veil-less species such 
as P. auriporus and P. hemichrysus (treated in this book under Boletus). 
Pulveroboletus ravenelii 
(Veiled Sulfur Bolete) 
CAP 2-8 (12) em broad, convex or nearly round when young, becoming plane in age; sur- 
face dry to slightly viscid if wet, bright yellow with orange, pinkish, or reddish-brown tones 
developing at the center, especially in age; covered with yellow cottony or powdery veil 
material, at least when young; margin often covered with veil remnants also. Flesh thick, 
white to yellow, changing slowly to blue when exposed, then eventually yellowish to dingy 
brown. PORES and tubes bright yellow when fresh, becoming dingier or olive-yellow in 
age; usually bruising bluish-green, and then sometimes turning dark brownish. STALK 
6-15 em long, 0.5-1.5 em thick, equal to slightly irregular, often rather long; dry, bright 
yellow, powdery or cottony at least when young, except at apex. VEIL bright yellow, 
cottony-powdery to cobwebby, leaving remnants on cap and cap margin and stalk (and 
sometimes a slight ring on stalk). SPORE PRINT dark olive-brown to brown; spores 
8-12)( 4-6.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups in woods; widely distributed, but rather rare on 
the west coast. In our area I ha ve found it in the fall and early winter in mixed woods of oak 
and pine and under manzanita. 
EDIBILITY: Like myself, not firmly established. 
COMMENTS: I was dumbfounded by the sight of my first Pulveroboletus. As boletes go 
it is an odd creature-a gaudy misfit, an audacious anomaly. The brilliant yellow cottony 
veil which covers the cap and stalk when young sets it apart from all other boletes. In old 
age or rainy weather the veil remnants may be obliterated, but the color and relatively 
long, slender stalk help identify it. Though rare in California, it is included here because 
it is so bizarre.Uyou should be (un)fortunate enough to fall on top of one, as Idid, I would 
like you to know what it was. 
An unusually gracile (long and slender) example of Pu/verobo/etus ravene/ii. The distinctive 
yellow veil is not clearly visible in this picture. 
. 
". 
. 
 "! 
. 7 \" ! 
510 
BOLETACEAE 
GYROPORUS 
Small to medium-sized, terrestrial boletes. CAP typically dry. PORES pallid or whitish when 
young, pale yellow to yellow in age. STALK lacking scabers and glandular dots and typically not 
reticulate; usually hollow at maturity, at least toward the base. VEIL absent or rudimentary. 
SPORE PRINT pale yellow to yellow. Spores elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HE pale yellow spore print and hollow or partially hollow stem are the distinctive 
features ofthis small genus. Four species-all choice edibles-are included in the key, but 
only one, G. casraneus, has been found in California. In addition to the generic charac- 
teristics, G. casraneus can be told by its chestnut-brown to orange-brown cap, white to pale 
yellow pores, and often slender, uneven, similarly-colored, non-reticulate stalk plus its 
"failure" to stain blue when bruised. 
Key to Gyroporus 
l. Flesh and pores quickly turning deep indigo-blue or violet-black when bruised or cut; cap 
yellowish to buff, dry, often somewhat fibrillose; pores whitish becoming yellowish; stalk 
colored like cap, often thicker toward base, smooth or fibrillose; common in sandy soil and 
woods in eastern North America (also said to occur rarely in Pacific Northwest) G. cyanescens 
I. Flesh and pores not blueing when bruised ......................................... 2 
2. Cap and stalk white to yellowish or tinged pink or apricot. sometimes spotted with cinnamon or 
brown in age; common under oak and pine in southeastern North America . G. subalbellus 
2. Cap and stalk darker (tawny to orange-brown. chestnut-brown, wine-red, etc.) .. _ _ _ _ . . _. 3 
3. Cap more or less wine-red to burgundy; found under hardwoods in eastern North America 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G. purpurinus 
3. Cap brown to chestnut-brown to orange-brown or tawny; widespread . G. castaneus, below 
Gyroporus castaneus (Chestnut Bolete) Color Plate 148 
CAP 2.5-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or shallowly depressed; surface dry, minutely 
hairy to smooth, sometimes with a delicate whitish bloom when young; color variable: 
chestnut-brown to brown, cinnamon-brown, orange-brown, or rusty-tawny. Flesh thick, 
firm, white, not blueing when bruised. PORES and tubes white, becoming pale yellowish 
in old age, not blueing. STALK 3-9 cm long, 0.5-1 (3) cm thick, often rather slender and 
more or less equal (but a robust form also occurs), sometimes thicker or swollen below; 
surface dry, uneven, brown to tawny (colored more or less like cap or slightly paler); hollow 
or partially hollow at least at maturity (especially toward base). SPORE PRINT pale 
yellow to yellow; spores 8-12 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical-oblong, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups under oaks and other hardwoods; fairly common in 
Europe and eastern North America, but extremely rare in the West. I have found it only 
twice in our area, under a tanoak in July (while truffle-hunting) and under a large live oak 
in October. The slender form is the common one in North America. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly esteemed in Europe, but alas, hard to come by in our area. 
One day I was picking fairy ring mushrooms (Marasmius oreades) on a lawn. A round 
Polish woman came out and said the mushrooms I was picking were no good. Then she 
invited me inside, where she proceeded to stuff me with sour cream cookies(she thought I 
was too skinny). S he showed me a picture of herson, who was in the navy. Then she gave me 
a necklace of dried Gyroporus castaneus. They were her last ones, she said, and they came 
from "the old country, where everything tastes better." They made a fabulous soup. Sodid 
the M arasmius. 
COMMENTS: In the West it is unlikely to be confused with anything, as it is unlikely to 
be found. 
511 
BOLETUS 
Medium-sized to very large, mostly terrestrial and mycorrhizal, woodland boletes. CAP fleshy, 
usually dry (but sometimes viscid), sometimes areolate. PORES and tubes typically white, yellow, 
orange, red, brown, or gray, often blueing when bruised. STALK fleshy, sometimes bulbous, thick 
or slender, ujien reticulate but nut glandular-dolled and without dark scabers. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT usually ulive to olive-brown ur brown. but sometimes yellow-brown or cinna- 
mon-brown. Spores spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
IF YOUR bolete is not a Suillus. Fuscoboletinus, Leccinum. Tylopi/us. Pulveroboletus. 
Austroboletus. Bolete//us. Gyroporus. Strobi/omyces. or Gastroboletus. then it's pro- 
bablya Boletus. In other words, it is much easier to characterize what a Boletus isn't than 
what it is. There is neither a veil nor glandular dots as in Suillus. the stem does not have the 
dark scabers characteristic of Leccinum. the spores are neither yellow as in Gyroporus nor 
reddish as in Tylopi/us. nor are they ornamented as in Bolete//us and Austroboletus. 
As such Boletus is a large and varied genus that splits nicely into two natural groups. The 
first group includes the hefty familiar forms like B. edu/is. and can be subdivided into 
those with white pores when young( e.g., B. edu/is), those with red pores ( e.g., B. satanas), 
and those with yellow pores (e.g., B. appendiculatus). The stem is usually thick, some- 
times bulbous, and often reticulate, the pores small (up to I mm broad), and the different 
species are relatively easy to distinguish in the field. They are fairly finicky as to their 
mycorrhizal mates and have exceedingly fickle fruiting habits. For instance, in our area 
heavy early rains may elicit a bumper crop of nearly every species, whereas if the rains 
are delayed until December, they may not fruit at all! 
Species belonging to the second group (the genus X erocomus of some books) tend to be 
smaller, with a dry, minutely velvety (subtomentose) cap. The pores are often large (1-2 
mm or more in diameter), and the stem is relatively slender (or at least not bulbous) and 
not reticulate or only very coarsely so from decurrent tube walls. Members ofthisgroupare 
more cosmopolitan than those in the first group-that is, they occur in a wider range of 
habitats and may even grow on rotting wood. They tend to have a much longer growing 
season and more dependable fruiting habits, but seldom appear in large numbers. 
Identifying them is often difficult without resorting to chemical and microscopic 
characters, but few species in the group are good edibles. 
Boletus boasts some of the finest and most flavorful of all the fleshy fungi (see photo on 
p. 512). First and foremost, of course, is that fabulous fungus cherished by the Europeans 
above all others-the king bolete or cepe, B. edu/is. Its sister species, B. barrowsii and B. 
aereus. are also excellent, and the butter boletes( B. appendiculatus and B. regius) are little- 
known local treasures. On the other hand, some species are bitter-tasting( see comments on 
the edibility of B. "marshii"!) and others, such as B. satanas. are so poisonous that their 
consumption can result in hospitalization. A general rule of thumb is to avoid all those 
species whose pores bruise blue. But this rule eliminates roughly half of all Boletus species 
(including some very good ones such as B. appendiculatus), and at least on the west coast it 
can be amended to: avoid all those blue-staining species with pink, red, or orange pores. 
However, this does not mean that you should munch on those without red pores 
indiscriminately. The edibility of some species has yet to be established and many(even B. 
edulis) can cause stomach upsets if not thoroughly cooked. 
Even in its modern "restricted" sense, Boletus is the major genus of boletes. It is espe- 
cially numerous and diverse (over 100 species) during the humid summer months in the 
hardwood forests of eastern North America. On the west coast, however, the rains come 
during the cooler months of the year and the Boletus flora is much smaller, with only 
about 40 known species. Our oak-madrone woodlands boast a modest but unique 
bolete bounty. Prominent species include B. satanas. B. erythropus. B. amygda/inus. B. 
appendiculatus. B. regius. B. aereus. B. barrowsii. and B.jlaviporus(alongwithLeccinum 
.....- , 
. ..... 
.... 
""- 
" 
... 
i.. 
" 
i 
"" 
"" 
-- 
.. .. 
.., ' 
. 
Five delectable species of Boletus (gathered the same day!): B. regius, three at top left; B. barrowsii, 
three at top right; B. aereus, three at bottom right; B. appendiculatus, small button at bottom and 
the one just above it; and B. edulis, two at bottom left. The smallest bolete in this picture is about 
10 em (4 inches) high! All of these species favor hardwoods (at least in our area) except B. edu/is. 
manzanitae). Pine forests, on the other hand, are favored by B. edu/is, which can be har- 
vested by the bushel under favorable conditions. Boletus species are easily preserved by 
slicing and drying, but remember: if you should stumble into a .. Boletus bonanza," take 
only as many as you can use. This will allow others (namely me) to share your luck, and 
aside from the good social practice it builds, it will test your will power to its limits! 
More than 30 species of Boletus occur in California. Nineteen are described here, plus 
three extralimital species. Don't be intimidated by the apparent length of the key-it is 
actually composed of two separate keys that diverge at couplet #7: one key to western 
species and another to eastern ones. (Since Boletus is such a prominent group in eastern 
North America, I have keyed out many of the more distinctive and common species that 
occur there.) If you happen to be in southern Arizona, southern New Mexico, Mexico, 
or other regions where the eastern and western fungal floras overlap, try the key to western 
species first; if that doesn't work, then try the key to eastern ones (couplet #42). 
Key to Boletus 
I. Growing on earthballs (Scleroderma species); fruiting body small to medium-sized, usually 
rather soft; especially common in southern latitudes ..................... B. parasiticus 
1. Growing on ground or wood, not on earthballs ..................................... 2 
2. Taste distinctly acrid (peppery) when a small piece of the cap is chewed; fruiting body typically 
rather small, with bright yellow mycelium at base of stalk .... B. piperatus & others, p. 511 
2. Not as above (but taste may be bitter or sour) ...................................... 3 
3. Growing on or near wood or in sawdust (especially coniferous) ....................... 4 
3. Growing on ground ............................................................ 1 
4. Cap yellow to ochre (or developing rusty-orange tones toward center in age); pores and flesh 
blueing when bruised; often in groups or clusters; spores short-elliptical ............... 5 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
5. Pores reddish to reddish-brown when young; cap at first powdery ......... B. hemichrysus 
5. Not as above; pores typically yellow ............................... B. sphaerocephalus 
6. Cap and stalk dark reddish-brown to maroon-brown or chocolate-brown; cap plushlike or 
fibrillose-scaly; stalk usually long and often streaked or lined; pores yellow to olive-yellow, 
not blueing when bruised; found on or near northern conifers ........ B. mirabilis, p. 521 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 1 
512 
BOLETUS 
513 
7. Found in western North America (Rocky Mountains, Southwest, and westward)* ....... 8 
7. Found in eastern North America (east of the Rockies, also southern Arizona)* ......... 42 
8. Pore surface red, pink, vinaceous, or orange when fresh (but may be yellowish or dingier in age, 
or in one case yellow when young becoming red in age); pore surface and flesh usually turning 
blue or blue-black when bruised or cut ........................................... 9 
8. Pore surface yellow to olive, brown, white, etc., but not red or orange; pore surface mayor 
may not turn blue when bruised ............................................... 15 
9. Stalk distinctly reticulate (netted), at least over upper portion ....................... 10 
9. Stalk not reticulate, or only very slightly so from decurrent tube walls ................. 13 
10. Stalk equal to bulbous, usually at/east 2.5 cm thick at apex; reticulation on stalk usually red 
or pink or vinaceous(but may be stained olive or brown by spores); widespread in West 11 
10. Stalk equal or slightly thicker below, typically 1-3 cm thick at apex; reticulation red or not red; 
found only in parts ofthe Southwest (e.g., southern Arizona) ....................... 46 
II. Stalk with an exaggerated basal bulb; cap whitish to grayish to olive-buff, or sometimes suf- 
fused with pink in age; associated with oak ......................... B. satanas, p. 527 
II. Stalk equal or swollen below, but without an exaggerated bulb; cap some shade of brown or red 
(or in one variety, pallid); associated mainly if not exclusively with conifers ........... 12 
12. Cap brown to olive-brown or yellow-brown (not often reddish); pores often yellow when very 
young; found in mountains ................ B. haematinus(see B. pu/eherrimus. p. 528) 
12. Cap brown to reddish-brown; pores never yellow ......... B. pu/cheTTimus & others, p. 528 
13. Cap intensely yellow, quite large; rare ............. B. orovi//us(see B. erythropus. p. 526) 
13. Not as above; common ........................................................ 14 
14. Flesh changing to blue slowly or not at all when mushroom is cut open; cap usually areolate in 
age; not common............. . . ... '" . . B. mendocinensis(see B. ehrysenreron. p. 519) 
14. Flesh blueing quickly when cut; cap not normally areolate ... B. erythropus& others, p. 526 
15. Stalk typically long, relatively slender, and scurfy or minutely scaly (as in Leecinum); cap yellow 
to ochre, reddish-orange, or cinnamon; pores yellow, not normally blueing when bruised; 
rare (reported from northern Idaho and the Southwest) ........................... 67 
15. Not with above features; common. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 16 
16. Cap viscid or slimy when moist, cinnamon-brown to chestnut- or reddish-brown; pores an 
intense, brilliant yellow or greenish-yellow, not blueing when bruised; stalk not reticulate or 
only slightly so (but sometimes ridged) ........................... B.J/aviporus, p. 522 
16. Not as above; cap not viscid, or if viscid then not as above .......................... 17 
17. Stalk entirely or partially pink to red to dark red (or with red flakes or granules) ........ 18 
17. Stalk white to buff, yellow, or brown (i.e., lacking obvious red tones, but may have reddish 
to cinnamon-brown stains, especially near or at base) ............................. 27 
18. Cap red to purple-red, pink, or at times reddish-brown (but sometimes overlaid at first with 
olive-yellow to olive-gray to olive-brown hairs or fibrils) ........................... 19 
18. Cap not markedly reddish (but may be dark brown or black with a slight reddish cast) ... 22 
19. Cap small (2-5 cm broad), red to dark red to purple-red; stalkless than I cm thick; pores and flesh 
typically not blueing when bruised; rare............ B. coccyginus(see B. bie%r. p. 521) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Cap and stalk red or reddish; known only from the Southwest ... B. bic%r& others, p. 521 
20. Not as above; common in the Pacific Northwest and California. but not in the Southwest; stalk 
usually only partially red ..................................................... 21 
21. Associated with live oak in central and southern California .......... B. dryophi/us, p. 520 
21. Associated with northern conifers ................... B. smithii (see B. dryophi/us, p. 520) 
22. Taste distinctly bitter (chew on a small piece of the cap), even when cooked; stalk at least 2 cm 
thick at apex ............................................................... 23 
22. Not as above (but taste may be acidic or sour) ..................................... 24 
23. Upper part of stalk typically reticulate (often finely so) ................ B. calopus, p. 523 
23. Stalk not reticulate or only obscurely so at the very apex ............... B. rubripes, p. 524 
24. Cap black to blackish-brown to deep olive-gray when fresh, often developing a slight reddish 
cast toward the margin (especially when wet) and sometimes fading in age; surface of cap not 
typically areolate, but occasionally becoming so in age ................. B. ze/leri, p. 518 
24. Cap dark olive-brown to olive-gray to brownish, tan, etc.; surface often areolate ........ 25 
*In regions where the eastern and western fungal floras overlap (e.g., southern Arizona), try both choices! 
514 BOLETACEAE 
25. Fruiting body medium-sized to large (cap 6-18 cm broad); flesh in base of stalk not normally 
reddish; spores not truncate; found under mountain conifers ................ B.fragrans 
25. Not as above; fruiting body small to medium-sized, or if larger than more common along the 
coast and flesh in base of stalk often reddish; spores truncate or not truncate; common . 26 
26. Cap when areolate usually showing pink or reddish tints in the cracks; stalk typically rather 
slender (less than 2 cm thick); cap medium-sized (usually less than 9 cm broad); spores 
not truncate _.............................................. B. chrysenteron, p. 519 
26. Not as above; cap when areolate mayor may not show pink or reddish tints; size and shape 
of fruiting body variable, but sometimes more robust than above species (stalk 1-3 cm thick, 
cap5-15 cm broad); spores often amyloid ortruncate(appearingchopped off at one end) when 
viewed under the microscope .......... B. truncatus & others (see B. chrysenteron. p. 519) 
27. Fruiting body medium-sized to large; stalk 2 cm thick or more, often bulbous or thicker below 
(but often not); pores small (mostly less than I mm broad) ......................... 28 
27. Fruiting body small to medium-sized; stalk usually 2 cm thick or less at apex, or if thicker 
then pores at least I mm broad; stalk usually equal or tapered below (not bulbous) ..... 38 
28. Pore surface whitish when young, becoming yellowish, greenish, or brown inage and not blueing 
when bruised; stalk distinctly reticulate (netted) at least over upper portion; flesh white or 
tinged reddish, not blueing (or sometimes blueing slightly when tubes are peeled off) ... 29 
28. Not as above; if stalk reticulate then pores not white when young and/ or pores blueing when 
bruised ................................................................... 31 
29. Cap white to pale grayish or dingy buff, usually dry; associated mainly with oak in central 
California, with pine and other conifers in the Southwest ............ B. barrowsii, p.529 
29. Not as above; cap typically darker (but may be whitish while still under the duff) ....... 30 
30. Cap dark brown to blackish-brown beneath a thin whitish bloom when young(but often fading 
to cinnamon-brown or paler in age); associated with hardwoods ........ B. aereus, p. 531 
30. Not as above; cap biscuit-brown to yellow-brown, cinnamon-brown, brown, or dark red; 
associated mainly with conifers but also with oak and other trees . B. edulis & others, p. 530 
31. Taste distinctly bitter (chew on a small piece of the cap), even when cooked; stalk typically at 
least 2 cm thick at apex ....................................................... 32 
31. Not as above(but may taste slightly sour or acidic) _.. _. .. .......... ...... ... ...... 33 
32. Found under northern conifers; stalk usually reticulate B. coniferarum(see B. calopus. p. 523) 
32. Found mostly with oak in California; stalk not reticulate ............. B. "marshii," p. 524 
33. Stalk distinctly reticulate, at least over upper portion ............................... 34 
33. Stalk typically not reticulate; found under mountain conifers ................. B.fragrans 
34. Stalk yellow to buff(at least when fresh), sometimes with reddish stains below ......... 35 
34. Stalk brown, or white with brown fibrils (apex sometimes yellow) ..... B.fibrillosus, p.523 
35. Cap dark brown when fresh; pores and flesh not blueing when bruised ................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. sp. (unidentified)( see B. fibrillosus. p. 523) 
35. Not as above; pores normally turning blue when bruised (but may not blue in button stage); 
flesh in very base of stalk often tinged pinkish or vinaceous; cap pink, red, brown, tan, or 
yellowish, but not normally dark brown ......................................... 36 
36. Cap with distinct fibrillose scales, especially in age; associated with mountain conifers (parti- 
cularly fir) .............................. B. abieticola(see B. appendiculatus, p.525) 
36. Associated with hardwoods, or if with conifers then cap lacking obvious scales .., _ . _ . .. 37 
37. Cap usually brown to reddish-brown, sometimes yellowish ....... B. appendiculatus, p. 525 
37. Cap reddish to pink or rose-colored, sometimes with yellow .............. B. regius, p.526 
38. Flesh, stalk, and pores staining dark blue almost instantly when exposed; cap dull brown to 
dark brown; stalk usually yellow at apex and brown or reddish-brown at base; pores yellow to 
olive; rare in California, more common in the Pacific Northwest ........ B. pulverulentus 
38. Not as above ................................................................ 39 
39. S pore print amber-brown to bright yellow-brown; cap vinaceous-brown to dark brown, yellow- 
brown, tan, etc., often with paler spots; pores whitish to buff or pale tan; reported from the 
Southwest (but mainly eastern in distribution) .............................. B. affinis 
39. Not as above; spore print typically brown to olive or olive-brown .................... 40 
BOLETUS 
515 
40. Cap brown to dark brown or blackish; stalk pallid to buff( or yellowish at apex); pores brilliant 
yellow, not blueing when bruised .............. B. c;tr;n;porus (see B.fibri//osus, p. 523) 
40. Not as above; pores typically yellow but not as brilliantly colored as above ............ 41 
41. Cap usually extensively fissured (areolate) by maturity .... B. chrysenteron& others, p. 519 
41. Cap not usually areolate, but sometimes showing a few cracks in age, especially near margin 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. B. subtomentosus & others, p. 517 
42. Pore surface dark red to bright red, orange, orange-brown, red-brown, or dark yellow-brown 
whenfresh (may fade to yellow in age) .......................................... 43 
42. Pore surface white to yellow, olive, grayish, etc. when fresh (but sometimes brown in age) 49 
43. Pore surface reddish-brown to dark yellow-brown or orange-brown when young, or if not then 
fruiting body rather small and not blueing when bruised ........................... 73 
43. Pore surface dark red to red, brick-red, or orange; medium-sized to large, usually blueing 44 
44. Cap whitish to buff, grayish-olive, or sometimes tinged pink; stalk neither bulbous nor mar- 
kedly reticulate; found under southern hardwoods .................... B. p;edmontens;s 
44. Not as above; cap typically darker or brighter than above ........................... 45 
45. Stalk typically reticulate. at least over upper portion ............................... 46 
45. Stalk not reticulate or sometimes slightly so at apex. but often scurfy from numerous minute 
granules or dots ............................................................. 48 
46. Cap yellow to olive-brown, brown, or reddish-brown B. /ur;dus(see B. pu/cherrimus, p. 528) 
46. Cap deep red to bright red to rosy-red, at least when fresh ........................... 47 
47. Cap viscid when moist; pores dark red, sometimes with yellow droplets; stalk very coarsely 
reticulate nearly to the base ........................................ B. frost;;, p. 528 
47. Not as above; cap not viscid or only slightly so; stalk only finely reticulate ................ 
. . ... .. ... . ... ... . . .......... .. B.f/ammans& B. rubrof/ammeus(see B.frostii, p. 528) 
48. Cap red or rosy-red ...................... B. b;c%r var. borea/;s(see B. bic%r, p. 521) 
48. Cap yellowish to brown or reddish-brown ........................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. erythropus, B. subve/ut;pes, & others (see B. erythropus, p. 526) 
49. Cap white or pallid. at least until old age ......................................... 50 
49. Cap more highly or deeply colored. at least when young ............................ 51 
50. Stalk white or whitish. usually not reticulate (but sometimes slightly so); very common under 
hardwoods; taste mild to bitter ......................................... B. pal/;dus 
50. Stalk at least partially red or with bright red to pink reticulation; taste bitter .... B. ;nedu/;s 
51. Pore surface and/ or flesh typically staining blue, blue-green, or blue-black when bruised or 
cut (but sometimes slowly or weakly) ........................................... 52 
51. Neither the pore surface nor the flesh blueing when bruised ......................... 60 
52. Fresh fruiting body bright yellow to lemon-yellow (but cap may be yellow-brown at center or 
streaked with red), quickly staining blue or blue-black when bruised or cut; stalk sometimes 
reticulate but usually not ..................................... B. pseudosu/phureus 
52. Not as above ................................................................ 53 
53. Cap bright red to rose, pink, or rusty-red when fresh (may fade in age) ................ 54 
53. Not as above (but cap may show slight red or pinkish tints) .......................... 56 
54. Stalk slender( usually less than I cm thick) ..... B. rubel/us & others (see B. bieu/ur, p. 521) 
54. Stalk usually 0.8-3 cm or more thick ............................................. 55 
55. Stalk distinctly reticulate, at least over upper portion ..... B. speciosus (see B. regius. p. 526) 
55. Stalk not reticulate or only slightly so from decurrent tube walls . B. b;c%r& others, p. 521 
56. Taste decidedly bitter (chew on a small piece of the cap), even when cooked; stalk typically 
at least 2 cm thick; not common .................................. B. ca/opus, p. 523 
56 Not as above (buttaste may be slightly acidic or sour) .............................. 57 
57. Flesh, stalk, and pores staining dark blue almost instantly when exposed; cap dull brown to 
dark brown; stalk usually yellow at apex and brown or reddish-brown toward base; pores 
fairly small, yellow to olive-yellow; stalk typically not reticulate ......... B. pu/veru/entus 
57. Not as above(but may stain blue to blue-green) ................................... 58 
58. Cap typically areolate (extensively fissured or cracked) at maturity; stalk entirely or partially 
red to dark red (or with red fibrils or granules) ................................... 59 
58. Not as above; cap not areolate or only occasionally so and/ or stalk lacking red ......... 66 
516 BOLET ACEAE 
59 Stalk scurfy from small rough scales; spores striate under the microscope; often growing at 
the bases of trees .................. _ . . . . . . . . . _ (see Boletellus & Austroboletus, p. 508) 
59. Not as above; spores not striate; usually found on ground .. B. chrysenteron& others, p. 519 
60. Cap rosy or pink when fresh (but often fading to tan in age); stalk not reticulate; stalk base bright 
yellow inside and out; pores whitish when young ................. (see Tylopilus, p. 532) 
60. Not as above ................................................................ 61 
6 I. Pore surface white to grayish when young (but usually yellowish, brownish, grayish, or greenish 
in age); stalk distinctly reticulate (netted), at least over upper portion; flesh white or tinged 
reddish; spore print olive to brown but not yellow-brown .......................... 62 
61. Not as above; pores differently colored and/ or stalk not reticulate or only faintly so at apex 64 
62. Cap grayish (or with darker fibrils) when fresh; pores white becoming gray to grayish-brown 
in age; common under hardwoods .................. B. gr;seus(see B. ornatipes. p. 522) 
62. Not with above features; pores not typically grayish in age .......................... 63 
63. Cap tan to gray-brown, dark brown, or yellow-brown, dry, often areolate in age; cap and stalk 
without purplish tones; associated with hardwoods.... .. B. var;;pes (see B. aereus, p. 531) 
63. Not with above combination offeatures (but may have some ofthem); found with hardwoods or 
conifers ................................................ B. edul;s & others, p. 530 
64. Cap and stalk bright orange-brown to golden-orange; fairly common in North Carolina and 
adjacent areas, but exact distribution uncertain .. B. auriflammeus (see B. ornatipes, p. 522) 
64. Not as above ................................................................. 65 
65. Cap and stalk viscid or slimy and yellow, or if not then pores brilliant yellow to bright greenish- 
yellow; not large . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 75 
65. Not as above (pores often yellow but not intensely so) ............................... 66 
66. Stalk typically long, relatively slender, and scurfy or minutely scaly as in Leccinum; cap yellow 
to ochre, reddish-orange, or cinnamon; pores yellow, not normally blueing when bruised 67 
66. Not with above features ....................................................... 68 
67. Dots or minute scales on stalk reddish; cap usually viscid (sometimes thinly so) when moist 
. . .. . . ... . .... . . . ... . .. . . . . . . . . . . ...... . '" " ... B.long;curv;pes& B. rubropunctus 
67. Not as above; stalk yellow .......................................... B. subglabr;pes 
68. Stalk largely yellow to buff when fresh (but may develop brownish to cinnamon stains from 
the base upward, especially in age) ............................................. 69 
68. Stalk typically brownish to reddish, tan, etc., or white with brown tones, even when fresh 71 
69. Stalk prominently reticulate throughout or nearly throughout; pores small (about 2 per mm); 
taste mild or bitter; found under hardwoods ............... B. ornat;pes& others, p. 522 
69. Not as above; stalk not reticulate andl or pores larger; taste usually mild .............. 70 
70. Cap often with brownish to reddish hairs or small scales on a yellowish to orange-buff back- 
ground, usually viscid beneath hairs when wet (hairs may be absent in age) (seeSu;lIus, p.491) 
70. Not as above ..................................... B. subtomentosus& others, p. 517 
71. Spore print yellow-brown or amber-brown; cap yellow-brown to reddish-brown ordark brown, 
often with paler spots; pores white to buff or pale tan or yellow ................ B. aff;n;s 
71. Not as above; spore print olive to brown or olive-brown; pores yellow to olive .......... 72 
72. Stalk with prominent raised ridges and/ or coarsely reticulate, often long and slender in relation 
to cap; cap grayish or olive-tinged when young but usually reddish-brown to dark reddish- 
brown or bay-red in age; pores not blueing ....... B. projectellus(see B. mirabi/is. p. 521) 
72. Not as above; cap slightly viscid when young or wet, usually reddish-brown to bay-red to 
chestnut-brown, but at times yellow-brown or olive-tinged; pores mayor may not stain blue 
when bruised; stalk not coarsely reticulate or strongly ridged B. bad;us (see B. zelleri. p. 518) 
73. Pores and or flesh not blueing when bruised; under hardwoods or conifers ... B. rub;nellus 
73. Pores and or flesh staining blue to blue-black when cut; usually under hardwoods ...... 74 
74. Pore surface dark reddish-brown to orange-brown when young; stalk typically not reticulate 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. verm;culosus & others 
74. Pore surface dark yellow-brown when fresh; stalk often reticulate ............. B.fag;cola 
75. Fruiting body mostly bright yellow to lemon-yellow (including cap); cap and stalk viscid or slimy; 
stalk usually with a white cottony base; common in South ................... B. curtis;; 
75. Not as above; pores brilliant yellow when fresh; cap and stalk viscid or dry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
.. . . ... . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ... B. v;r;diflavus & B. auriporus (see B.flaviporus, p. 522) 
... 
. 
 
'\ 
\ 
'\ 
BoielUS piperalus is our smallest species of BolelUs. It has a peppery taste and bright yellow mycelium 
at the base of the stalk. 
Boletus piperatus (Peppery Bolete) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad (but usually less than 5 cm), convex to plane; surface slightly viscid to 
dry, usually smooth, yellow-brown to buff, rusty-cinnamon, orange-brown. or reddish- 
brown. Flesh thin, yellowish-buff to pinkish in cap, bright yellow in base of stalk; taste 
distinctly acrid (peppery). PORES rather large (1-2 mm in diameter), yellow-brown to 
cinnamon, reddish-brown, coppery or brick-red, darkening slightly when bruised but not 
blueing; tubes tawny to reddish-yellow. STALK 2-8 (12) cm long, 0.4-1 (2) cm thick, 
equal or tapered downward, often slender; smooth, solid, colored more or less like the 
cap; base coated with bright yellow mycelium. SPORE PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; 
spores 8-12)( 3-5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, associated mainly 
with conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits in the fall and winter with pine and 
Douglas-fir, but is not common (I find it only once or twice each year). Farther north. 
however, it is sometimes abundant. 
EDIBILITY: Questionable. 1 t's not as bitter as some ofthe peppery Russula and Lactarius 
species, and therefore could be useful as a spice. However, according to one source the 
peppery taste disappears when thoroughly cooked, and according to another it is mildly 
poisonous unless thoroughly cooked. 
COMMENTS: Our smallest Boletus. this species is suggestive of a Suil/us (and was once 
placed in that genus), but has neither glandular dots nor a veil. Some view it as a possible 
"missing link" between Suil/us and Boletus. If you have any doubt as to its identity, just 
chew a small piece ofthe cap for a couple minutes! The bright yellow mycelium and yellow 
flesh at the base of the stalk are also characteristic. B. p;perato;des is a similar widespread 
peppery species with blue-staining pores. 
Boletus subtomentosus (Boring Brown Bolete) 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, minutely velvety (subtomentose), 
but may appear smooth in age; yellow-brown to drab olive-brown to dull brown, or 
occasionally yellowish, but in age or especially in wet weather often redder (cinnamon- 
517 
- 
-:. 
. ' 
 
-'. 
Boletus sublOmentosus is a boring brown and yellow bolete with large yellow pores (see p. 488 for a 
close-up of the pores). 
brown); sometimes with pallid, yellow, or reddish-tinged cracks, especially near margin. 
Flesh pallid to pale yellow, sometimes blueing slightly when exposed. PORES large (1-3 
mm in diameter), dull yellow to bright yellow, blueing weakly or not at all when bruised. 
STALK 4-14 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or tapered either way, smooth or scurfy, the 
apex often coarsely reticulate from downward-extending tube walls; firm, yellow to buff, 
or often stained brown to dull cinnamon (especially below), but never red. SPORE 
PRINT olive-brown; spores 10-16 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in woods; widely 
distributed and very common, but not often occurring in large numbers. In our area 
it fruits throughout the mushroom season with a variety of tree hosts (oak, conifers, etc.). 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but definitely not choice. In blind tastings of local boletes it has 
consistently placed near the bottom. 
COMMENTS: This boring but ubiquitous bolete with the boring brown cap does not 
show red on the stem, in contrast to B. zelleri and B. chrysenteron. In addition, the cap 
is not often as conspicuously areolate as that of the latter species, and the pores are larger. 
X erocomus subtomentosus is a synonym. B. spadiceus is an equally boring but ubiqitous 
bolete. I t has the same general appearance and grows in the same places at about the same 
time. True, its cap may be more reddish-brown and its pores may blue more readily, but 
the only way to separate it with certainty is by applying a drop of ammonium hydroxide 
to the cap surface. A fleeting blue-green to blue-black reaction means B. spadiceus; 
otherwise, it's B subtomentosus. Since neither is worth eating, the distinction is academic. 
Inundating boring brown boletes with ammonia may be your idea of fun. but it's not 
mine! 
Boletus zeller; (Zeller's Bolete) Color Plate 128 
CAP 3-16 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, often wrinkled or uneven and with a 
frosted orfinely powdered appearance when young; black to dark gray or dark olive-brown 
when fresh, often reddening somewhat in age or wet weather, especially toward the 
margin; surface cracking only slightly or not at all. Flesh thick, white to pale yellow, some- 
times blueing erratically when exposed. PORES and tubes yellow to dark yellow or olive- 
518 
BOLETUS 
519 
yellow. often blueing when bruised (but often not blueing). STALK 4-12 cm long.0.5-3 (5) 
cm thick. equal or slightly thicker at either end; firm. yellow to tan with delicate red 
granules when young. usually dark red above or throughout in age. SPORE PRINT 
olive-brown; spores 12-16 x 4-5.5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical. smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary. scattered. or in groups on ground or rotten wood; very common 
along the Pacific Coast in woods of all kinds. In our area it fruits in the fall. winter. and 
early spring and is one of the few boletes with a tolerance for redwood (I have even found 
it growing on a redwood stump!). It is also abundant under oak and farther north. under 
alder. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly rated by some sources. In my experience. however, it 
cooks up slimy and tasteless. 
COMMENTS: The sensational combination of black, yellow. red, and often blue makes 
this our most colorful bolete. The color plate shows specimens whose caps have begun to 
develop a reddish tinge. but perfectly fresh caps can be coal-black or deep gray. B. chry- 
senteron and B. truncatus often have a more copiously cracked (areolate) cap that is 
usually paler or duller in color. B. citr;n;porus has a dark cap. but its stem is not red. 
In eastern North America, B. zeller; is supplanted by B. bad;us, a common edible species 
with a dark yellow-brown to bay-red cap. Like B. zeller;, it grows on rotten wood (as well 
as on the ground), usually under conifers. 
Boletus chrysenteron (Cracked-Cap Bolete) 
CAP 3-11 cm broad. convex to plane; surface dry, minutely velvety when young, in age 
usually conspicuously cracked or fissured (areolate). especially toward the margin; 
color variable: dark olive-brown to dark grayish-olive, grayish-brown, or brown; often 
paler (tan to olive-bum in age, with pink to reddish tints usually visible in at least some of 
the cracks (especially those toward the margin). Flesh fairly thick, whitish to yellow, 
usually blueing slowly when exposed. PORES rather large (about 1 mm in diameter), 
yellow to greenish-yellow or sometimes dingy brownish, usually (but not always) bruising 
blue or greenish (sometimes slowly!); tubes also yellow. STALK 4-13 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm 
thick, equal or tapering downward, smooth or minutely scurfy and often longitudinally 
ridged or striate, firm; color variable, but typically a mixture of yellow and red (yellow 
Boletus chrysenteron is one of several species that has a conspicuously cracked (areolate) cap at 
maturity. Others include B. truncatus, B. porosporus, and Tylopilus amylosporus (not illustrated). 
. 
,. 
, 
. .. 
'" ... 
. , 
4 
1 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
" " 
'\' t 
, .. 
. 
, 
\ 
... ;. _/' 
, . I-J' 
 
 
;- 
.... '.' 
.: S",;"" ", '. "t. " . \ . 
''''.  . w"" ,.. ".\ \'\ , 
. ".;.,, :!l'1t'\' e.,Il 
 4. .(#> .' :JrI::l,., :..'- 1J' 
"''!#/;'.", bt'" .. . 
. .... ""Iii'.' '! ", 
''''t .';:.)'.' 
520 
BOLETACEAE 
with reddish fibrils or yellow above and red to dark rhubarb-red below). SPORE PRINT 
olive-brown; spores 10-15 x 3.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups under trees and in wooded areas, often near trails 
or on road banks; widely distributed and ubiquitous, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. 
In our area it can be found throughout the mushroom season. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not choice. It is rather mushy and insipid when cooked. 
COMMENTS: The conspicuously fissured (areolate) cap with pinkish-tinted cracks 
plus the yellow pores that usually bruise blue are the hallmarks of this cosmopolitan 
bolete. Also known asXerocomuschrysenteron, it is sometimes confused with B. zelleri. 
which has a darker cap that is not usually areolate. There are several verysimilar"cracked- 
cap" boletes that are difficult to distinguish in the field, including: Tylopilus amylosporus, 
with dark reddish-brown, erratically amyloid spores and pallid (not pink or red) flesh in 
the cracks; B. mendocinensis, with pinkish to reddish pores; B. truncatus, with truncate 
("chopped off') spores; and B. porosporus, with truncate spores and no pinkish tints 
in the cracks. The latter two species are particularly wides pread and common, and seem to 
intergrade. A robust form (cap 5-15 cm broad, stalk 1-3.5 cm thick) of B. truncatusbears 
special mention because it occurs commonly in our coastal forests. Its cap is often only 
slightly areolate and shows little or no pink in the cracks. Since none ofthe above species 
are worth eating, it hardly matters whether or not you identify them correctly, unless 
you aspire to be a professional boletologist (or plan on entertaining a professional bole- 
tologist). All of them, along with B. zelleri and B. dryophilus, are prone to attack by a 
powdery white to bright yellow parasitic fungus (Hypomyces chrysospermum) which 
eventually engulfs the entire fruiting body, making it look like a very sick puffball. 
Boletus dryophilus 
(Oak-Loving Bolete) 
Color Plate 132 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, minutely velvety 
when young, often cracked or fissured in age, usually reddish to reddish-brown or pinkish, 
but sometimes overlaid with minute olive-brown to olive-gray hairs. Flesh thick, yellow, 
usually blueing when exposed. PORES often somewhat irregularly shaped, yellow to 
olive-yellow and usually blueing when bruised; tu bes same color. ST ALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 
1-2 (2.5) cm thick, often rather short and stout, usually pinched or narrowed at the base and 
often slightly swollen above it; sometimes nearly equal; firm, solid, usually distinctly 
yellow at apex and red to dark reddish below. SPORE PRINT brown to olive-brown; 
spores 12-16 x 5.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in grou ps in humus under live oak, fall through early spring, known 
only from California. It is rather rare in our area, but sometimes abundant in southern 
California. In fact, it is one of the most common boletes in Los Angeles and San Diego 
counties. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and fairly popular in the above-mentioned region. Collections I have 
sampled were mediocre, and in our area they are more readily parasitized by Hypomyces 
chrysospermum than any other bolete! 
CO MMENTS: This interesting endemic species is closely related to B. chrysenteron. but 
is somewhat stouter and apparently grows only with oak. The reddish tones usually present 
in the cap plus the distinct yellow and red zones on the stalk help identify it. The abruptly 
tapered or "pinched" stem base is also distinctive when present. Other species: B. smithii 
has a similarly colored cap, but is larger and stouter. Its stalk may be narrowed at the base 
but is usually pallid or yellow with a bright red band near or at the apex. It seems to grow 
only with conifers and is quite common in northern California and the Pacific Northwest. 
BOLETUS 
521 
Boletus bieolor 
(Red and Yellow Bolete) 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth or 
minutely velvety, sometimes cracking in age; deep red to pinkish-red or rose, the margin 
sometimes yellowish in age. Flesh thick, pale yellow, blueing erratically or not at all when 
exposed. PORES yellow to bright yellow, sometimes with reddish areas in old age; 
typically staining blue or blue-green slowly when bruised; tubes also yellow. ST ALK 5-10 
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below or with a tapered base; smooth, firm, solid, 
not reticulate or only slightly so at apex; deep red to rosy except for yellow apex. SPORE 
PRINT olive-brown; spores 8-12)( 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, associated mainly with oak and 
perhaps aspen; common in the summer and early fall in eastern North America and also 
occurring in the Southwest, but apparently not found on the west coast. A related species, 
B. coccyginus (see comments), occurs in California and the Pacific Northwest, but is rare. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, and according to some, excellent. However, gastrointestinal upsets 
have been attributed to closely related species, so exercise caution. 
COMMENTS: The rosy to red cap and stalk contrast vividly with theyellow pores, making 
this a most beautiful bolete. There are a number of similar red-capped, yellow-pored, 
blue-staining species that form a close-knit group within Boletus. They are difficult to 
distinguish in the field and are largely confined to the humid forests of eastern and southern 
North America and the tropics. They include: B. sensibilis, somewhat larger, with a brick- 
red cap and yellow stalk; B. miniato-palleseens, cap rosy-red fading to yellow and stalk 
yellow to reddish-brown, common; and several smaller, slimmer (stalk less than I cm 
thick) species such as B. rubellus, widespread, B. eampestris, especially common on 
shaded la wns, and B.Jraternus, with an areolate cap at maturity. All of these species bruise 
blue (often quickly) and do not ha ve the robust, reticulate stalk of B. regius. Other species: 
B. coeeyginus is a rare, small, slender western species with a red to rose or purple-red cap 
and yellow pores and flesh that do not stain blue; B. bieolor var. borealis resembles the 
typical variety but has red to orange pores; it occurs mainly in the Southeast. 
Boletus mirabilis 
(Admirable Bolete) 
Color Plates 127, 129 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface moist to dry, granulose to plushlike 
(roughened by numerous small, often erect, fibrillose scales); dark reddish-brown to 
maroon-brown, bay-brown, or chocolate-brown; margin often hung with fragments of 
tissue. Flesh thick, white to dingy pinkish or yellow, rarely blueing when bruised. PORES 
fairly large (I -2 mm in diameter), pale yellow becoming mustard-yellow and finally 
greenish-yellow, not blueing when bruised but sometimes staining darker yellow; tubes 
also yellow. STALK 7-20 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, usually club-shaped (thicker toward 
base); dark brown to maroon-brown or reddish-brown, sometimes with yellow, buff, or 
beige streaks; firm and often roughened, pitted, or longitudinally ridged, the apex often 
coarsely reticulate; base frequently with yellow mycelium. SPORE PRINT olive-brown; 
spores 18-24 )( 7-9 microns, spindle-shaped to eIIiptical, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary or in small groups on or near rotting conifers (especially hemlock), 
but sometimes appearing terrestrial; common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and 
northern California, also reported (rarely) from Michigan. It does not seem to venture 
south of San Francisco. (Neither does hemlock, and neither would I if I could help it.) 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious-some collections have a distinct lemony flavor. 
Don't use specimens attacked by a whitish mold (Hypomyces chyrospermum). 
COMMENTS: This beautiful northern bolete is practically unmistakable. The plush- 
like maroon-brown cap and long roughened, similarly-colored stalk plus the yellow 
522 
BOLETACEAE 
pores that do not stain blue and growth on or near rotting conifers form a unique set of 
characters. Other species: B. projectellus of eastern North America is a closely related, 
terrestrial species that favors sandy situations under pine. 
Boletus flaviporus 
(V iscid Boletus) 
Color Plate 131 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface viscid or slimy when wet, smooth or fibrillose, 
reddish-brown to cinnamon-brown or chestnut-brown, not normally cracking into scales. 
Flesh thick, white to pale pinkish, not blueing when bruised. PORES and tubes brilliantly, 
intensely yellow, becoming slightly greenish-yellow in age; not bruising blue. ST ALK 6-15 
cm long, 0.6-2 (3) cm thick, equal to slightly thicker below or often with a short, tapered, 
rooting base; smooth, viscid in wet weather but otherwise dry; color variable, but usually 
yellow at apex and pallid to reddish-brown or dark brown below; typically not reticulate 
or only slightly so at apex. SPORE PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 11-17 )( 4-6 microns, 
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in mixed woods and under hardwoods; 
endemic to the west coast. In our area it is fairly common in the fall and winter under oak, 
madrone, and manzanita, but seldom fruits in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but mediocre. 
COMMENTS: This is our only Boletus with a distinctly viscid cap and intensely yellow 
pores that do not stain blue. It might be mistaken for a Suillus, but it isn't associated with 
conifers and has neither glandular dots nor a veil. The stem is not truly reticulate like that of 
B. edulis and B. fib rillosus, but the tubes ma y form a sligh t raised network at the stalk apex. 
Its eastern counterparts with brilliant yellow, non-blueing pores are B. viridiflavus, 
with a reddish- or pinkish-tinged stalk and sometimes viscid cap; and B. auriporus 
(=B. caespitosus?), with a yellower stalk and somewhat more velvety cap. 
Boletus ornatipes (Ornate-Stalked Bolete) 
CAP 4-20 cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface dull, often velvety when young, dry 
or slightly viscid when wet, color variable: gray, purple-gray, olive, olive-brown, yellow, 
or mixtures thereof. Flesh firm, thick, yellow, not blueing; taste mild to somewhat 
bitter. PORES and tubes lemon-yellow to bright yellow, usually staining orange- 
yellow to rusty-brown when bruised, but not blueing; pores small. STALK 7 -15 cm long, 
1-3.5 cm thick, more or less equal but often curved, solid, firm, bright yellow to yellow- 
orange throughout and prominently reticulate nearly to base (reticulation often coarse); 
dingier in age. SPORE PRINT brown to olive-brown; spores 9-13 )( 3-4 microns, 
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, gregarious or in small clusters on ground under oaks 
and other hardwoods in eastern North America (particularly the northern halO; it is 
common in the summer and early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Non-bitter specimens are said to be edible; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This beautiful eastern bolete is readily told by its yellow pores and flesh 
and its beautifully patterned (reticulate) golden-yellow stalk. The cap color varies consi- 
derably but is usually some shade of gray, olive, or yellow-olive. B. retipes is a bitter- 
tasting southern version (probably a form of the same species); B. auriflammeus, also 
southern, is similar but has a brownish-orange to brilliant gold cap and creamy or pink- 
tinged flesh. All of these stain your fingers yellow when handled. Another closely related 
species, B. griseus, is grayish but often shows some yellow( at least at the base of the stalk) 
as it ages. It has softer, mild-tasting, pallid, edible (but often wormy!) flesh, white to gray 
or grayish-brown (never yellow!) pores that may stain brown, and a reticulate stalk. It is 
common under hardwoods in eastern North America and also occurs in southern Arizona. 
BOLETUS 
523 
Boletus Jibrillosus 
CAP 6-17 cm broad, convex to more or less plane; surface dry, minutely velvety becoming 
fibrillose or sometimes fibrillose-scaly at the center; brown to dark brown to cinnamon- 
brown, sometimes with paler blotches or paler at the margin (but not yellow). Flesh thick, 
white or buff, not blueing when bruised; taste mild. PORES and tubes pale yellow to 
yellow or dingy olive-yellow (occasionally pallid when very young), not bruising blue. 
ST ALK 8-16 cm long, 24 cm thick at apex, equal or thicker below( but sometimes pinched 
at base); solid, firm; light brown to brown (often paler than cap); apex often yellow and/ or 
base whitish; usually lined or fibrillose, reticulate at least at the top. SPORE PRINT 
dark olive-brown; spores 13-17.5 x 3.5-5.5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious on ground in mixed woods and under conifers; 
known only from the west coast, sometimes common in the fall in coastal northern 
California and the Cascades. A similar species (see below) occurs in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and fairly good, but certainly not the equal of B. edu/is or B. aereus. 
COMMENTS: The dark brown frequently fibrillose cap, yellow pores, brown reticulate 
stalk, and "failure" of all parts to turn blue when bruised are the telltale traits of this 
northern bolete (see photo on p. 529). It resembles B. edu/is and B. aereus, but its cap is 
more fibrillose and its pores are often yellow even when young. Tylopilus pseudoscaber 
is also somewhat similar, but does not have yellow pores. Both T. pseudoscaber and B. 
fibrillosus have passed under the defunct name B. ol;vaceobrunneus. A similar, uniden- 
tified Boletus occurs rarely in our area under live oak, but differs in having a yellow stalk. 
B. citr;n;porus is a smaller Californian species with a brown yo blackish cap, brilliant 
yellow pores that do not bruise blue, a whitish to buff (or yellow at apex) stalk that is not 
reticulate or only slightly so, and mild taste. I have found it in mixed woods and under oak. 
Boletus calopus (Bitter Bolete) 
CAP 10-30 cm broad. convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, dull, smooth to 
minutely hairy or fibrillose, often cracking (areolate) in age; dull brown to olive-brown, 
grayish-brown, or olive-buff, sometimes yellow-brown or in age darker brown. Flesh very 
thick, pale yellow or whitish, quickly blueing when exposed; taste distinctly and 
persistently bitter. PORES and tu bes pale yellow becoming darker or dingier yellow in age; 
typically bruising blue or blue-green quickly. STALK 6-15 (20) cm long, 3-7 cm thick at 
apex, equal or bulbous; solid, firm; yellow, but usually with pink to red zones or 
discolorations also present, or sometimes entirely reddish; blueing when bruised; apex or 
upper half finely reticulate. SPO RE PRINT dark olive- brown; spores 13-19 x 4-6 microns, 
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in mixed woodsand underconifers 
in the late summer and fall (or occasionally spring); common in western North America, 
rare in the East. It is particularly prominent at higher elevations (e.g., in the Sierra 
Nevada), but I have also seen large fruitings on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington. 
In our area it is apparently supplanted by another bitter bolete, B. "marshii." 
EDIBILITY: Bitter-tasting (see comments on the edibility of B. "marshii"). 
COMMENTS: This sometimes massive bolete is easily recognized by its bitter taste, 
blueing of all parts when injured, yellow pores, and reticulate stalk. The bitter taste always 
comes as a disappointment to those seduced by its large size. Our other large "bitter 
boletes," B. "marshii" and B. rubripes, have non-reticulate stalks. Still another bitter 
bolete, B. coniferarum, has a yellow reticulate stalk (without any red or pink), a darker 
(olive-gray to deep brown) cap, and a northern distribution. I have seen it under conifers 
in northern Idaho and British Columbia. 
524 
BOLETACEAE 
Boletus rubripes (Red-Stemmed Bitter Bolete) Color Plate 130 
CAP 6-15 (25) cm broad, convex to broadly convex or sometimes plane; surface dry, dull, 
smooth or velvety, often becoming cracked or furrowed in age; pale buffto olive-buffto 
tan. Flesh thick, firm, buff to pale yellow or even whitish, but blueing when exposed; taste 
usually bitter. PORES and tubes pale yellow becoming darker or duller yellow in age; 
blueing when bruised. STALl\. 7-13 (20) cm long, 1-4 cm thick, sometimes swollen below 
(especially when young), but often more or less equal in age; firm, solid, not reticulate but 
often longitudinally striate in age; color variable, but usually yellow at apex with bright 
pink to reddish areas below, becoming dark red throughout in age. SPORE PRINT olive- 
brown; spores 12.5-17.5 )( 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in groups, associated primarily with conifers; known 
only from western North America and Mexico. I have not seen it in our area, but it is fairly 
common in northern California under Sitka spruce and also occurs in the Sierra Nevada. 
It fruits in the summer and fall. The color photograph was taken in New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Bitter-tasting (see comments on the edibility of B. "marshii"). 
COMMENTS: This beautiful but bitter bolete can be told from B. c%pus by its non- 
reticulate stalk (use a hand lens if unsure!), and from B. "marshU" by the red to pink stalk 
which beomes dark red or dull purple-red in age. Several Ty/opi/us species are also bitter- 
tasting, but do not have yellow pores. 
Boletus "marsh;;" (Ben's Bitter Bolete) 
CAP 5-25 cm broad, convex to nearly plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth 
or cracking in age, whitish to gray, pale grayish-brown or buff when young, becoming 
dull brownish and developing darker brown stains in age or upon handling. Flesh thick, 
dense, white or grayish, turning blue to bluish-gray erratically when exposed; taste bitter, 
at least latently. PORES and tubes pale yellow becoming dingy yellow or olive-yellow, 
bruising blue quickly, then eventually turning dingy brown. STALK 4-15 cm long, 2-5 
cm thick at apex, usually enlarged below but sometimes tapered at the base, smooth, not 
reticulate; pallid to buff or yellow above (sometimes with a very slight reddish zone), dingy 
brown below, darker brown throughout in old age; turning blue when bruised. SPORE 
PRINT olive-brown; spores 11-14 )( 4.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on ground near or under live oak in the summer and 
early fall (before the onset of the fall rainy season); common in the vicinity of Santa Cruz, 
California, and also reported by several collectors from the foothills of the Sierra Nevada. 
This bitter-tasting bolete is known locally as Boletus "marsh;;" (or the "Shucks Bolete," because 
that's what you say when you taste it!). Note pale cap, blue-staining pores, and non-reticulate stalk. 
""I 
, 
..'" 
... 
" '" 
BOLETUS 
525 
EDIBILITY: Sauteed delicately in butter with a pinch of pepper and a clove of garlic, 
served steaming hot on toast with cream cheese and celery, broiled belligerently on a 
skewer with spiced lamb and bell peppers, or layered lovingly in a casserole with parmesan 
cheese, egg noodles, and onions, Boletus "marsh;;" is still inedible. 
COMMENTS: This bulky bolete with the bitter taste appears to be unnamed. However, 
it is known to local yokels as B. "marsh;;" because it bears an uncanny resemblance to 
its discoverer, Ben Marsh, who is also dense, bulky, bitter, and bulbous, and who spent 
many fruitless hours (and ruined many otherwise marvelous meals) in a highly commen- 
dable ifill-conceived attempt to make it palatable. It is easily distinguished from B. calopus 
by the non-reticulate stalk, from B. appendiculalUs by the paler cap, non-reticulate stalk, 
and bitter taste, from B. rubripes by the paler cap and absence of red on the stalk, and 
from B. barrowsii by the bitter taste, blue-staining pores that are yellow when young, and 
non-reticulate stalk. Its habit of fruiting before the rains arrive is odd, but quite reliable. 
A European species, B. albidus (=B. radicans), is similar in color and taste, but is usually 
described as having a reticulate stalk with a rooting base. Although B. "marshii" never 
seems to have a reticulate stalk, it often has a rooting base, and a critical comparison may 
reveal that the two species are one and the same. 
Boletus appendiculatus 
(Butter Bolete) 
Color Plate 134 
CAP 6-20 (30) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or even plane; surface dry or 
slightly viscid, smooth or witha fine bloom when young, sometimes cracked inage; brown 
to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown, or sometimes buff to yellowish, often with reddish 
stains or blushes. Flesh thick, very firm and dense, pale yellow to yellow, changing slowly 
and erratically to blue when cut, or not at all; taste mild. PO RES and tubes lemon-yellow to 
bright butter-yellow or in old age olive-yellow; usually blueing when bruised, but 
sometimes not (especially in button stage). STALK 5-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex, 
usually bulbous or thicker below, but sometimes equal or tapered at base; solid, very firm; 
uniformly yellow or butter-yellow, sometimes with brownish or reddish stains; upper 
portion finely reticulate; flesh in base usually pinkish or vinaceous. SPORE PRINT dark 
olive-brown; spores 12-15 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods, especially live 
oak and tan oak; fruiting shortly after the first fall rains and apparently more common in 
our area than anywhere else in North America. It is abundant some years, practically 
absent others; it often grows with B. satanas, B. regius, and/ or B. aereus. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and popular (although some people are "allergic" to it). It lacks the 
nuttiness of B. edulis but is remarkable for its firmness-a joy to find as well as to eat, 
something you can really sink your teeth into. When cooked it will often turn blue, then 
gray. then back to yellow. 
COMMENTS: The butter bolete is easily recognized by its heaviness (it is the densest of 
our boletes-the young buttons are sometimes as hard as rocks), mild (never bitter!) taste, 
yellow pores that usually bruise blue quickly, and finely reticulate, butter-yellow stalk. 
Don't be misled by the variation in cap color-it is usually brown, but ranges from yel- 
lowish to somewhat reddish or rusty-brown. Sometimes it seems to intergrade with B. 
regius, which is also edible. The reticulation is usually the same color as the stalk (unless 
stained brown by spores), and thus can be difficult to see(a hand lens will help). Specimens 
of the poisonous B. satanas which have lost their red pore color are easily distinguished 
because they do not have a yellow stalk. B. "marsh;;" differs in its paler cap, white flesh, 
non-reticulate stalk, and bitter taste. Other species: B. abieticola, sometimes common 
under fir in the Siskiyou Mountains of northern California and southern Oregon, is quite 
similar, but has a more fibrillose, tan to rose-colored cap. 
526 
BOLETACEAE 
Boletus regius (Red-Capped Butter Bolete) Color Plate 133 
CAP 6-20 cm broad or more, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface smooth to 
uneven or pitted, sometimes minutely hairy when young, dry or slightly viscid; pink to 
rosy-red or dark red, sometimes also with brownish tones or yellow areas. Flesh very thick, 
firm, yellow, slowly and erratically or irregularly blueing when exposed; taste mild. 
PORES and tubes bright yellow becoming darker yellow or olive-yellow in old age; usually 
blueing when bruised. STALK 4-14 cm long, 2.5-6 cm thick at apex, usually bulbous or 
thicker below, often rather short in relation to cap; solid, firm, pale to bright yellow but 
usually bruising blue and often reddish-stained below; finely reticulate over at least the 
upper half; flesh in base often pinkish or vinaceous. SPORE PRINT olive-brown; spores 
12.5-16.5 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods; known from California, Oregon, 
and Washington. In our area it fruits in the fall under live oak, often with B. barrowsii, B. 
satanas, and/ or B. appendiculatus. Like those species it does not seem to fruit every year. 
In the Sierra Nevada and Cascades it grows under conifers in the spring, summer, and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and very similar to B. appendiculatus in flavor, but not as firm and 
therefore not as good; it is often riddled with maggots. 
COMMENTS: This sometimes massive boletecan be told by its blue-staining yellow pores, 
yellow flesh, pink to reddish cap, and large, thick, reticulate yellow stem. It closely mimics 
B. appendiculatus except for cap color, but since both are edible it hardly matters if you 
confuse them. S mall specimens of B. regius are shown on p. 512. B. speciosus is a similar 
eastern species with a longer, slimmer stalk and a tendency to stain blue more readily. 
Boletus erythropus Color Plate 135 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming nearly plane to slightly depressed or pitted in 
age; surface dry, minutely velvety when young, yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown, dark 
brown, or reddish-brown, quickly staining bluish-black when bruised. Flesh thick, firm, 
yellow or yellowish but blueing very quickly when ex posed; often reddish-brown or reddish 
in base of stalk. PORES red to brick-red to orange-red, orange, rusty-orange, or burnt 
sienna (but sometimes yellowish in old age), blueing quickly when bruised; tubes yellow 
becoming greenish-yellow in age. STALK 4-15 cm long, (1.5) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal or 
thicker at either end but not bulbous; yellowish or more often masked by a coating of 
minute red to orange dots or granules; blueing quickly when bruised and often dingier 
(darker or browner) in age; solid, firm, often curved; not reticulate or only very slightly 
so at apex from decurrent tube walls. SPORE PRINT olive-brown to ochraceous-brown; 
spores 12-16 x 4-6 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed. It is 
fairly common under conifers (especially spruce) from northern California to Alaska, and 
under both hardwoods and conifers in eastern North America; also reported from 
the Rocky Mountains. In the oak and madrone woodlands of California it is replaced by 
B. amygdalinus (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to some people-to be avoided. Two books which list B. satanas 
as poisonous state flatly that B. erythropus is edible. However, Bill Everson (an intrepid 
Californian toadstool-tester) was unaffected by cooked B. satanas but ate a small portion 
of sauteed B. erythropus and vomited soon after-an explicit example of why you should 
be cautious when trying any mushroom for the first time, even a so-called "edible" one! 
COMMENTS: The red to orange pores, non-reticulate and non-bulbous stalk, and brown 
to dark brown cap typify this beautiful bolete. It certainly has substance, but is puny in 
comparison to the bulky hulk (hulking bulk?) of B. satanas. It bruises blue so rapidly that 
. i 
,. 
. - .... 
J 
! 
Boletus erythropus. a poisonous species with orange or reddish pores that quickly stain blue. Flesh 
also stains quickly when cut (see color plate). Note that the stalk is not bulbous as in B. satanas. 
a few minutes frenzied handling will render it unrecognizable. A very similar species that is 
apparently unique to California, B. amygda/inus, has oranger pores and grows under 
hardwoods. Another look-alike, B. subve/utipes (COLOR PLATE 136), is quite common in 
the Southwest as well as eastern North America. It can have a somewhat yellower cap and 
often has dark red hairs at the base of the stalk. B. hypocarycinus is a very similar south- 
eastern species with a dark red to carmine stal base and shorter spores. B. orovi//us is a 
rare but striking bolete with a large brilliant yellow cap, bright red pores that mayor may 
not bruise blue, and a thick, non-reticulate stalk. It has been takeninafewwidelyscattered 
localities in northern California and the Pacific Northwest. None ofthese should beeaten. 
Boletus satanas 
(Satan's Bolete) 
Color Plate 137 
CAP 7-30 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane in age; surface dry, smooth 
or sometimes cracked; pallid to gray or olive-buff, becoming suffused with pink in age, 
especially toward margin (but yellowish where slug-eaten). Flesh white to yellow, blueing 
when bruised, especially when young or near the tubes. PORES deep red becoming red to 
pink or in old age orange to yellowish, turning blue to blue-black when bruised; tubes 
yellow to greenish. ST ALK 6-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex, with a massive abrupt bulb 
at base which is up to 15 cm broad and is especially prominent when young; solid, firm; 
upper portion colored more or less like the cap and finely but distinctly reticulate (reti- 
culation usually reddish); bulb usually pink or pinkish-red, but the pink tones usually 
more evident in youth and tending to disappear in age. SPORE PRINT brown to olive- 
brown; spores 11-15 )( 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in grou ps under oaks (often at the edges of pastures); known only 
from California and Europe. In our area it is sometimes abundant in the fall or early 
winter. It is usually one of the very first boletes to appear. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous, at least raw! It causes vomiting, diarrhea, and severe cramps. 
Thorough cooking reputedly destroys the toxins, and some people eat it regularly. Its 
voluminous avoirdupois is certainly inviting-but when so many more delectable and less 
dangerous mushrooms abound, why tempt fate? ' 
COMMENTS: The red pores, pallid to olive-buff cap, and bulbous reticulate stem are 
diagnostic. Young specimens can be told by their obesity alone-the bulb can be several 
inches broad, often larger than the cap and just as round! The red color of the pores 
527 
528 
BOLETACEAE 
sometimes fades in old age, but the pronounced bulb and blue-staining tubes signify B. 
salanas. I found one specimen at the edge of a meadow that weighed six pounds, and half of 
it had been eaten by a cow! B. pulcherrimus is the only other red-pored, reticulate-stalked 
bolete in coastal California, but it is not so bulbous and has a brown to reddish-brown cap. 
Boletus pulcherrimus (Red-Pored Bolete) 
CAP 8-25 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane; surface dry, smooth or 
minutely velvety when young, sometimes breaking up into small scales in age; brown 
to pale olive-brown orreddish-brown( often redder at margin). Flesh thick, yellow, blueing 
when exposed. PORES deep red to bright scarlet-red, often duller (reddish-brown) or 
paler in old age; quickly staining blue or blue-black when bruised; tubes yellow. STALK 
7-20 cm long, 2-5 cm thick at apex and up to 10 cm thick at base; sometimes equal, more 
often club-shaped (thicker below), but not abruptly bulbous; solid, firm, yellowish to pale 
reddish-brown with dark red reticulation over at least the upper half. SPORE PRINT 
olive-brown; spores 13-16 x 5.5-6.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in mixed woods and under conifers in the summer and 
fall; endemic to western North America, rather rare but sometimes fruiting in quantity. 
I've seen it in northern California and New Mexico, but have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! Like B. salanas, it is especially dangerous raw. 
COMMENTS: Listed in older books as B. eastwoodiae, this large and beautiful bolete is 
easily told by its red to dark red pores, reticulate stalk, and brown to reddish-brown cap. It 
is the principal red-pored bolete of the Pacific Northwest, but does not fruit every year. 
In our area it is replaced by B. salanas, which is differently colored and much more obese. 
A very similar species, B. haematinus (COLOR PLATE 138) is common under western 
mountain conifers. It has a yellow-brown to olive-brown or brown cap, sometimes has a 
yellower stalk, and often has yellow pores when very young (the pores at the cap margin 
of older specimens can also be yellow). A similar but unidentified species with a pallid cap 
has been found by Greg Wright under conifers in southern California. Another reticulate- 
stalked species, B. luridus, grows under hardwoods and conifers in eastern North America 
and the Southwest. It has a slimmer (1-3 cm) stalk red to orange pores, and a yellowish to 
olive-brown, brown, or reddish-brown cap. All of the above species are poisonous and all 
lack the exaggerated bulb of B. salanas. For species with bright red caps, see B./roslii. 
Boletusfrosti; (Apple Bolete; Frosfs Bolete) Color Plate 139 
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to broadly convex, often becoming plane or with an uplifted 
margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist and often shiny, dark red (or even 
blackish-red) when young, becoming blood-red or apple-red in age, and often developing 
yellowish (faded) areas when old. Flesh thick, pallid to yellow, quickly blueing when cut. 
PORES small, dark red when fresh and often beaded with yellow droplets when young, 
often fading to paler red in age; typically staining dark or dingy bluish when bruised; 
tubes yellow to olive. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, dry, 
solid, coarsely and deeply reticulate throughout; dark red to red, sometimes with yellowish 
areas; reticulation same color or paler; base red to yellow or whitish. SPORE PRINT 
brown to olive-brown; spores 11-17 x 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under hardwoods; common during the 
summer throughout eastern North America, also in Texas, southern Arizona, Mexico, 
and Costa Rica. It favors oak, but is said to be frequent under madrone in Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. In Mexico it is often sold in farmer's markets, but since it has red 
pores, be careful! Cook it thoroughly and be sure of your identification! 
" 
'.. 
. 
. 
4\-'''' ".... 
. 
l' 
( 
Left: Boletusfibn//osus (see p. 523) can be confused with B. edu/is and B. aereus, but has a hairier 
(fibrillose) cap in age and usually has yellow pores. Right: Boletus barrows;;, oak-loving form (also 
shown on p. 512). Note whitish cap. See color plate for pine-loving variety from the Southwest. 
COMMENTS: One of the most beautiful and memorable of all boletes, this species is 
easily told by its viscid red to dark red cap, dark red pores, and coarsely reticulate stalk. 
The stalk may be thickened downward, but is never bulbous as in B. satanas. Thetendency 
of the young pores to exude yellow droplets is also distinctive. In Mexico it is sometimes 
called panza agria, which means "sour belly:' Other species: B.flammans and B. rubro- 
flammeus, both poisonous, have a non-viscid red to dark red cap and finely to scarcely 
reticulate stalk and red pores (at least when young). The first favors eastern conifers, the 
second grows with hardwoods in eastern North America and southern Arizona. 
Boletus barrows;; 
(White King Bolete) 
Color Plate 141 
CAP 6-25 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane; surface smooth or very 
slightly velvety, dry, dull white to buff or grayish. Flesh thick, white, not blueing when 
exposed (or blueing only very slightly near the tubes). PORES and tubes white or pallid 
when young (and appearing stuffed with a pith), becoming yellow to olive-yellow in age; 
not blueing when bruised. STALK 6-20 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex, equal or thicker 
below (especially when young), solid, firm, whitish to buff or colored like cap, sometimes 
with brownish stains; finely but distinctly reticulate at least over the upper portion. SPORE 
PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 13-15 x 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary or scattered to gregarious under both hardwoods and conifers, 
fruiting mainly in the summer and fall; apparently endemic to the drier parts of western 
North America and Mexico. It is a warm weather species and more abundant in Arizona 
and New Mexico than anywhere else. There it is associated almost exclusively with ponde- 
rosa pine, while B. edu/is favors spruce. In Colorado, however, I have found it under spruce 
and fir, and in coastal California it is usually associated-quite curiously-with live oak, 
while B. edu/is grows with pine. In our area it fruits in the fall and winter, but is abundant 
only after warm early (September-N ovember) rains. 
EDIBILITY: Delectably delicious. It is a favorite of collectors in the Southwest, and in 
the completely objective opinion of its "discoverer," Chuck Barrows, it is the best of the 
boletes for the table. Unfortunately, the maggots share his opinion, for they attack it even 
more voraciously than they do B. edu/is! 
COMMENTS: For many years this handsome, meaty bolete has passed as a ..white" 
B. edu/is, and is listed as such in the first edition of Mushrooms Demystified. However, 
it does not intergrade with B. edu/is and lacks the clearly differentiated, often viscid cap 
cuticle (skin) of that species. Result: it is now recognized as a distinct species. 
530 
BOLETACEAE 
Boletus edulis Color Plates 142,143,144 
(King Bolete; Cep; Steinpilz; Porcini; etc.) 
CAP 8-30 cm broad or more, convex to broadly convex or bun-shaped, orin age becoming 
plane; surface dry or more often viscid when moist, smooth to somewhat pitted or in dry 
wea ther sometimes cracking into plaq ues; color variable: biscuit-brown or warm brown to 
yellow-brown, cinnamon-brown, reddish-brown, or dark red (but often with whitish or 
pinkish tints while still under the dufO; margin sometimes paler or yellower. Flesh thick, 
firm, white or sometimes tinged yellowish ordingy reddish inage; not blueing when bruised 
or only blueing slightly near the tubes; odor and taste pleasant. PORES at first white or 
pallid and appearing stuffed with a pith, then becoming yellow, olive-yellow, or brown in 
age, not blueing when bruised; tubes whitish becoming yellow, then olive-yellow. STALK 
(3) 8-25 cm long, 2-7 (12) cm thick (often large in relation to cap); usually enlarged below 
when young, often becoming more or less equal in age; firm, solid, entirely white, or 
whitish at the base and brownish above; finely reticula te over upper portion orthroughout; 
flesh in base sometimes with dark yellow areas (a parasite?). SPORE PRINT more or less 
olive-brown; spores 13-19 x 4-7 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or sometimes troups on ground in woods; 
found throughout the world and very common in western North America. It favors coni- 
fers (pine, spruce, hemlock, fir) but also grows with hardwoods such as oak and birch. It 
is often abundant in our coastal pme forests in the fall and winter( usually 2-4 weeks after 
the first substantial fall rains) as well as under oak, and a smaller flush may appear in the 
spring. In coastal northern California and Oregon it grows with pine and spruce in the fall; 
in the Sierra Nevada a stout form fruits in large quantities under conifers in the spring, 
summer, and fall; and in the high Rockies the variety with a dark red cap fruits in colossal 
quantities in August and September, under spruce. 
EDIBILITY: One of the finest offleshy fungi and certainly the best-loved and most sought- 
after in Europe, where it has more common names than there are languages. If any 
mushroom deserves the dubious title of ""king," this is the one. It is a consummate crea- 
tion, the peerless epitome of earthbound substance, a bald bulbous pillar of thick white 
flesh-the one aristocrat the peasantry can eat! 
The entire fruiting body is exceptionally delicious, even the tubes ifthey're firm enough. 
It is delicious raw, but can cause stomach upsets because it's difficult to digest, so play it 
safe and cook it (preferably on high heat in an open pan, so as to drive off the excess mois- 
ture). The odor and taste of dried B. edu/is are marvelous-nutty, earthy, and meaty all 
at once. But you have to find them before you can eat them. and it isn't always easy. You 
can't just casually look for them the way you can forchanterelles or blewits -you have to 
hunt them down and root them up from under the duff before they're visible to others. 
Timing is of paramount importance, because you face formidable competition from both 
maggots and boletivores(see p. 546). One source suggests getting up at the crack of dawn 
and wearing your shirt inside out. Uthatdoesn't work, you can always resort to the dried, 
imported version found in delicatessens. 
COMMENTS: This magnificent mushroom has several color forms, two of which are 
particularly common. The first has a brown to reddish-brown ca p( Color PIa tes 142 & 144) 
and is the dominant one in coastal California. The second, also called B. edulis var. pinicola 
(= B. pinicola, B. pinophilus), has a dark red to red-brown cap. It is prevalent in the Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest (Color Plate 143) and Gulf Coast region. Remember: brown to 
reddish cap, thick reticulate stalk, mild to nutty (not bitter) taste, and white pores when young 
that do not bruise blue. No mushroom is more substantial or satisfying to find! Other edible 
species: B. mottii of the Sierra Nevada has a pitted and / or ridged cap; B. separans (reddish to 
liver-colored cap when young) and B. pseudoseparans (dark purple cap when young) usually 
have a purple or purple-tinged stalk and grow under hardwoods in eastern North America. 
)' 
,.....-  
 
'i 
. _.,. 0 . 
"=; I! 
to 
>- . 
 
.- 
. 
Boletus edu/is. young specimens with white pores. Some forms have much stouter stalks than these, 
which have been trimmed to check for maggots. The caps will broaden as they mature. See p. 489 for 
a close-up of the reticulate stalk. Also see color plates and photo on p. 512. (Joel Leivick) 
Tylopilus species can be somewhat similar, but have pinker pores, pinkish- to reddish- 
brown spores, stain dark brown when bruised, and/ or are bitter-tasting. B.fibrillosus is 
another look-alike, but its cap is darker and hairier. See also B. aereus and B. barrowsii. 
Boletus aereus 
(Queen Bolete) 
Color Plate 140 
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad. convex becoming broadly convex to plane in age; surface dry or 
moist (or viscid only in age), smooth or somewhat pitted, dark brown to nearly black when 
young and covered at least partially with a fine whitish bloom, but inage becoming smooth 
and cinnamon or red-brown or blotched with paler (whitish to tan) areas. Flesh thick, 
white or tinged reddish, not blueing when exposed (or blueing only slightly nearthe tubes); 
taste mild or pleasant. PORES and tubes white when young and at first stuffed witha pith, 
becoming yellow to greenish-yellow in age; not blueing when bruised. ST ALK 5-15 cm 
long, 2-5 cm thick at apex, usually enlarged below when young but oftenequal inage; firm, 
solid, white or often brown in age, finely reticulate at least over upper part. SPORE 
PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 12-14 x 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in mixed woods and under hardwoods 
(especially oaks); found in California, but originally described from Europe. In our area 
it is fairly common in the fall in the coastal mountains, usually under tanoak, madrone, 
and/ or chinquapin. It also grows with live oak, but not as commonly as B. barrowsii. 
EDIBILITY: Delicious! It is every bit as good as B. edu/is, and less apt to be wormy! 
COMMENTS: This relative of B. edu/is often grows with B. appendiculalUs, but has white 
pores when young, a darker cap, and does not stain blue. The hoary bloom on young caps 
(see photos on pp. 50 & 512) disappears as the cap becomes more cinnamon-colored, and 
in age there is little to distinguish it from B. edu/is other than habitat. Fortunately, both 
species are so delectably delicious that it hardly matters if you unwittingly confuse them! 
Bfibrillosus is also similar, but has a hairier cap without a whitish bloom. Anothercousin 
of B. edu/is, B. variipes, has a dry, tan to grayish-brown, yellow-brown, or dark brown cap 
that lacks the whitish bloom of B. aereus and often becomes areolate (cracked) inage. It is 
abundant in the summer under oak and beech in easternN orth America, but rare or absent 
in the West. It is edible, but usually riddled with maggots and sometimes bitterish to boot. 
531 
532 
BOLETACEAE 
TYLOPILUS 
Medium-sized to large, fleshy, mostly terrestrial boletes. CAP usually dull colored and typically not 
viscid. PORES and tubes typically pallid to pinkish. vinaceous. gray. or brown. STALK fleshy, 
sometimes reticulate. but not glandular-dolled and not usually with dark scabers. VEIL absent. 
SPORE PRINT flesh-colored to pinkish-brown. reddish-brmm. cinnamon-brown. vinaceous. 
or chocolate-brown. Spores elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth (except T. gracilis). 
TYLOPILUS closely resembles Boletus, but gives a flesh-colored to reddish-brown or 
chocolate-brown spore print instead of a brown to olive-brown one. In the field the two 
genera can often be told by the color of their pores-in Boletus they are usually orange, 
red, yellow, or white and frequently stain blue when bruised, while in Tylopilus they are 
typically pallid to flesh-colored, vinaceous, gray, or some shade of brown, and are more 
apt to stain reddish, brown, or black than blue. 
In eastern North America Tylopilus, like Boletus, is quite diverse and often abundant 
in the summer and early fall. The West presents a completely different picture, however-a 
mere handful of species occur and only one, T. pseudoscaber (a species "complex"), could 
be characterized as "common." Tylopilus does not offer the plethora of good edibles that 
Boletus does. I can find no mention of any Tylopilus being poisonous, but many species 
(e.g., T. felleus) have a very bitter taste-even when cooked. Since Tylopilus is such a 
conspicuous component of the bolete bounty of eastern North America, I have included 
the more common and distinctive eastern species in the key. Four species are described 
(three of which occur in California); two additional species are shown in the color plates. 
Key to Tylopilus 
I. Tubes yellow; pores yellow to brownish or reddish, often blueing when bruised; cap usually 
areolate (cracked) in age; western ...... T. amylosporus(see Boletus chrysenteron, p.519) 
I. Not as above; tubes not yellow, or if so then found in eastern North America ............ 2 
2. Stalk white or creamy (but staining dark brown); pores white when fresh but quickly staining 
dark red and then dark brown when bruised; flesh in cap and upper stalk often blueing slightly 
when cut, then turning reddish or brown; found in eastern North America; rare .. T. snellii 
2. Not as above; staining reactions different, or if similar then stalk not whitish; common ... 3 
3. Pores and/ or flesh staining blue or blue-black when bruised or at least staining waxed or white 
paper blue or blue-green when wrapped in it; fruiting body dark T.pseudoscabergroup, p.534 
3. Not as above; not staining waxed paper blue or blue-green; fruiting body dark or light .... 4 
4. Cap and stalk dark gray to brownish-black or black, but the pores white when young and pinkish 
in age; pores and flesh staining reddish or vinaceous when bruised, then often blackening; 
fruiting body usually robust; spore print pinkish or vinaceous; found in eastern NorthAmerica 
and the Southwest, usually under hardwoods such as oak; edible ............. T. a/boater 
4. Not as above; differently colored or with darker (chocolate-brown, etc.) spores or pores .. 5 
5. Pore surface dark gray to dark brown or blackish, even when young; stalk densely scurfy from 
numerous minute scales or granules; cap and stalk chocolate-brown to dark brown or with a 
purple or bluish tinge; spore print pinkish-brown to vi naceo us; found in eastern North 
America, mainly under northern conifers ................................. T. eximius 
5. Not as above (if dark, then spore print chocolate-brown or stalk not densely scurfy) ...... 6 
6. Cap and stalk dark (olive-brown to grayish-brown, dark brown, or blackish); pores usually 
gray to brown, at least in age; spore print chocolate-brown .. T. pseudoscaber group, p. 534 
6. Not as above; differently colored and/ or spore print pinkish to vinaceous or cinnamon ... 7 
7. Found in eastern North America (east ofthe Rocky Mountains). ..................... 8 
7. Found in western North America (from the Rocky Mountains westward). ............ 18 
8. Stalk base bright yellow; cap pink when fresh (but fading to tan or paler) T. chromapes, p. 533 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Cap whitish to buff or pale yellow, sometimes dingy tan in age ....................... 21 
9. Not as above; cap darker or brighter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 10 
*In regions where the eastern and western fungal floras overlap (e.g., southern Arizona), try both choices! 
TYLOPILUS 
533 
10. Cap broadly conical and shaggy-fibrillose (or pitted in age), yellow to bright yellow-brown or 
tinged pink, margin often fringed; found in southern bottom lands T. (=Mucilopilus) conicus 
10. Not as above; cap not shaggy ................................................... II 
II. Cap bright orange to dull orange (but may become cinnamon or browner in age); stalk white to 
yellow or orange (or aging brownish) .............. T. hal/ou;; (see T. chromapes. below) 
II. Not as above; cap yellow-brown to cinnamon, brown, purplish, etc., but not truly orange 12 
12. Flesh very bitter-tasting (but some people have trouble detecting the bitterness) ........ 13 
12. Taste not bitter or only slightly or sporadically so .......... _ _ . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . _ . . . . .. 16 
13. Stalk purple or purple-and-white when fresh (but may fade in age!); cap purplish to brown; 
pores white when young, dingy pinkish in age; stalk not reticulate or only slightly so at apex; 
usually found under hardwoods; common ....................... T. plumheoviolaceus 
13. Not as above; cinnamon to brown or dark brown but not purple when fresh ........... 14 
14. Stalk clearly reticulate; usually (not always) under conifers T.Jelleus(see T. ;ndecisus. p.535) 
14. Stalk not reticulate or only slightly so at apex; usually associated with oak ............. 15 
15. Stalk thick (1-5 cm at apex); cap medium-sized to large; widespread ..... T. ruhrohrunneus 
15. Stalk thinner than above; cap often rather small; southern ..................... T. minor 
16. Stalk typically long and slender(less than I cm thick at apex), often curved at base;capand stalk 
reddish-brown to cinnamon ortawny(see Color Plate 149); found in many habitats but partial 
to hemlock; many spores minutely roughened or pitted T. graci/is (see T. chromapes. below) 
16. Not as above; stalk usually at least I cm thick; spores smooth ........................ 17 
17. Cap more or less maroon-red ........................................... T. hadiceps 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 24 
18. Stalk distinctly reticulate over upper portion; associated mainly with oak T. indecisus, p. 535 
18. Stalk not reticulate or only obscurely so at apex from decurrent tube walls. . . . . . . . . . . .. 19 
19. Stalk often short, poorly-developed, and sometimes off-center; margin of cap often incurved 
even at maturity; fruiting body often partly buried in soil ............. T. humilis, p. 535 
19. Not as above ............................................... _. .. .. . . _.. . .. . .. 20 
20. Cap dark brown ....................... _.... .. . ........ ... ... . . . . T.Jerrugineus(?) 
20. Cap tan to dull brown or vinaceous-tinged ......... T. ammiratii(see T. ;ndec;sus. p. 535) 
21. Stalk distinctly reticulate or reticulate-ridged; mainly southern ...................... 22 
21. Stalk not reticulate or only slightly so at apex; southern or northern .................. 23 
22. Reticulation on stalk coarse and raised; stalk usually long in relation to cap; cap often areolate 
in age; spores pitted or roughened ............... (see Boletellus& Austroholetus, p. 508) 
22. Not as above; taste bitter or mild; fruiting body often robust ................ T. rhoadsiae 
23. Cap typically wrinkled; northern . _ . _ _ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . T. intermedius 
23. Cap not normally wrinkled; southern .............. _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . T. peralhidus 
24. Fruiting body medium-sized to large, tawny to orange-brown to brown (including the pores!); 
stalk usually reticulate; taste mild to slightly bitter; mainly southern ......... T. tahacinus 
24. Not as above; pores usually paler when fresh ............... T. indecisus& others, p. 535 
Tylopilus chroma pes (Chrome-Footed Bolete) 
CAP (3)5-15 cm broad, convex, often becoming more or less plane in age; surface smooth 
or felty, dry to slightly viscid, bright pink to rose-colored when fresh, but often fading (to 
pinkish-tan, tan, or even whitish) in age. Flesh thick, white or tinged pink, not blueing; 
taste mild or slightly acidic. PORES minute, white when young becoming pinkish to flesh- 
colored to dingy brownish in age, not staining appreciably when bruised, or staining 
pinkish; tubes more or less same color or slightly yellower. STALK 4-20 cm long, 1-2.5 
cm thick, equal or slightly tapered either way, solid, firm; upper portion white or pallid or 
sometimes splotched with pink (especially when young), base bright yellow inside and out; 
not reticulate but often scurfy above from small hairs or scales. SPOR E PRINT vinaceous- 
to pinkish-brown; spores 10-17 )( 4-5.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and conifers; locally 
534 
BOLETACEAE 
frequent throughout eastern North America in the summer and fall. I t is especially 
common under birch, aspen, and conifers in northern latitudes in June and July. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good, but often riddled with maggots. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Boletus chroma pes and Leccinum chroma pes, this 
lovely bolete is easily recognized by its pink cap and white pores when young and its 
scurfy stalk with a bright yellow base. (The color scheme is reminiscent of Gomphidius 
subroseus. a gilled mushroom closely related to the boletes.) It is one of several very 
striking species of Ty/opi/us that are native to eastern North America. Others include: 
T. plumbeov;olaceus, a beautiful but bitter-tasting violet to purple-brown species; T. 
(=Austroboletus) gracilis, a slender-stemmed species (COLOR PLATE 149); and T. 
ballou;;, with an orange, Leccinum-like cap when fresh. For more details on these and 
other distinctive eastern species, see the key to Ty/opi/us. 
Tylopilus pseudoscaber group 
(Dark Bolete) 
CAP 5-16 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, minutely velvety 
to smooth in age, dark brown to very dark brown or at times grayish-brown to olive-brown, 
usually bruising darker brown to blackish; margin sometimes slightly paler. Flesh thick, 
whitish, typically bruising blue (but sometimes slowly or erratically), then slowly dis- 
coloring to reddish-brown or brown (or sometimes staining directly to pinkish); odor often 
pungent, taste mild or at least not bitter. PORES and tubes dark yellow-brown to coffee- 
brown to grayish-brown, chocolate-brown, or very dark brown (but in some forms pallid 
to grayish or yellow-gray when young); usually (but not always!) staining blue and then 
slowly reddish to dark brown when bruised. STALK (4) 7-16(20)cmlong, 1-3 (4)cmthick, 
equal or more often thicker below, firm, dry, minutely velvety and/ or scurfy, often 
longitudinally lined or streaked; distinctly reticulate above in one form, not reticulate in 
others; brown or colored like cap or darker, usually bruising darker brown or sometimes 
blue; base typically whitish. SPORE PRINT pale to dark chocolate-brown or reddish- 
brown; spores 11-19 (25) x 5-9 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or rotten wood, usually under 
conifers but sometimes with hardwoods; widely distributed but mainly northern. It is 
fairly common in the late summer and fall in the Pacific Northwest and northern Cali- 
fornia. It is especially fond ofSitkaspruce-which mayexplainitsabsence ornearabsence 
south of Mendocino County, California (the southernmost limit of Sitka spruce). 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but according to most sources, far from incredible. Its somber 
color is unappetizing and makes it difficult to see in the forest gloom. I haven't tried it. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as Porphyrellus pseudoscaber, this distinctive bolete is easily 
told by its dark color (see photo on p. 535), reddish-brown spore print, dark brown pores in 
age, and tendency to stain blue. The latter feature varies considerably in duration and 
intensity and may even be absent; however, if the fruiting body is wrapped in white or 
waxed paper it will usually stain the paper blue or dark blue-green. The above description 
is actually a composite of several closely related '''dark boletes" that have passed under 
the names T. pseudoscaber. T. porphyrosporus. T. o/ivaceobrunneus. T. atroJuscus, 
T. sord;dus, etc. Some mycologists consider them to be forms of one highly variable 
species. Others consider them distinct-for instance, they reserve the name T. porphy- 
rosporus for the form with pallid pores when young, and T. ol;vaceobrunneus for the 
variety with a reticulate stalk. Other sp_cies in the group include: T. pacif;cus, which tends 
to have a copiously cracked (areolate) cap in age; T.Jumos;pes, an eastern species with an 
areolate cap in age and narrower spores; and T. nebulosus, which typically does not stain 
blue. Two other dark species, T. a/boater and T. eximius. are described in the key. 
· 'If. 
t" 
Left: Tylopilus pseudoscaber group, Note dark color. Right: Tylopilus indecisus is apt to be mistaken 
for a Boletus. but like many species of Tylopilus. it stains brown when handled. 
Tylopilus indecisus (Indecisive Bolete) 
CAP 5-15 (25) cm broad, convex to plane; surface usually dry and smooth, dark brown to 
brown, dingy brown, or dingy cinnamon (usually darker when young, paler in age), stain- 
ing dark brown where bruised. Flesh thick, pallid, often staining pale vinaceous or flesh- 
color when bruised; taste mild. PORES and tubes pallid when young, soon becoming dull 
pinkish or pale flesh-color; slightly darker, dingier, or more vinaceous in age, staining 
brown where bruised. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 (4.5) cm thick, equal or thicker below, 
dry, firm, buff to brown, the apex often pallid; darker brown where bruised or handled; 
reticulate at least at the apex (but eastern variety sometimes not reticulate), sometimes 
nearly throughout. SPORE PRINT flesh-colored to reddish-brown or tinged vinaceous; 
spores 10-15 x 3-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in mixed woods and under oaks; fairly 
common in eastern North America, but rare in the West. I have seen it only a few times in 
our area, under live oak in the late fall and early winter, and under white oak inland. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, according to the literature. I haven't fried it. 
COMMENTS: There is nothing particularly indecisive about this drab bolete, but there is 
nothing particularly decisive about it either. The brown cap and reticulate stalk are remi- 
niscent of Boletus edulis. but the pores are pinker (and never olive-yellow), the fruiting 
body stains dark brown when handled or bruised, and the spore print is pinkish. Eastern 
material (including vaT. subpunctipes, which differs microscopically) is less apt to be 
reticulate than the western version. T. ammiratiiissimilarbuthasa tanorvinaceous-tinged 
cap and whitish stalk that is not reticulate oronlyslightlysoat the apex; it occurs in Califor- 
nia under oak. Similar easterners include: T. subunicolor, a small, slim, tawny-ochre 
southern species with yellowish flesh; T. tabacinus and T. rubrobrunneus, both medium to 
large (see key to Tylopilus); and T.felleus (COLOR PLATE 150), with a reticulate stalk 
and very bitter taste. T felleus is especially common under conifers (e.g., hemlock and 
pine); it is often mistaken for Boletus edu/is. For other easterners, see key to Tylopilus. 
Tylopilus humilus 
(Humble Bolete) 
CAP 4-12 cm broad, nearly round to convex when young, sometimes expanding to plane in 
age or often somewhat misshapen or irregular; surface dry or slightly tacky, often minutely 
velvety, dull brown or sometimes reddish-brown; margin often with vinaceous tints and 
frequently remaining incurved through maturity or even covering some of the pores. Flesh 
thick, white, bruising pinkish-brown or vinaceous (rarely blue); taste mild. PORES and 
535 
... 
". 
.. J' 
,,4.Y .. 
: ... 
.t.\t  
\ 
"" 
..\,.. 
Tylopi/us humi/us is a small, rare, often misshapen bolete. Note how stalk is often poorly developed. 
tubes whitish when young, becoming pale flesh-color or dull pale pinkish, staining brown 
when bruised. STALK 2-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually rather stocky and sometimes 
off-center; equal or swollel1 below, but the base often pinched; firm, solid, white at apex, 
usually brownish- or vinaceous-stained below, especially when handled; not reticulate or 
only very slightly so at extreme apex. SPORE PRINT dull reddish-brown; spores 8-12 )( 
)( 3-4 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps on ground (often partially buried), 
fruiting in the fall and winter; known only from California, rare. It appears every year in 
sand y soil in a burned-over area near Santa Cruz, apparently in association with manzanita 
or live oak, but with knobcone pine also in the general vicinity. It was originally discovered 
by Harry Thiers in Mendocino County under pines near a destroyed dormitory. 
COMMENTS: This bashful bolete is easily separated from other Tylopilus species by its 
semi-underground habit, i.e., it tends not to expose itself until fully mature, and even then 
may remain half-buried. The stocky or poorly-developed stem is reminiscent of Gastro- 
boletus, but the spores are forcibly discharged and the tubes are arranged vertically. 
LECCINUM (Rough-Stemmed Boletes) 
Medium-sized to large, tleshy, terrestrial, mycorrhizal, woodland boletes. CAP usually some 
shade of orange, red, brown, gray, or white; viscid or dry; often rimmed with a tlap of sterile tissue 
when young. PORES and tubes usually whitish to dingy buff. grayish. graYish-olive. or pale brown. 
only very rarely yellow; not staining blue. STALK tleshy, usually rathertoughand fibrous, typically 
not reticulate, ornamented with scabers which usually darken at maturity. VEIL typically absent. 
SPORE PRINT brown. Spores spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
LECCI N U M differs from other boletes by virtue of the tufted hairs or small rough scales 
(scabers) on the stalk. The scabers may be pallid when young, but usually darken to brown 
or black by maturity. They should not be confused with the resinous or sticky glandular 
dots found in Suillus, which do not protrude as scabers do and are not composed of hairs. 
Leccim-ims also have a characteristic appearance which makes them recognizable from a 
distance: the cap is typically some shade of orange, reddish-brown, brown, or white; the 
pores are usually white or dingy-colored (not yellow or red) and do not stain blue; and the 
stalk is usually whitish or pale colored except for the scabers, and usually much tougher 
and more fibrous than the cap. Also, the stalk sometimes stains blue when cut or handled, 
and in many species is rather long in relation to the cap. 
Leccinums are good boletes for beginners because they are widespread, often abundant 
536 
LECCINUM 
537 
(in Alaska they are said to outnumber all other boletes), and edible (though a few, like 
L. arrostipitarum, reportedly cause stomach upsets in some people). Nearly all Leccinums 
have a tendency to blacken when cooked or dried, but in no way does this affect their 
flavor. They dry quite nicely and are less apt to be maggoty than other boletes, at least 
in our area. Some species, such as L. insigne, are delicious fresh. Others, like L. man- 
zanitae, are watery and bland unless dried first. Even the less savory ones, however, have 
an important role to fulfill-they help stuff the buckets and bellies of boletivores (see 
p. 546) who might otherwise grow despondent and dangerous! 
Like most boletes, Leccinums are mycorrhizal. Their favorite hosts are aspen and birch, 
but they also occur with conifers and oaks, and in California-where birch is not native 
and aspen is restricted to the Sierra Nevada-they link up with madrone and manzanita, 
masquerading under the moniker "manzanita boletes." Over I 00 species of Leccinum have 
been described from North America (most ofthem from the northern part), but many are 
very similar in appearance and can only be distinguished with a microscope. For instance, 
L. aurantiacum differs from L. disc%r by the presence of minute pigment globules in the 
hyphae of the cap cuticle, while L. disc%r differs from L. rufescentoides in its smaller 
cuticular hyphal end cells! The staining reactions of the flesh upon exposure to air- 
particularly at the juncture of the cap and stalk-are also significant and should be 
determined by slicing open the fruiting body lengthwise, rubbing the flesh a couple times, 
then observing it at 5-minute intervals for a period of -1 hour. 
Fortunately, Leccinum is such a safe genus that boletivorous bipeds such as you and I 
can leave such dubious and esoteric distinctions to professional boletologists, and con- 
centrate on learning a few common "prototypes"-e.g., the L. manzanitae group that is 
so common with manzanita and madrone; the orange to reddish-brown-capped L. insigne- 
L. aurantiacum group that grows profusely wherever there are aspens; and the white- 
capped L. h%pus and dingy colored L. scabrum groups that favor birch. Three "proto- 
types" are described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Leccinum 
I. Pores and tubes yellow when fresh ............................................... 2 
I. Pores and tubes not yellow ...................................................... 3 
2. Scabers on stalk brown to blackish in age; cap yellow to ochraceous to brown or dark brown; 
found under hardwoods (mainly oak) in eastern and southern North America ......... 29 
2. Not as above; scabers reddish or paler, not darkening appreciably in age (see Boletus, p. 511) 
3. Base of stalk bright yellow and cap pink when fresh (but fading!) or cap and stalk chocolate- 
brown to purplish to dark blue-gray and pores chocolate-brown to dark gray to blackish at 
maturity; restricted to eastern North America .................... (see Tylop;lus, p. 532) 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Margin of cap lacking sterile flap(s) of tissue; cap white to buff, grayish, brown, dingy yellow- 
brown, olive-tinged, or even black when fresh ..................................... 5 
4. Cap pink to apricot-buff, orange, red, reddish-brown, orange-brown, or rusty-brown, or if 
colored as above then margin of young cap rimmed with a sterile flap of tissue 2-6 mm wide, the 
flap breaking up into segments as the cap expands, or disappearing ....... _ . . . . . . . . .. 12 
5. Cap white or whitish (but sometimes tinged buff, pinkish-buff, brown, or olive in age) .... 6 
5. Cap more highly or deeply colored (pink, orange, red, brown, gray, black, etc.) .......... 8 
6. Associated with aspen; known only from California L. californ;cum(see L. scabrum, p. 541) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Cap often olive-tinged in age, sometimes viscid; common under birch in northern and eastern 
North America .......................... L. holopus& others (see L. scabrum, p. 541) 
7. Not as above; cap not viscid; associated with hard woods (especially oak) in southern and 
eastern North America (especially common in the South) L. albellum(see L. scabrum, p. 541) 
8. Cap bluish-black to dark grayish-brown to black when fresh (but often fading in age); asso- 
ciated with aspen and birch in eastern North America .............................. 9 
8. Not as above; cap dull brown to gray-brown, dingy yellow-brown, olive-tinged, etc. ..... 10 
538 BOLET ACEAE 
9. Found with birch; flesh in stalk apex reddening when bruised L. snellii(see L. scab rum. p. 541) 
9. Not as above; associated with aspen ............. L. griseonigrum (see L. scab rum. p. 541) 
10. Cap yellow-brown when young becoming duller or grayer in age and usually prominently 
cracked (areolate); associated with oak and other hardwoods; especially common in south- 
eastern North America ............................ L. griseum(see L. scab rum. p.541) 
10. Not as above; cap not usually areolate; associated with birch or aspen ................. II 
II. Associated with birch; widely distributed .................... L. scabrum & others, p. 541 
II. Associated with aspen; common in the Sierra Nevada L. montanum(see L. scabrum. p. 541) 
12. Veil present, covering the young cap, then breaking up into whitish patches; associated with 
aspen in the Great Lakes region .......................................... L. potteri 
12. Not as above; veilabsent(but margin of cap may have sterile flap(s) of tissue) .......... 13 
13. Scabers on stalk dense and coal-black even in the button stage and black or dark brown in age; 
associated mainly with birch in eastern and northern North America, but also found with 
aspen in Southwest ....... L. atrostipitatum& L. testaceoscabrum(see L. insigne. p. 540) 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 14 
14. Associated with manzanita and madrone (and possibly toyon); cap often (but not always) viscid 
when moist; common in west coast states, especially Oregon and California ........... 15 
14. Associated with aspen, conifers, or other trees; cap viscid or dry; widely distributed but not 
found in coastal California .................................................... 18 
15. Cap dark red to brown or sometimes orange-brown ........ L. manzanitae & others, p. 539 
15. Cap bright orange to pink or apricot-buff ......................................... 16 
16. Scabers on stalk orange; bruised or cut flesh usually reddening somewhat before darkening .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. "aurantioscaber" (see L. manzanitae, p. 539) 
16. Not as above ................................................................. 17 
17. Cap pinkish to apricot; flesh not staining when bruised L. constans (see L. manzanitae, p. 539) 
17. Cap orange; flesh usually reddening or darkening L. armeniacum (see L. manzanitae, p. 539) 
18. Flesh (especially at juncture of cap and stalk) not changing color appreciably when cut or 
bruised, or staining only very slightly (but lower stalk may stain blue); found with conifers 19 
18. Flesh (especially at juncture of cap and stalk) staining purple-gray, bluish-gray, smoky, reddish, 
vinaceous, etc. when cut or bruised (but often slowly or erratically); lower stalk may stain 
blue as well ................................................................. 20 
19. Fruiting body medium-sized to very large (mature cap 10-30 cm broad); found in the Pacific 
Northwest ....................... L. ponderosum & others (see L. manzanitae. p.539) 
19. Fruiting body smaller (cap usually less than 10 cm broad); known from the Southwest and 
eastern North America ............................... ............... L. vulpinum 
20. Flesh staining purple-gray to bluish-gray or smoky (fuscous) directly when bruised or cut (but 
often staining slowly or erratically) ........................................... _. 21 
20. Flesh staining reddish, vinaceous, or burgundy when bruised or cut (but often staining purple- 
gray to bluish-gray or fuscous after that) ..... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 23 
21. Cap whitish when young but becoming brownish in age; stalk thick and club-shaped (thicker or 
swollen below); associated with western conifers (mainly in mountains) ...... L. clavatum 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Cap orange to rusty-orange to reddish when young (may become browner in age), or if brown 
when young then tubes often staining vinaceous or purplish when bruised L. insigne, p. 540 
22. Cap dark brown to dull reddish-brown or dull brown; tubes not staining vinaceous or purplish 
when bruised ....... _.. . . . . . ......... . .. . ... L. brunneum(see L. manzanitae. p. 539) 
23. Cap liver-colored to liver-brown and fibrillose to fibrillose-scaly; associated with conifers 
in the Pacific Northwest .... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L.Jibrillosum (see L. manzanitae. p. 539) 
23. Not as above; cap typically reddish to rusty-orange, brownish, or paler ................ 24 
24. Cap pale tan to pale dingy orange-brown or yellow-brown; associated with aspen and birch in 
northern and eastern North America, and in the Southwest ........... L. cinnamomeum 
24. Not as above; cap usually darker or brighter ...................................... 25 
25. Cap pinkish- or vinaceous-tinged when young; known only from Idaho under whitebark pine 
. . ... . . . .. . . .... ... . . .. . . . .......... .... . ........... . ..... . .... ... L. incarnatum 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
LECCINUM 
539 
26. Stalk more or less equal or narrowed near apex; associated mostly with aspen or pine; very 
widely distributed and common ............................................... 27 
26. Stalk distinctly and consistently club-shaped (thicker below); associated with conifers (mainly 
spruce and fir) in the Rocky Mountains and Southwest ............................ 28 
27. Cap typically reddish to orange to brick-red when young (often somewhat duller in age); asso- 
ciated with aspen and conifers (pine, etc.) ......... L. aurant;acum (see L. insigne, p.540) 
27. Cap somewhat similar in color to above or often duller even when young (brown to orange- 
brown, pale cinnamon, etc.); associated only with aspen . L. d;scolor(see L. insigne, p. 540) 
28. Cap fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly. . . . . . ... . .. .. _ . . . . .L. subalp;num(see L. insigne, p.540) 
28. Not as above ..... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . L.fallax(see L. insigne, p.540) 
29. Stalk often robust and swollen in the middle or below; cap yellow-brown to dark brown .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. croc;pod;um 
29. Stalk long and more or less equal; cap yellow-brown to ochre, often wrinkled or finely pitted 
in age ............................................................ L. rugos;ceps 
Leccinum manzanitae 
(Manzanita Bolete) 
Color Plate 145 
CAP (5) 7-20 (30) cm broad, rounded becoming convex and then broadly convex to plane 
or somewhat irregular; surface viscid when moist, practically smooth but usually with 
flattened fibrils, sometimes pitted in age; dark red to reddish-brown, or at times rusty- 
brown, rusty-orange, or brown (see comments); margin with flaps of sterile tissue when 
young, which break up into segments or disappear in age. Flesh thick, firm becoming soft 
at maturity, white, usually bruising smoky-gray to purple-gray or bluish-gray when cut, but 
often very slowly or only in certain areas. PORES and tubes whitish to pale olive, olive- 
gray, or grayish, usually deep dingy olive-buff in age; not blueing when bruised but often 
discoloring brown. STALK 8-20 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick at apex, equal or often thicker or 
swollen below, tough, fibrous, solid, white or whitish when fresh, but roughened by 
numerous small projecting scabers that are pallid at first but deep brown to black by 
maturity; lower portion often bruising (or already stained) bright blue to greenish-blue. 
SPORE PRINT brown; spores 13-19 x 3-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground, associated with man- 
zanita and madrone but often growing in mixed woods; known only from the west coast. 
It is common in our area in the fall and winter and is easily the most prevalent Leccinum in 
coastal California. It is seldom as prolific as B. edulis, but 1 have seen more than fifty 
prime fructifications under a patch of stunted madrones in the middle of a pasture. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and esteemed by many boletivores, but disappointingly bland in 
my experience. Mature or waterlogged specimens should be dried in order to concentrate 
their flavor and get rid of excess moisture. In one blind tasting of several local boletes (all 
fresh), it placed next to last-slightly behind the boring Boletus subtomentosus but ahead 
of the abominable Suillusfuscotomentosus. Michael Cabaniss, who did the line drawings 
for this book, says: "I have tried only dried slices, a form which is not the most visually 
stimulating. . . their consistency is rather grainy, giving the gustatory experience of dried 
earth or decomposed redwood chips. Dried slices are not even chewy; they break up readily 
when inserted into the oral cavity and are swallowed with great difficulty." 
COMMENTS: This large, impressive bolete is easily identified by its reddish to brown 
cap, hard tough stalk with dark scabers, and growth with manzanita and madrone (see 
photo on p. 39). It is the central species in a cluster of edible Leccinums that appear to 
associate only with ericaceous plants such as manzanita and madrone, and are 
consequently referred to collectively as "manzanita boletes." Their ranks include a 
common but unidentified (probably unnamed) species in our area with a bright orange to 
rusty-brown cap, orange scabers, and flesh that tends to stain reddish before turning 
fuscous (it is known locally as L. "aurantioscaber'); L. arbuticola, with reddish-staining 
,. 
.J\- 
''''.. 
 
.. 
i 
-.. 
.. :J. 
l-- 
:,.". , . .. 
" 
'to 
 
.... 
'a. 
f 
\ 
. '1 
711 
" 
.. 
. 
Leccinum manzanitae is a common associate of manzanita and madrone. Note the dark scabers on the 
stalk and the white flesh that stains fuse 0 us (smoky to smoky-purple) erratically when cut. 
flesh and a buff to pale brown cap; L. aeneum, with a non-viscid, oranger cap; L.largentii, 
possibly associated with toyon, with a dry cap, dark olive-gray pores, and very dense 
scabers; L. constans, with a pale pink to apricot-colored cap and unchanging flesh; L. 
armeniacum, a common species with an orangish cap and somewhat paler scabers (especially 
when young); and L. arctostaphylos, an Alaskan species associated with bearberry (a type of 
manzanita). Other species: L. ponderosum (CO LO R PLATE 146) is a sometimes massive 
species that looks like L. manzanitae, but typically has unchanging (or only slightly 
staining) flesh and is associated with conifers in the Pacific Northwest; it is quite tasty. 
L. fibrillosum also grows with conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but it has a fibrillose 
to fibrillose-scaly, liver-brown cap and its flesh stains reddish or vinaceous when cut. L. 
idahoensis has a roughened, liver-colored cap but does not stain appreciably when 
bruised, while L. brunneum has a dark brown to reddish-brown cap, stains directly to 
fuscous, and is quite common under aspen in the Sierra Nevada and Southwest. See also 
L. insigne and the species listed under it. 
Leccinum insigne (Aspen Bolete) Color Plate 147 
CAP (4) 6-17 cm broad, round to convex becoming broadly convex to nearly plane; surface 
dry or only slightly viscid when wet, smooth to minutely fibrillose or sometimes breaking 
up into small scales, in age sometimes pitted; color variable: bright orange to rusty-orange, 
reddish-orange, orange-brown, reddish-brown, or cinnamon (or in one form brown), 
often paler or duller (tan, brown, or dull orange-brown) in age; margin usually with flaps 
of sterile tissue, at least when young. Flesh thick, often rather soft in age, white, turning 
bluish-gray to purple-gray or fuscous when bruised or cut, but sometimes very slowly or 
erratically. PORES and tubes pallid or whitish when young, becoming olive-buff to 
grayish or dull yellowish-buff in age; not blueing when bruised (but may stain yellowish to 
brown, lavender, or vinaceous). STALK 6-15 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal or 
swollen below, dry, solid, rather tough and fibrous; white or whitish when fresh, but 
roughened by numerous small, projecting scabers which are initially pallid but become 
reddish-orange to brown and finally blackish by maturity; base or lower portion often 
staining or discoloring blue. SPORE PRINT brown to yellow-brown; spores 11-18)( 4-6 
microns, spindle-shaped to elongated-elliptical, smooth. 
540 
LECCINUM 
541 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious or in troops on ground in woods and at their 
edges; associated primarily if not exclusively with aspen, and common in the summer and 
early fall wherever aspen occurs. It is abundant in the Sierra Nevada (along with other 
Leccinums-see comments), and I have seen enormous fruitings in the Southwest and 
Rocky Mountains shortly after the blue columbines bloom. It is also abundant in Alaska. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and good. Though not the equal of Boletus edu/is. it is far better in 
flavor than its coastal counterpart, L. manzanitae. Like most Leccinums it darkens when 
cooked or dried. If this intimidates you, that's fine with me-I'll be more than happy to take 
them off your hands! 
COMMENTS: This common aspen-lover has many look-alikes in the genus Leccinum. 
most of which have passed under the name L. aurantiacum. They are very difficult to dis- 
tinguish without a microscope but all are apparently edible, though some may cause 
digestive upsets in sensitive individuals. L. insigne is recognized by its rusty.:.orange to 
reddish-hrown or brown cap, scabers on the stalk which darken in age, and growth with 
aspen. Some of its more common look-alikes include: L. aurantiacum, very similar and 
widespread under aspen and conifers, but sometimes larger and more robust and with 
flesh that distinctly stains burgundy-red before turning purplish- or bluish-gray; L. dis- 
color, very similar to L. aurantiacum. but growing only with aspen and with a slightly 
duller, browner, or more cinnamon-colored cap (see p. 537 for the critical microscopic 
difference); L. atrostipitatum and L. testaceoscabrum (the latter more brightly colored), 
with scabers that are black even in the button stage, associated mainly with birch and 
poisonous to some people; andL.Jallax andL. subalpinum, with a rusty to dark reddish 
cap and club-shaped stalk, associated with spruce and fir in the Rocky Mountains and 
Southwest. Also see L. manzanitae and the species discussed under it. 
Leccinum scabrum (Birch Bolete) 
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex to nearly plane or slightly depressed 
centrally; surface smooth, dry to slightly viscid when wet, dull brown to grayish-brown to 
dingy yellow-brown or tan (but often developing olive tints in age); margin lacking 
flaps of sterile tissue. Flesh thick, white, typically not staining when cut or discoloring 
slightly pinkish to brownish in the stalk. PORES and tubes dull whitish or pallid becoming 
dingy brownish in age; not blueing when bruised but sometimes staining slightly yellowish 
or ochre. STALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-1.5 (3) cm thick at apex, usually thicker below, 
firm, solid, white to grayish but roughened by numerous projecting tufted hairs (scabers) 
which soon become brownish to black at least over the upper portion; often staining blue- 
green below. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 14-20 )( 5-7 microns, spindle-shaped to 
elongated-elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups near or under birch in the summer and fall; 
common throughout the northern hemisphere wherever birch occurs. It has not been 
found in California, but could conceivably appear on lawns where birches have been 
planted (just like Lactarius torminosus). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice according to some, mediocre according to others; only 
firm specimens should be used. 
COMMENTS: The dingy brownish cap, dark scabers on the stalk, and association with 
birch are the principal field marks of this bolete. There are several similarly colored species 
that are best differentiated microscopically, but L. montanum ofthe Sierra Nevada can 
be distinguished by its different mycorrhizal mate-aspen. Other species:L. griseonigrum, 
associated with birch, is one of several species with a blackish to bluish-gray to dark brown 
cap (which, however, may bleach out in age); L. snellii also has a dark cap but favors aspen; L. 
alaskanum, common with birch in Alaska, has a dark and light, streaked or mottled cap. 
"- . \' 
... 
\ , \ t , 
.... 
. " 
.. . 
- 
II -1 
.....,j 
I . 
. .. . 
iii 
, 
Leccinum scab rum is one of many birch-loving Leccinums. Cap is dull colored (brown to tan, gray, or 
dingy olive) and the stalk is usually rather slender. 
There are also several species with a whitish or pallid cap, including: L. h%pus and L. 
rotundifo/iae, both fairly common in northern North America under birch, the former 
often developing olive tinges on the cap in age and the latter usually growing in bogs; 
and L. a/bellum, a slender-stemmed, dry-capped eastern species that favors southern oaks. 
L. ca/ifornicum hasa whitish to buff cap, but grows with aspen in the Sierra Nevada, while 
L. cretaceum has a pale buff cap and flesh that stains vinaceous-pink erratically. L. roseo- 
fracta has a dark brown cap and reddish- or pinkish-staining flesh and is associated with 
birch. Finally, there is L. griseum, an eastern species that somewhat resembles L. scab rum 
but usually has an areolate (cracked) cap in age and favors oak and other hardwoods over 
birch. All of these species lack the flaps of sterile tissue on the cap margin characteristic of 
L. insigne, L. manzanitae, and the species discussed under them. 
Left: Leccinum holopus, a white-capped birch-loving species. Note dark scabers on stalk. Right: 
Strobilomyces con/usus (see comments under S.floccopus, p. 543, for details). 
.. 
,, 
" ..,t\ -\'\ · 
"!-. . \r _ ' .., 
  .' .' ;.( 
 . . " -a)i"  : -4 .  . t  
.. .... !.,,f t' 
.. ..t (W> .  ' . *..t . 
,  .:-\..::. "  .. ", 1".t .c' 
"...:"-........._.....,,.... ......1:.... 
"'.':..:. ..t.. .11 
, · '" ..,..- .... at  \, !' 
", 
, 
 
, 
, 
.1 
 
/ 
(. 
. 
.. 
'" 
.... 
"'\ ..""". 
..... 
.,. 
I. 
-. 
" 
, ,- 
 
JII\ 
": 
... .. # 
", 
J 
.\ 
"Old Man of the Woods:' Strobilomycesfloccopus. is easily told by its shaggy black or gray fruiting 
body. Note cottony veil in young specimen at center and dark gray to black pores in older one at left. 
STROBILOMYCES 
THIS small genus is unique among the boletes in having a shaggy Or scaly gray to black 
fruiting body. gray to black pores when mature. and blackish-brown, reticulate or warty 
spores. It is so unique, in fact, that some mycologists place it in a separate family. A woolly 
veil is present when young, and may forma slightannulus(ring) on the stem. Since only one 
species is described here, a key is not included. 
Strobilomycesfloccopus (Old Man of the Woods) 
CAP 4-15 em broad, convex orcushion-shaped becoming broadlyconvex to plane; surface 
dry. shaggy from numerous soft, coarse. gray to grayish-brown or black scales on a paler 
background (but in age sometimes entirely blackish); margin usually hung with pallid to 
grayish veil remnants. Flesh whitish. usually turning reddish (often slowly) when bruised, 
then dark brownish to black. PORES fairly large, white or gray becoming darker gray to 
nearly black in age, usually bruising reddish, then brownish to black; tubes same color. 
ST ALK 5-12 em long, 1-2.5 em thick, equal or somewhat thicker toward base, solid, firm, 
dry, sheathed by large gray to grayish-black scales or shaggy material except atapex. VEIL 
pallid to grayish, woolly-cottony, leaving tissue on cap margin and usually one or mOre 
shaggy zones on stalk. SPORE PRINT black to blackish-brown; spores 9.5-15)( 8.5-12 
microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, reticulate. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or in groups in humus under hard woods( especially oak), 
sometimes also with conifers; common in the summer and fall in eastern North America, 
and according to Dr. Robert Gilbertson of the University of Arizona, also fairly common 
in southern Arizona. Its dark color makes it hard to see in the forest gloom. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not rated highly by most mushroom enthusiasts. I found it 
rather insipid although the texture was good. Only young specimens should be used. 
COMMENTS: This most distinctive of all the boletes is easily told by its shaggy gray to 
black fruiting body. In contrast to most boletes, it does not decay readily. As a result, it 
often seems more numerous than it actually is. Other species: S. strobi/aceus is a synonym. 
s. confusus of eastern North America is quite similar in color and overall aspect, but has 
more erect scales on the cap (see photo on p. 542) and spiny-warty to only partly reticulate 
spores; S. dryophilus is a southern species that is similarly colored in age but usually paler 
(cap pinkish-tan to brown) when young. 
543 
544 BOLET ACEAE 
GASTROBOLETUS (Gastroid Boletes) 
Small to medium-sized boletes usually buried or partially buried in humus. CAP convex to some- 
what irregular in shape. PORES variously colored; lUbes often irregularly arranged. i.e., not all 
vertical'-' oriented. STALK usually short. poorly developed. sometimes off-center. VEIL absent 
or present as persistent membrane that covers the tubes. SPORE PRINT unobtainable. Spores 
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth, brown to golden-brown under the microscope. 
THESE funky fungi have been modified or "reduced" from normal, everyday, upright 
boletes to abnormal, semi-underground, "decadent" ones. They resemble puffballs in that 
they do not forcibly discharge their spores, yet they retain a modicum of respectability in 
the form of a rudimentary stalk and definite tube layer arranged rather haphazardly 
within the misshapen cap. 
Gastroboletus is a small genus, with only one species common along the coast. How- 
ever, several species occur in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades-perhaps in response to 
the more severe and unpredictable weather. Fruiting underground helps the mushrooms 
to withstand the pend ulum-like hot-and-cold or warm-and-dry spells. None are known to 
be poisonous, yet none are known to be edible, since none are known to have been tried. 
Key to Gastroboletus 
I. Tubes and flesh blueing when bruised or cut ............... G. turbinatus & others, below 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Stalk relatively long (6-10 cm) and roughened by small scales or scabers; known only from 
eastern North America .............................................. G. scabrosus 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Cap whitish to buff or pale tan (sometimes slightly darker in age); tubes whitish to buff to olive- 
brown, or grayish-yellow; stalk averaging 2-5 cm thick ............ G. subalpinus, p. 545 
3. Not as above; cap pale or dark; tubes yellow to olive-yellow; flesh often yellow; stalk typically 
1.5 cm thick or less ............. G. suilloides& G. amyloideus(see G. lurbinarus, below) 
Gastroboletus turbinatus (Bogus Boletus; Gastroid Bolete) 
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to slightly depressed to irregular (misshapen); surface dry, 
minutely velvety, often pitted or wrinkled; color variable, but usually brown to reddish- 
brown to bright yellow with red or brown spots and stains. Flesh soft, yellow (but often 
reddish in base of stalk), typically bruising blue quickly. PORES pinkish to reddish, 
orange, or yellow, typically blueing quickly when bruised; tubes greenish-yellow to yellow, 
irregular and sinuous or disoriented (arranged at various angles rather than exclusively 
vertical). STALK 14 (7) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, often (but 
not always) protruding only a short distance below the tubes; solid, dry, yellow or with 
reddish streaks or granules or colored like the cap, sometimes reddish in old age and often 
reddish at the base. SPORE PRINT unobtainable; spores(9.5) 13.5-18 x 6.5-9.5 microns, 
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth, brown or golden under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods or at their edges, often 
partially buried; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the summer and fall under 
conifers in the Pacific Northwest, northern California, and the Sierra Nevada. I have 
found it twice in our area under live oak, in July and October (it is not necessarily rare, 
however-just easy to overlook). 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, like myself, and likely to remain so. 
CO MMENTS: A curiously wrought fungal afterthought, easily recognized by its irregular 
shape, semi-underground growth habit, and disoriented tube layer. Since the spores are 
not forcibly discharged, there is no need to elevate the cap above the ground. Just how 
the spores are spread is a mystery-perhaps with the help ofboletivorous bipeds such as I. 
1 
t 
t 
,., 
" 
 
., 
, . 
y;:.... < 
Left: Gastrobo/etus turbinatus. These two specimens have unusually well-developed stems, but the 
misshapen caps are typical. Right: Gastrobo/etus xerocomoides. This specimen has been sliced open 
to show the disoriented (haphazardly arranged) tube layer. (Herb Saylor) 
Many agarics have been "reduced" to gastroid forms (see Podaxales & Allies, p. 724); 
this is one instance in which a bolete has. Most of the other members of the genus have 
limited distributions. Several occur under conifers in the Sierra Nevada, including: 
G. xerocomo;des, which blues only slightly and has mostly truncate spores, and three 
species which do not blue when bruised: G. su;llo;des, with a brown cap; G. amylo;deus, 
with a yellow, buff, or reddish-spotted cap and amyloid spores; and G. subalpinus(below). 
Gastroboletus subalpinus (Gastroid King Bolete) 
CAP 5-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane to depressed or somewhat irregular; surface 
smooth to slightly velvety, often pitted and/ or wrinkled, not viscid but often covered with 
dirt and debris; whitish to buff or pale tan, sometimes darkening somewhat in age; margin 
extending downward and over the tubes as a thin white membrane that often disappears 
or breaks up in age. Flesh thick, soft, white or with yellow to olive discolorations; not 
blueing when bruised but sometimes staining pinkish. PORES pallid or whitish becoming 
grayish-yellow to buff and finally darkening to olive-brown, not blueing when bruised; 
tubes occasionally oriented vertically (especially near stalk) but mostly arranged hap- 
hazardly (at various angles); colored more or less like pores. STALK 2-6 cm long, 2-5 
cm thick, tapered downward or sometimes equal or even swollen below; solid, dry (but 
often dirty), white to buff, sometimes darkening to tan in age; base sometimes orange- 
yellow. SPORE PRINT unobtainable; spores 10-16 (18»( 4.5-6 (8) microns, elliptical to 
spindle-shaped, smooth, yellowish to brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff under mountain conifers in the late spring 
and summer; known only from the Sierra Nevada (where it is fairly common) but to be 
expected in other mountain ranges of the West. It develops underground but is often 
partially exposed (erumpent) at maturity. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This gastroid bolete is easily told from its brethren by its pale color and 
white, non-blueing flesh. It is likely to be mistaken for an aborted button of Boletusedulis, 
or more likely still, B. barrowsii. However, the disoriented tube layer, tendency to develop 
underground, and refusal to give a spore print are distinctive. The thin layer of tissue 
which at least partially covers the tubes of young specimens may represent a more elabo- 
rate version of the whitish pith that plugs the tubes of young B. edu/is and B. barrowsii. 
546 
BOLETIVORES 
THESE curious creatures, as their name suggests, are a major predator of Boletus edu/is. 
Since they are likely to be encountered by anyone who looks for mushrooms, it seems 
appropriate to describe them and include a few observations on their habits. 
Boletivores appear shortly after the onset of the rainy season, not coincidentally, at 
the same time Boletus edu/is appears. As a group they share a number of telltale traits 
which the experienced observer can discern at a glance. Their overall appearance is rather 
dingy and disheveled, their color drab. The cap is quite variable, ranging from depressed or 
deflated to uplifted, ecstatic, or inflated; its surface may be dry and distinctly tomentose 
or smooth and somewhat viscid. The flesh is normally pallid, becoming blue when bruised 
and exuding a red latex when cut, but it is most often obscured by a ragged woolly cuticle 
which is typically appressed above and baggy below. The stalk may be fleshy orcartilagi- 
nous, and more often than not, bent. The odor varies considerably from individual to 
individual; the taste is unpleasant, and a spore print is not obtainable, at least with normal 
methods. Boletivores are strictly terrestrial, and are invariably equipped with a long 
pointed stick, rapacious eye, and capacious bucket or "universal pail." At least two 
distinct species occur in our area; these are keyed below. 
Key to the Boletivores 
I. Retreating furtively when approached .................. Bolet;vorus clandest;nus, below 
I. Advancing boldly when approached ......... _ . . . . . . . . .. Bolet;vorus brutalosipes, below 
Boletivorus clandestinus is the more common of the two species. In addition to 
its secretive nature, it can be recognized (if you can get close enough!) by its tough, 
wizened stalk with a persistent, even permanent, stoop. The gait is also highly distinctive: 
curiously hitched and truncated, marvelously efficient, yet flailing and disjointed. The 
overall impression is that of a creature completely immersed in, yet not designed for, its 
element-like a kayaker trying to negotiate a rapids without wetting her back. When one 
is crept up on unawares, it can be heard alternately cooing to and swearing at its pro- 
spective prey in a vaguely familiar, yet unintelligible, tongue. This species occurs 
solitary to scattered or in small groups in the woods, butalwa ys near roads. There is usually 
a rusty pick-up truck, station wagon, or '65 Dodge Dart nearby, parked on the side 
of the road. Near the vehicle will be found one or more telltale ""middens"-neat piles of 
discarded tubes and wormy stalks. These resemble the feathers that remain from a freshly 
and systematically disemboweled bird-positive proof of boletivores' singular lust 
and unbridled craving for their quarry. 
Boletivorus brutalosipes (the ""Brutal-Footed Boletivore"), on the other hand, can be 
instantly recognized by its inquisitiveness, its bold advance and cavalier stance. In 
addition, the stalk is more fleshy than that of Boletivorus clandestinus-often swollen in 
the middle or even bulbous. The gait is decidedly more compact, the stride purposeful, 
yet completely arbitrary. When one comes rushing toward you, the net effect is that of a 
rapids intent upon wetting your back. Its insatiable greed for Boletusedu/is may be cleverly 
disguised by an amicable disposition and disarmingly friendly, fibrillose smile. But it will 
stop at nothing to achieve its ends, so never leave your basket unattended in the woods! 
If there are Boletus edu/is in it, they will be gone, and other species will be stepped on, 
masticated and regurgitated, or otherwise obliterated. Trampled fly amanitas (Amanita 
muscaria), incidentally, are a sure sign that brutal-footed boletivores are in the vicinity! 
Boletivorus brutalosipes is found in roughly the same habitats as Boletivorus clandestinus, 
'- 
, 
. 
" 
....... 
., 
A telltale "midden" left by Bo/etivorus clandestinus. 
but fortunately, is not as common. Invariably there is a rusty pick-up truck, station 
wagon, or '65 Dodge Dart nearby, parked in the middle of the road, and the discarded 
tubes and wormy stalks of its quarry are apt to be haphazardly strewn about rather than 
stacked in the "middens" characteristic of B. clandestinus. 
Boletivorus clandestinus is probably harmless, though I haven't been able to get close 
enough to find out. Boletivorus brutalosipes. on the other hand, has a well-deserved 
reputation for unprovoked acts of aggression. If you have some Boletus edulis in your 
basket, watch out! 
Between these extremes, as might be expected, "hybrids" occur, in addition to possibly 
autonomous species* (I have even seen a skinny, blonde, bare-stemmed variety). However, 
further study-and preferably, a critical comparison with European specimens-is 
necessary before a definitive and natural classification can be worked out. Both species 
occur throughout the range of Boletus edu/is. On weekends they are particularly abundant 
on lower Empire Grade above Santa Cruz, California, where their crafty cousin, Pseudo- 
boletivorus incognitus, is also in evidence. (The latter closely mimics Boletivorus clan des- 
tinus, but only pretends to be stalking Boletus edu/is-the true object of its desires being 
Amanita calyptrata.) 
As a final note, I might add that what boletivores do during the summer is a mystery. It 
has been suggested by one colleague of mine that they hibernate in the trunks of their cars. 
Another possibility is that they follow the bolete season up and down the coast. A third is 
that they migrate east - or west. But perhaps the most reasonable hypothesis is that they 
are like squirrels-they stash away what they gather in hedges, holes, nests, or sheds, 
for when the hunting is good, they have neither the time nor the inclination to eat. Then, 
in the summer, when they have nothing but time, they do nothing but eat. 
*In the newsletter of the Mycological Association of Washington, D.C., Anne Dow announces the discovery of 
a third species. Bo/eth'orus europaeus, in the Tetons of Wyoming. Like B. brwa/osipes. it "advances boldly when 
approached," but it "fills [rather than empties] the baskets [sic] of other boletivores" (or does she mean other 
bolete hunters?). I have never encountered such a species in California, but would welcome its introduction! 
547 
548 
APHYLLOPHORALES 
THIS large and diverse assemblage of fleshy-and not-so-fleshy-fungi includes all the 
Hymenomycetes (p. 57) with the exception of the agarics, boletes, and jelly fungi. The 
fruiting body is not normally gelatinous (as in the jelly fungi), there is no veil (as in many 
agancs and boletes), and the basidia are typically simple and clublike. The hymenium 
(spore-bearing surface) can be completely smooth and unspecialized as in the crust and 
parchment fungi, or it can take the form of tubes (the polypores), spines or "teeth" (the 
teeth fungi), upright clubs or branches (the coral fungi), or veins, wrinkles, or even rudi- 
mentary gills (the chanterelles). 
More than twenty families in the Aphyllophorales are now recognized, but many of 
the distinguishing criteria are esoteric. To facilitate field identification, the Aphyllo- 
phorales have been divided into five major groups (plus one aberrant species), keyed 
below. The coral fungi and chanterelles (Clavariaceae and Cantharellaceae) are placed 
in a separate order, the Cantharellales, by some taxonomists. 
Key to the Aphyllophorales 
I. Fruiting body with a layer of downward-pointing spines or "teeth" on underside of cap or with 
icicle-like spines hanging from branches or a cushion of tissue ......... Hydnaceae, p. 611 
I. Not as above(but fruiting body may have pores whose walls become torn or toothlike in age) 2 
2. Fruiting body with a layer oftubes( usually on underside of cap); tube mouths (pores) large and 
sinuous to small or very minute ......................... Polyporaceae & Allies, p. 549 
2. Not as above; tubes and pores absent (but spore-bearing surface may have veins that give it a 
somewhat poroid appearance) .................................................. 3 
3. Fruiting body consisting of a small (up to 2.5 cm) hollow, bladderlike cap mounted on a thin 
stalk; surface of cap smooth or wavy, whitish to yellowish or pale brownish; found on ground 
or wood in eastern North America, often in groups or clusters ........ Physalacria inflata 
3. Not as above; common and widely distributed _.......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . " 4 
4. Fruiting body usually bracketlike, crustlike, or sheetlike (i.e., usually without a stalk and often 
without a cap); usually growing on wood or herbaceous stems .. Stereaceae & Allies, p. 604 
4. Not as above; fruiting body upright, either simple and clublike or branched (coral- or bushlike) 
or with a cap (often vase-shaped) and stalk; usually on ground, sometimes on wood ..... 5 
5. Fruiting body with a cap (i.e., a clearly differentiated, usually flattened or depressed upper 
sterile surface) and stalk .................................... Cantharellaceae, p. 658 
5. Fruiting body clublike or branched or a rosette-like mass of flattened, white to creamy or tan 
lobes or segments (i.e., without a well-defined cap) ................. Clavariaceae, p. 630 
Bondarzewia montana (see description on p. 565). When these compound fruiting bodies were 
younger, they were whitish and resembled coral fungi (e.g., Sparassis) but for the presence of pores. 
As they mature, however, the upper lobes or "branches" broadened into tan or brown caps. This 
species is also capable of producing simple fruiting bodies (withjust one cap and stalk). 
\ --,.. 
... 
, 
... 
... : 
,.. 
. .\ 
.  
 
.,..'- 
.... 
".. 
), 
. 
.. . 
'. 
l 
'J" '. 
,ro. . 
.. ,- 
.. 
.:. 
.... 
. "''j' 
"- 
" ;. 
I 
-, 
...- --....' 
-:;:;_. . 
-._,- '-, 
 ,....' , 
'. .- " 
, .... - -- 
- 
...:". 
549 
Polypores and Bracket Fungi 
POLYPORACEAE& Allies 
1i:I 
 <f?J 
spores @ 
THIS large and exceedingly diverse group comes in a mind-boggling multiplicity of 
shapes and sizes and a pleasing array of gay decorator colors. As the name ..bracket fungi" 
implies, the fruiting body is most often bracketlike or shelflike. ..Polypore" (meaning 
..many-pored") describes the spore-producing tube layer which lines the underside ofthe 
cap. However, the tube mouths or pores are sometimes so minute that they're virtually 
invisible without a hand lens, and in some bracket fungi the pores are replaced by large 
mazelike pockets or even gills and in others the tube walls break up to form "teeth." The 
boletes are also equipped with tubes, but they are rapidly-decaying, mostly terrestrial fungi 
with a soft fleshy cap, central stem, and tubes that usually peel away easily from the cap. 
Polypores, in contrast, grow mostly on wood and have a tube layer which is scarcely 
detachable. The most familiar types fruit on logs and stumps in dense, shelving masses 
(or in ascending tiers if the tree is still standing). Others, called conks, are those hard, 
woody, hooflike growths you see on living trees. Still others are resupinate: with neither 
cap nor stem, they lie flat on the wood or incrust it. Those that grow on the ground often 
originate from roots or buried wood, and their stem is usually off-center or even lateral. 
Polypores are usually described as being tough, leathery, or woody. This is true of old 
specimens, but fresh individuals of some species, such as Phaeolus schweinitzii, are so soft 
and watery they can be wrung out likea sponge. Others, like the beefsteak fungus( Fistulina 
hepatica) and the sulfur shelf (Laetiporus sulphureus) ..weep" in wet weather, exuding 
colored water droplets. In contrast, Fomitopsis and Ganoderma can be woodier than the 
wood they feed on! 
Like most fungi, polypores fruit during the rainy season. However, mature fruiting 
bodies are so tough they tend to dry out instead of decaying. They may thus persist for 
months, even years. Some (e.g., Ganoderma, Fomitopsis, Phellinus) are actually 
perennial: rather than going to the trouble of manufacturing new fruiting bodies every 
year, they quite sensibly make use of existing resources by adding a new growth layer onto 
the old one. In this manner they may attain gargantuan dimensions-a 5 ft.)( 3 f1. specimen 
of Oxyporus nobilissimus from the Pacific Northwest weighed 300 pounds, undoubtedly 
a record for fleshy fungal fructifications! 
There is much more to polypores than their fruiting bodies, however. One cannot fully 
appreciate them without appreciating their work-that is, the chemical and structural 
changes they produce in their hosts. Polypores are absolutely indispensable to the forests 
of this world. They are the major group of wood-rotting fungi. Though they wreak 
economic havoc (15-20% of all standing timber in this country is said to be defective or 
unusable because of fungal decay, more than 90% of it caused by bracket fungi; struc- 
tural timber is also destroyed-in ships, mines, houses, bridges, etc.), the polypores 
should not be seen as enemies. Without them there would be no logging industry in the 
first place; every cut stump, felled log, and lopped-off limb would lie indefinitely on the 
forest floor, the woods would quickly become impenetrable, and new trees would have 
neither room nor nutrients to grow. 
In living trees the dead tissue (heartwood) in the center of the trunk is more susceptible 
to attack than the living tissue (sapwood) beneath the bark. Trees infected by heartrot may 
look outwardly sound, even when they are completely hollowed out inside. Sometimes 
the only clue to the pernicious presence of the rot is the fruiting body of the fungus! Since 
heartwood is largely dead, heart rot fungi are technically not parasites, but they can be 
deleterious-the infected trees are steadily weakened until they come crashing down at 
550 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
the slightest provocation. (So remember not to breathe too hard when picking polypores 
from a standing tree!) A few species, such as Helerobasidion annosum, are virulent 
parasites, destroying both the sapwood and the heartwood. 
Spores generally gain access to living trees through wounds in the bark. Trees bruised or 
battered by wind, nearby construction, careless machinery, or mindless vandalismC'Jody 
loves Judy") are especially vulnerable. Sometimes spores enter through holes bored by 
grubs or beetles, which may in turn munch on mycelium growing in their tunnels. 
Heart rot continues after the tree dries, and sap rot sets in. On fallen logs and branches 
you will find large clusters of colorful bracket fungi (e.g., Trameles versicolor and 
Trichaplum abielinus) which are digesting the sapwood. Several varieties may simul- 
taneously or successively inhabit the same log. Recently felled timber is also susceptible 
to attack. Only complete immersion in water will prevent infection. 
Wood is composed largely of dead, empty cells from which the fungus extracts nutrients. 
The cell walls have two principal constituents: cellulose, which makes the wood soft and 
tough, and lignin, which makes the wood hard and brittle. Fungi which digest the cellulose 
and leave the lignin behind are called carbonizing decays or brown rots because they 
render the wood dry, brittle, and darker than normal wood. Fungi which digest cellulose 
and lignin are called delignifying decays or white rots because they make the wood soft, 
spongy. and whiter than normal wood. Some species may completely hollow out the trunk 
or produce small, hollow pockets called pocket rot. The mycelial threads of bracket fungi 
can often be seen if the wood is broken open and examined closely. But if more than one 
species inhabit the same piece of wood, interpretation and diagnosis become complicated. 
Only repeated observation can tell you which ones produce which types of rot. 
The part of the tree infected should also be noted. Butt rots such as Phaeolus schweinilzii 
are confined to the roots and base of the tree and the fruiting bodies are often found on the 
ground. Trunk rots like Phellinus pini infect the entire trunk, while top rots such as 
Fomilopsis rosea inhabit the top of the trunk. 
Practically all of the polypores were originally lumped together in one giant genus, 
Polyporus. Dozens of families and genera have subsequently been proposed ina laudable 
effort to break the group down. As usual, however, there are widely divergent opinions on 
exactly how the task should be accomplished. The result is scholarly chaos, and the goal 
of arriving at one name for each kind of organism is still a long way off. To give youan idea 
of the difficulties faced by a prospective polyporologist (or any toadstool taxonomist) 
when she sets about consulting the literature on her pet polypore. here is a list of names 
given to Trameles occidemalis by various investigators: 
Polyporus oecidenlalis. Coriolus oecidentalis. Polystietus oecidentalis. Microporus 
oecidentalis. Coriolopsis oeeidentalis. Boletus serieeus, Trametes lanata, Polystictus 
lanatus. Microporus lanatus. Polyporus lanatus. Polyporus lenis. Polystietus lenis, 
Microporus lenis. Trametes wahlenbergii, Trametes sealaris, Polystietus sealaris. 
Polystietus eyclodes var. homoporus, Polystietus seorteus, Microporus seorteus, 
Polyporus gourliaei. Fomes gourliaei, Scindalma gour/iaei. Trametes hispidula. 
Trametes devexa, Polystietus malaehodermus, Polystietus substrigosus. Polyporus 
iIIotus. Polystietus iIIotus, Microporus iIIotus. Daedalea subeongener. Polystietus 
subeongener. Trametes heteromalla, Polystietus extensus. Polyporus badioluteseens 
. . . (I'm suddenly very grateful that I'm not a taxonomist!) 
Several hundred different polypores are known from North America; perhaps half of 
them occur in California. Unfortunately, the vast majority are too tough or too bitter 
(or too tough and too bitter) to eat. Two happy exceptions are the sulfur shelf (Laeliporus 
sulphureus), a succulent and unmistakable treat, and the beefsteak fungus (Fisrulina 
hepalica), which looks like a slab of steak. The hen of the woods, Grifolafrondosa, and its 
look-alike, G. umbel/ala, are also excellent, but do not seem to occur in our area. A few 
polypores, however, may actually be poisonous (e.g., Phaeolus schweinilzii), and even 
the edible species are difficult to digest unless cooked thoroughly. 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
551 
Since so few bracket fungi are edible, they are ignored by most people and barely 
mentioned in many popular mushroom books. As I am also ignored by most people (and 
have yet to be mentioned in any kind of book), I feel I have something vital in common 
with these unheralded but indispensable organisms. Therefore, a fairly extensive (but by 
no means comprehensive) treatment is offered here, in hopes that readers will at least learn 
to notice polypores, if not identify them. In the following key they are broken down into 
several groups based on field characters. If you have trouble with some of the choices, you 
can take solace in the fact that almost everyone finds the polypores difficult to identify! 
Key to the Polyporaceae & Allies 
l. Spore-bearing surface composed of closely-packed but discrete (separate) tubes that look like 
small pipes (use a hand lens if unsure and see photo at top of p. 553); flesh usually marbled 
or streaked when sectioned; fruiting body fleshy (not hard and woody) and often exuding a 
bloodlike juice when moist; found on or around hardwoods ............ Fistu/ina, p. 553 
l. Not as above; spore-bearing surface not composed of tubes, or if composed of tubes then the 
tubes forming a united layer (i.e., not discrete); fruiting body fleshy, tough, woody, etc. .. 2 
2. Fruiting body with a stalk(s) and cap(s) (but may appear fingerlike when emerging); found on 
ground, or if on wood then stalk usually central or off-center; cap and stalk not varnished 3 
2. Fruiting body knoblike, hooflike, bracketlike, shelflike, or crustlike; stalk absent, rudimentary, 
or attached to side or top of cap (or if central, then varnished); growing on wood or roots 4 
3. Flesh yellow-brown to tawny, rusty-brown, or brown (or sometimes dark yellow, butifso then 
associated with conifers); flesh darkening (staining red to vinaceous-brown or black) in potas- 
sium hydroxide (KOH); pores often colored like flesh; usually growing on ground (often 
around stumps or trees or on roots) ....... Phaeolus,lnonotus, Co/trida, & Allies, p. 566 
3. Not as above; flesh usually white or pallid to pale yellow when fresh (in one case yellow to olive- 
yellow, but if so then associated with hardwoods in eastern North America), but sometimes pale 
brownish or otherwise discolored in age or where bruised; pores usually colored like flesh when 
fresh; on wood or ground ...................... Po/yporus, A/batrellus, & Allies, p. 554 
4. Pore surface completely enclosed (hidden) by a tough membrane (i.e., fruiting body witha tube- 
lined internal cavity) or fruiting body growing on birch and possessing a blunt projecting 
margin that forms a "curb" around the pore surface .... Piptoporus& Cryptoporus, p. 584 
4. Pore surface exposed; not growing on birch, or if on birch then margin not curblike ...... 5 
5. Tube layer elastic and waxy to somewhat gelatinous when fresh, often separating easily from 
rest of fruiting body; pores usually pinkish to reddish-purple to blackish-purple (but occa- 
sionally white to bufO; cap white and hairy (when present) ......................... 19 
5. Not as above; pore surface differently colored and/ or not separable and elastic-gelatinous 6 
6. Fruiting body typically resupinate (i.e., lying flat on the wood or incrusting it), consisting of a 
simple layer oftubes; cap (sterile surface) absent or rudimentary ...." Poria & Allies, p. 602 
6. Fruiting body normally with a cap (upper sterile surface), but sometimes resupinate, especially 
if growing on the undersides of logs _............................................ 7 
7. Spore bearing surface composed of shallow veins which may form very broad "pores" or 
pits .............................................. (see Stereaceae & Allies, p. 604) 
7. Spore-bearing surface comprised of a true tube layer which forms minute to fairly large pores 
or spore-bearing surface with deep, elongated, mazelike pockets or even gills or "teeth" .. 8 
8. Underside of cap (spore-bearing surface) with gills .................................. 9 
8. Spore-bearing surface with tubes (pores), but the pores sometimes elongated or mazelike or 
breaking up to form small "teeth" .............................................. 10 
9. Gills appearing to be split lengthwise (along their edges), but actually composed of two adjacent 
plates which curl back in dry weather (see photos on p. 591) ....... Schizophy//um, p. 590 
9. Not as above .................................... Lenzites, Daeda/ea, & Allies, p. 586 
10. Fruiting body annual (with only one tube layer), the cap soon dark brown to blackish or bluish- 
black with a resinous, often roughened (sandpaper-like) and/ or radially wrinkled surface; 
fruiting body at first watery and often beaded with droplets, but tougher in age; pore surface 
whitish at first but aging or bruising darker (brownish); found on dead trees (logs, stumps, 
etc.); widespread but not common .............................. lschnoderma, p. 573 
10 Not with above features (but may have some of them); very common ................. 11 
.. 
Fistulina hepatica, a young specimen in which the cap is still velvety . It's easy to see whyit is sometimes 
called the "Ox Tongue:' A mature specimen is shown in the color plate. (Ralph Buchsbaum) 
11. Fruiting body punky, corky, or hard and woody. even when fresh, medium-sized to very large 
and often thick; usually perennial, i.e., with more than one tube layer, but if annual then often 
with a varnished surface crust ....... Ganoderma, Fomitopsis, Phellinus, & Allies, p. 574 
11. Not as above; fruiting body usually annual, small to medium-sized or if large then usually fleshy 
or spongy when young and fresh; if tough when fresh then cap usually fairly thin and lacking 
a highly varnished surface crust ................................................ 12 
12. Flesh soon red to orange, rusty-brown, tawny, yellow-brown, or dark brown and darkening 
(staining red to vinaceous-brown to black) in potassium hydroxide (KOH); pores variously 
colored (including red, orange, and mustard-yellow), but not rosy, purple, or bright sulfur- 
yellow). .................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . Phaeolus, lnonotus, Coltricia, & Allies, p. 566 
12. Not as above; flesh white to yellow, yellowish, beige, or sometimes light brown or salmon- 
tinged, not darkening in KOH. ................................................ 13 
13. Underside of cap with elongated pocketlike or mazelike pores (see photos on pp. 586, 588) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lenzites, Daedalea, & Allies, p. 586 
13. Not as above (but pores may break up to form "teeth") ............................. 14 
14. Fruiting body usually preceded by a small, often zoned cup- or saucerlike "nest" (0.5-2 cm 
broad) from which small whitish to yellowish shelves (fruiting bodies) develop; common on 
dead hard woods, especially elm, in eastern North America ........ Poronidulus conchifer 
14. Not as above ........................................:....................... 15 
15. Cap only 1-5 mm broad, with a stubby or knoblike stalk attached to the top; fruiting body white 
to brownish; common on hardwoods (rarely conifers) in eastern states Porodisculuspendulus 
15. Not as above; usually larger, widely distributed ................................... 16 
16. Pore surface white to buff to yellowish or bright sulfur-yellow when fresh (but may stain blackish 
or rusty-reddish in age or when bruised) ......................................... 17 
16. Pore surface red to orange, orange-yellow, lavender- or violet-tinged, rosy, gray, black, or 
brown, or soon becoming these colors ...................... _ Trametes & Allies, p. 592 
17. Pore surface bright sulfur-yellow when fresh (or rarely white, and if so then cap salmon-colored); 
cap orange-red to bright orange, bright yellow, or salmon-colored (but fading), usually at least 
6 cm broad when mature ........................................ Laetiporus, p. 572 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Cap thin and tough (but pliant) even when fresh, typically tearing easily in a radial direction; 
cap surface usually hairy or velvety and often concentrically zoned; often fruiting in large 
masses; very common, especially on hardwoods ............... Trametes & Allies, p. 592 
18. Cap soft, watery, spongy, or fleshy when fresh (but often tough in age), or if tough when fresh 
then not as above; cap often but not always thick, the surface sometimes hairy but not usually 
zoned; usually (but not always) found in smail numbers ...... Tyromyces& Allies, p. 597 
19. Pores averaging 4-8 per mm; found mainly on hardwoods Caloporus (=Gloeoporus) dichrous 
19. Pores averaging 2-4 per mm; tubes very shallow; found on dead conifers Skeletocutisamorpha 
.Several household cleaning agents (e.g., Drano, I teaspoon per  cup water) can be substituted for KGH, but 
unless the flesh is borderline in color (i.e., dark yellow or light brown) the test is usually unnecessary. If there's 
any doubt, simply try both choices! 
552 
... 
't 
, . 
 
t' 
,.; 
 
., 
oJ 
- .. 
., 
, 
I' 
. . 
, 
... 
.. 
.i  
. . 
" 
t 
. ... 
,,' 
. 
. . 
. . 
. 
LfCt: A close-up of the tubes in Fistu/ina hepatica. Note how bruised area is darker. Right: An even 
closer view, in which the tubes can be seen as discrete units or ..pipes"-a unique feature of Fistulina. 
FISTULINA 
THIS genus contains only one common species, the beefsteak fungus, F. hepatica. his not 
a ..true" polypore because the tubes, though packed together closely, are discrete units 
arranged like the bristles of a brush (see above photos). This character, which is best ob- 
served with a hand lens, has led polyporologists to give Fistu/ina a family of its own. 
Fistulina hepatica (Beefsteak Fungus; Ox Tongue) Color Plate 152 
FRUITING BODY annual, at first knoblike, then cushion- or shelflike juicy when 
fresh, soft to fairly firm. CAP 7-30 cm broad and 2-6cm thick when mature, tongue-shaped 
or fan-shaped surface minutely roughened and suedelike or velvety, but often gelatinous 
when wet, firm or very soft and spongy, sometimes knobby orange-buff to reddish-orange 
to pinkish, reddish-brown, dark red, or liver-colored margin often lobed. Flesh thick, 
soft and watery when fresh and oozing with 4ark reddish juice whitish to grayish, olive- 
brown, or reddish, streaked or marbled horizontally with paler veins (usually reddening 
after standing) taste rather sour or strongly acidic. PO RES 1-3 per mm. circular, whitish 
to yellowish, buff, or pale flesh-color, becoming dark reddish-brown when bruised or in 
old age tubes 10-15 mm long, closely packed but discrete (their walls not joined). STALK 
absent, or if present then lateral and rather short, 2-6 (10) cm long, 1-4 cm thick tougher 
than the cap but continous with it and colored similarly, firm. SPORE PRINT pinkish- 
salmon to pale ochre or pale rusty-brown; spores 4-6 )( 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or sometimes several together at the bases of hardwoods and on 
stumps, especially of chestnut and oak; widely distributed, but most common in Europe 
and eastern North America. In coastal California it seems to grow exclusively onchinqua- 
pin (a close relative of chestnut) in the fall and winter. In my experience it is not common, 
but Chroogomphus-king Ciro Milazzo discovered one large local fruiting of over thirty 
individuals on some recently cut chinquapin stumps. It causes a serious carbonizing decay 
in its host. The rich brown hue it imparts to the wood is prized by cabinetmakers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. The strong sour taste is displeasing to some, esteemed by others. 
Parboiling may remove some of the sourness as well as some of the nutrients (it is rich in 
vitamin C). I like to marinate thin, raw slices in seasoned vinegar and olive oil. 
553 
.  
'\ 
. 
" 
. 
- 
.. 
,." 
....-;- 
 
I 
;.1 " 
'"11 
. ., 
. j" J 
. 't J 
., 
Fistu/ina hepatica, sliced open to show the streaked, meatlike flesh. Fresh specimens even exude a 
bloodlike juice. For other views of this photogenic fungus, see color plate and photos on pp. 552-553. 
COMMENTS: This remarkable fungus looks like a slab of raw meat, especially after it 
is sliced open and starts oozing "blood." The streaked or marbled flesh is very distinctive, 
plus it never becomes as tough as other polypores and bracket fungi. The fruiting bodies 
seem to develop very slowly and are rarely attacked by maggots. Other species: Pseudo- 
fistulina radicata (=F. pallida) of eastern North America and Mexico also has discrete 
tubes, but the cap is grayish-brown to pale reddish and the stalk is usually longer(to 15 cm) 
and somewhat rooting. It is edible also. 
POL YPORUS, ALBATRELLUS, & Allies 
(Stalked Polypores) 
Fruiting body annual, fleshy to tough, with a cap and stalk or sometimes compound (with many 
caps and stalks); growing on ground or on wood. CAP convex to plane, depressed, or misshapen. 
PORES large to very minute, often decurrent on the stalk; tubes usually not cleanly separable from 
the cap. STALK central to off-center or sometimes lateral, usually well-developed but sometimes 
stubby. SPORE PRINT usually white (when obtainable), but sometimes brownish in Boletopsis. 
Spores smooth, warty, or spiny; amyloid in Bondarzewia. otherwise not amyloid. 
THESE are fleshy to rather tough polypores with a clearly defined cap, pore surface, 
and stalk. As such they are easy to recognize- the presence of a stalk separates them from 
most other polypores, and confusion with the boletes is unlikely because boletes ha vea soft, 
fleshy texture, centrl stalk, and tubes which are usually longer (deeper) and peel away 
easily from the cap (and often from each other). 
The genus Polyporus once embraced practically all the polypores or woody pore fungi. 
The "splitters" ha ve steadily whittled a way at it, however, so that it now contains a modest 
number of stalked polypores with white, cylindrical, smooth, non-amyloid spores. Most 
of its species grow on dead hard woods, but some arise from roots or underground "tubers" 
and thus may appear terrestrial. Albatrel/us, on the other hand, is one of the few groups 
of polypores that is truly terrestrial, fruiting in sometimes massive numbers under both 
hardwoods and conifers. Microscopically it differs from Polyporus in having elliptical 
to nearly round spores which mayor may not be amyloid. 
To facilitate identification, a number of other stalked polypores are treated here as well, 
though their similarity to Polyporus and Albatrel/us may be entirely superficial. These 
include: BolelOpsis, terrestrial like Albatrel/us, but with warted spores; Heteroporus, with 
a frequently misshapen fruiting body thatis often entirely covered with pores; Grifola, with 
a compound, intricately branched fruiting body that gives rise to many small overlapping 
caps; and Bondarzewia, with a frequently compound fruiting body and warted amyloid 
554 
POLYPORUS, ALBATRELLUS, & ALLIES 
555 
spores. The latter two genera can be reminiscent of coral fungi (especially Sparassis), but 
are easily differentiated by the presence of pores on the underside of each cap or "lobe." 
Tender specimens of Grifola are delicious when thoroughly cooked, but most of the 
other polypors treated here are too tough or chewy to be more than marginally edible. 
None are known to be dangerously poisonous, however. Fourteen species are described 
here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Polyporus, Albatrellus, & Allies 
1. Fruiting body often misshapen and covered in various areas (or almost entirely) by pores; 
pore surface usually reddening when handled ............... Heteroporus b;ennis, p. 566 
I. Pores confined to underside of cap (or decurrent on stalk), reddening in only a few cases .. 2 
2. Fruiting body wood-inhabiting (on wood or roots or near the bases of trees or stumps) ... 3 
2. Fruiting body truly terrestrial (growing on ground) ................................ 13 
3. Stalk black or with a black base, and only one cap; pores minute (averaging 3-7 per mm) " 4 
3. Stalk not black at base, or if so then pores larger and/ or fruiting body compound ........ 5 
4. Cap reddish-brown to chestnut-brown to blackish; stalk usually black .... P. bad;us, p. 562 
4. Cap tan to ochre or paler; stalk often black only at base ........ P. e/egans & others, p. 562 
5. Flesh very dense and htavy, becoming bone-hard as it dries out; cap(s) white to gray, buff, or 
even brownish, 2-10 cm broad, often in fused clusters but not truly compound; pores white to 
yellowish; found on dead conifers or rarely birch; not common Osteina obducta (=0. ossea) 
5. Not as above (larger or with different habitat or color, etc.); not drying bone-hard ....... 6 
6. Fruiting body with one cap, small to medium-sized (cap usually 1-8 cm broad), flesh usually 
2 mm thick or less; stalk usually less than 6 mm thick; found on wood above the ground . 7 
6. Not as above; if growing on wood above ground then fruiting body larger or compound .. 9 
7. Margin of cap often ciliate (fringed with hairs); pores averaging about 1 mm broad, usually 
hexagonal; stalk typically central ............................... P. arcu/arius, p. 563 
7. Margin of cap not ciliate; pores usually larger or smaller than above; stalk central to lateral 8 
8. Pores large (up to 3 mm), diamond-shaped or hexagonal, usually arranged in radiating rows; stalk 
very short, often lateral ............................ P. mor; (see P. arcularius. p. 563) 
8. Not as above; pores smaller; stalk central to lateral; stalk short or long ................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P. bruma/;s and M;croporellus spp. (see P. arcularius. p. 563) 
9. Pores minute (3-7 per mm); pore surface and/ or margin of cap staining gray to dark brown or 
black when bruised or dried; fruiting bodies often quite large; found at bases of hardwoods in 
eastern North America .......... Merip;/us giganteus(see Bondarzewia montana. p. 565) 
9. Not with above features ....................................................... 10 
10. Fruiting body compound, i.e., with many small (mostly 2-7 cm broad) overlapping caps or 
segments arising from a common, often branched base; fairly common in eastern North 
America, especially with hardwoods, but rare in the West; spores smooth. . . . . . . . . . . .. II 
10. Not as above; fruiting body not compound, or if so then mature caps larger(5 cm broad or more) 
or fewer or habitat different; spores smooth or ornamented ........................ 12 
II. Fruiting body white or tinged cream; fertile surface smooth, toothed, or with pores; growing in 
rosettes on hardwood stumps or roots in tropics and Gulf Coast Hydnopo/yporus pa/matus 
II. Not with above features ....................................................... 28 
12. Pores minute (24 per mm); pore surface sulfur-yellow, or if not then cap salmon-colored or 
pinkish or found in Southeast and cap buff to pinkish- or red-brown (see Laetiporus, p. 572) 
12. Pores larger, or if small then not as above ........................................ 22 
13. Cap blue to blue-gray to bluish-green (but often salmon-,ochre-, or rusty-stained in age) . 14 
13. Cap not bluish when fresh (but may be greenish) .................................. 15 
14. Pore surface white when fresh; found in western North America .......... A.f/ettii, p. 558 
14. Pore surface bluish when fresh; found in eastern states A. caeru/eoporus(see A.flettii. p. 558) 
15. Cap yellowish to yellow-brown to greenish or brownish-stained, with matted hairs or prominent 
scales in age; pores usually staining greenish, averaging 0 .5-2 per mm A. ellis;; & others, p. 559 
15. Not as above; differently colored and/ or cap not hairy-scaly ........................ 16 
16. Spore print olive-brown to brown; flesh and pores not white; pores yellow to greenish, a veraging 
3 orless per mm; associated with hardwoods (especially ash and alder) (see Boletaceae, p.488) 
16. Not as above; spore print whitish and/ or flesh white before exposure or differently colored 17 
556 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
17 . Found under eastern hard woods ( occasionally conifers); pores 1-3 per mm, yellow to greenish or 
if white then cap yellowish, ochre, or greenish; spores smooth A. cristatus(see A. e//isii. p.559) 
17. Not as above; differently colored or pores smaller or spores not smooth ............... 18 
18. Fruiting bod y with many yellowish petal-shaped caps arising from a common base; found under 
western conifers; apparently rare. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. A. dispansus 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
19. Cap and stalk grayish to purple-gray, black, vinaceous, or with olive, pinkish, or brownish tones 
(sometimes whitish when young), but not typically yellow-stained; cap often with a somewhat 
streaked appearance; pores small ( 14 per mm), white when fresh but often discoloring grayish, 
vinaceous, etc., in age and usually staining olive to black in KO H; spores angular-warty under 
the microscope, not amyloid .................... Boletopsis subsquamosa group. below 
19. Not as above; pores larger and/ or cap and stalk differently colored and/ ordevelopingyellowish 
tones in age or after handling; spores smooth and/ or amyloid ...................... 20 
20. Pores small (2-5 per mm); cap white to yellow, pinkish-tan, or pinkish-cinnamon ( occasionally 
darker), not hairy or scaly (but may be cracked); stalk not blackish at base; tuber absent 21 
20. Not as above; pores larger or stalk darker or tuber present or cap hairy or scaly, etc. ..... 22 
21. Cap or entire fruiting body often developing reddish or orangish stains in age or when dried; 
taste usually bitter ........................ A. corifluens & others (see A. ovinus. p. 557) 
21. Not as above; taste mild or bitter......................... ... A. ovinus& others, p. 557 
22. Cap and stalk brown to grayish-brown and covered with small hairs; taste very bitter ( chew on a 
small piece of cap); odor sometimes (but not always!) like iodine; stalk with neither a tuber nor 
a gnarly rooting base; spores smooth; found in western North America. . . . P. hirtus, p. 560 
22. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
23. Fruiting body arising from a large, swollen, brown to black underground "tuber" (sclerotium); 
cap often with fibrils or scales; spores smooth ..................... P. tuberaster, p. 563 
23. Not as above (but fruiting body may have a rooting base); spores smooth or warted ..... 24 
24. Found at or near bases of trees or stumps; fruiting bodies often clustered orcompound(withone 
to many caps), usually arising from a gnarly, rooting base; caps pallid to tan, ochre, or brown, 
but usually lacking darker scales; spores with amyloid warts or spines ................ 29 
24. Not as above; fruiting body typically not compound (but may be clustered); spores smooth 25 
25. Stalk with a black rooting base; pores usually 2-3 permm P. radicatus(see P. tuberaster, p.563) 
25. Not with above features ....................................................... 26 
26. Cap dark brown to brown, reddish-brown, or pinkish-brown; terrestrial A. pescaprae, p. 560 
26. Found on wood, or if terrestrial then cap usually paler, oranger, or yellower than above . 27 
27. Cap with brown scales, often large; pores often more than I mm in widest dimension; stalk often 
blackish or dark brown at base; found on wood, widespread but especially common in eastern 
North America .............................. P. squamosus(see P. decurrens, p. 561) 
27. Not as above; usually medium-sized; if found on wood then pores averaging 1 mm wide or 
smaller; cap smooth or scaly; stalk base not normally blackish P. decurrens& others, p. 561 
28. Caps usually spoon- or fan-shaped; stalks off-center to lateral ..... Grifolafrondosa, p. 564 
28. Caps more or less circular; stalks central . . . . . . Grifola umbel/ata (see G. frondosa, p. 564) 
29. Each fruiting body with one to many caps; favoring conifers .. Bondarzewia montana, p. 565 
29. Favoring hardwoods, with one to several caps Bondarzewia berkeleyi(see B. montana, p. 565) 
Boletopsis subsquamosa group (Kurokawa) 
CAP 4-15 (20) em broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly depressed; circular in outline 
to somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth to fibrillose or breaking up into small scales, 
especially at center; color variable: dingy whitish to gray, purple-gray, bluish-gray, 
yinaceous-tinged, or with olive, pinkish, brownish, or even black tones (usually darker 
in age), often with a somewhat streaked appearance; margin incurved at first, often wavy or 
lobed. Flesh thick, firm, white or tinged variously with cap colors; taste mild to bitter. 
PORES small or minute (1-5 per mm), usually white when fresh and young but soon 
discolored grayish, vinaceous-buff, brownish, etc.; tubes 2-4 mm long, usually at least 
.. 
'" 
J " 
, 
BolelOpsis subsquamosa is variable in color, but usually quite dark (gray, black, purplish, etc.) in age. 
somewhat decurrent. ST ALK (2) 4-13 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, central or off -center, eq ual or 
with a narrowed base, solid, smooth; whitish or colored like the cap or pores. SPORE 
PRINT white to pale brown; spores 4-7 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, but 
distinctly angular-warty. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and 
conifers; widely distributed. In our area it is fairly common in the fall and winter under 
tanoak and madrone; to the north it often fruits in coastal sand dunes under pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but often bitter. It is esteemed by the Japanese, who usually soak it 
in brine to remove the bitterness. 
COMMENTS: Like A/hatTel/us ovinus, this polypore is sometimes mistaken for a bolete 
because of its frequently central, well-developed stalk and terrestrial growth habit. 
However, the tube layer cannot easily be peeled from the cap and the overall shape is quite 
different. The color of the fruiting body (especially the cap) is extremely variable, leading 
to the naming of several different "species," including B. leucomelas, with a bluish-black 
to black cap, and B. griseus, with a grayish cap. These color forms appear to intergrade, 
however, and the common one in our area can be bluish-gray to purplish, pinkish-purple, 
or blackish, depending on season, temperature, and exposure to sunlight. The warty- 
angular spores are the critical microscopic feature. Albatrellus avellaneus (often listed 
as a variety of A. ovinus) can be similar in color but stains yellow and has smooth spores. 
A/batre//us ovinus (Sheep Polypore) 
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, circular in outline or irregular; convex becoming plane or slightly 
depressed; surface dry, unpolished, smooth or breaking into scales in age; usually whitish 
at first, but often yellow, ochre, buff, pinkish, or tan (especially at center) in age, orin some 
forms purplish to purple-gray throughout; margin often wavy. Flesh thick, white or yellow, 
firm and rather tough. PORES minute (2-4 per mm), white but often becoming yellow 
or yeJIowish in age or when bruised; tubes shallow (1-2 mm long), usually decurrent. 
STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, central or slightly off-center, equal or enlarged 
below with a narrowed base; solid, firm, whitish or tinged cap color, but sometimes staining 
pinkish. SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-4.5 )( 2.5-3.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, 
smooth, not amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious, sometimes in fused masses, on ground 
in mixed woods and under conifers; widely distributed. It is very abundant in the Rocky 
Mountains in the late summer under spruce and I have also seen impressive fruitings in 
Maine. In our area it is locally common under manzanita in the faJI and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when cooked weJI, and according to European sources, fairly good. 
Large quantities can have laxative effects, however, and material I tested was rather slimy 
("okraceous") when cooked. 
557 
. ... 
"". 
... . 
......... 
:.  : 
, .'. 
.'. 
.  
;., 
( 
. . 
'" 
'" 
. 
..,. 
.- . 
, 
.... 
,. 
Two farflung terrestrial polypores. Left: Albatrel/us ovinus, with a white to tan or yellowish cap. 
Right: Albatrel/us pescaprae (see p. 560), with a scaly brown cap and well-developed stalk. 
COMMENTS: This widespread Albatrel/us is variable in color (the purplish-capped 
form is often called A. avellaneus), but can usually be recognized by the yellow tints that 
develop in age or after handling. The pores are sometimes so tiny that the pore surface may 
appear completely smooth. Because of its terrestrial habit this polypore is sometimes 
mistaken for a bolete, but is much tougher and does not have detachable tubes. Other 
species: A. confluens is a very similar, widespread species which becomes orange to 
pinkish-cinnamon in age or upon drying and has slightly larger, weakly amyloid spores 
and a bitter taste; A. similis, reported from Arizona, is also similar, but has distinctly amy- 
loid spores; A. peckianus is an eastern beech-lover with a yellow to cinnamon-buff cap. 
A lbatrellus flettU 
(Blue-Capped Polyp ore) 
CAP 5-20 or more cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, 
blue to blue-gray or sometimes blue-green, but developing ochraceous, salmon, or rusty 
stains in age; margin at first incurved, often lobed or wavy. Flesh thick, firm and rather 
tough, white. PORES fairly small (1-4 per mm). white. but often becoming torn and 
developing salmon or ochraceous stains in age or upon drying; tubes 1-7 mm long, 
Albatrel/usflettii. The blue-gray to blue-green cap, white pore surface (the pores are too tiny to see 
here), and well-developed stalk distinguish this beautiful species. (Ralph Buchsbaum) 
..... 
; A' 
.... 
. 
# , ,t, ' 
.. 
 
....1'4.. 
. . 
" 
.. 
ALBATRELLUS 
559 
decurrent. STALK 5-15cmlong,(I) 1.5-4cm thick, central or off-center, equal orthickerat 
either end, white to pale bluish-gray, or aging dingy ochraceous to reddish; solid, firm. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 3.5-4 )( 2.5-3 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, 
weakly amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground in mixed woods and 
under conifers; known only from western North America. I have found it under knobcone 
pine in the fall and winter, but it seems to be quite rare in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It has been sold commercially in northern California, but I haven't 
tried it. If it's anything like A. ovinus. then it isn't worth collecting. 
COMMENTS: The unusual blue to blue-gray cap color contrasts nicely with the white 
pores to set this beautiful terrestrial polypore apart. Dingy ochraceous to rusty-ochraceous 
stains develop in age, but there are almost always vestiges of blue-green or blue somewhere 
on the cap. Otherspecies:A. caeruleoporusof eastern N orth America is similar, but entirely 
indigo-blue to blue-gray (including the pores). 
A Ihatrellus ellisii 
(Greening Goat's Foot) 
CAP 8-25 cm or more broad, convex becoming plane, wavy, or depressed; surface dry, 
at first hairy or plushlike but the hairs often matted in age or grouping to form coarse 
scales; greenish to sulfur-yellow or yellow-brown (often a mixture of colors), sometimes 
with darker brown shades or stains in age; margin often wavy and at first inrolled. Flesh 
thick, firm, white, sometimes bruising greenish slowly. PORES 0.5-2 mm in diameter, 
white, usually staining greenish or yellow-green when bruised or becoming yellowish to 
dingy greenish in old age; tubes 2-6 mm long, often decurrent. STALK 3-12 cm long or 
more, 2-6 cm thick, usually off-center or lateral, solid, tough, equal or thicker at either 
end; usually colored more or less like cap. SPO RE PRINT white; spores 8-9)( 5-7 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or infused clusters on ground in woods; widely 
distributed. I t favors conifers and is especially common in the mountains of western North 
America. I have seen huge fruitings in the late summer and fall in the Cascades and Sierra 
Nevada, but in our area it is supplanted by A. pescaprae. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, with a mild fla vor and pleasantly chewy texture. Care must be taken 
to simmer it slowly and thoroughly or it will toughen. 
Albatrel/us ellis;;. This terrestrial species is especially common under conifers in the Pacific North- 
west and Sierra Nevada. Note hairy-scaly cap. The pore surface usually stains greenish when bruised. 
" 
. ...:,...... 
) 
+c.' .., 
.\;." '\ 
... ... 
r 
 
560 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: Also known asS cutiger ellisii, this impressive conifer-lover is easily told by 
its yellow-green to yellow-brown color, fairly large size, growth on the ground, and ten- 
dency to stain greenish (especially the pores). Its close relative, A. pescaprae, is browner or 
redder in color and more southern in distribution. A. sylvestris is a somewhat similar 
species with a smoky-olive or darker pore surface and roughened spores. A. cristatus of 
eastern North America is similar in color but has a less hairy cap and favors hardwoods. 
A lbatrellus pescaprae (Goat's Foot) 
CAP (2.5) 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, covered with 
fine fibrils which form small, dense scales or sometimes a plush( especially toward center); 
dark brown to brown, reddish-brown, or pinkish-brown; margin often deeply indented. 
Flesh thick, fairly tough, white, bruising pinkish slowly; taste mild. PORES large, angular, 
1-2 mm or more in diameter ( or length); white to yellowish or with greenish stains, some- 
times becoming pinkish in age; tubes 2-5 mm long, often decurrent. STALK 2.5-8 cm 
long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, solid, usually enlarged below (sometimes several arising from a 
common base); occasionally central, but usually off-center to lateral; white to yellowish or 
in age brownish. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 x 5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clumps on ground in woods; widely distributed, but 
more southern than A. el/isii. In our area it is not uncommon in mixed woods and under 
tanoak and madrone, especially in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, at least according to European sources; I haven't tried it. Young 
caps are said to be quite tasty (though chewy) if cooked thoroughly. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Scutiger pescaprae, this terrestrial polypore can be told 
by its reddish-brown to brown, densely scaly cap plus its large pores, well-developed stem 
(see photo at top of p. 558), and mild taste. Bondarzewia species are somewhat similar, 
but have spiny spores and less scaly caps and are not normally yellowish- or greenish- 
stained. Polyporus hirtus is also somewhat similar, but has a bitter taste. 
Polyporus hirtus (Bitter Polypore; Iodine Polypore) 
CAP 5-18 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, covered with 
minute short, stiff, erect or matted hairs; uniformly brown to dark brown or grayish- 
brown. Flesh thick, white, firm and rather tough; taste very bitter (but often latently). 
PORES white to creamy, drying yellowish, 1-2 per mm; tubes 2 mm long, adnate to 
decurrent. STALK 2-10 cm long, 0.7-3 cm thick, usually lateral or off-center; equal or 
tapering downward, hairy and colored like ca p; solid, firm, rather tough. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 12-17 x 4.5 microns, spindle-shaped or cylindrical ("boletoid"), smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on ground, around old stumps and trees (especially 
conifers), sometimes also on wood (often buried); northern North America. It is not un- 
common in our area in the fall and winter, particularly in mixed woods of tanoak and 
redwood. It is also fairly common in the Pacific Northwest. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible. If you boil it for several days and change the water frequently, you 
might remove the bitter taste, but you would remove everything else as well! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Albatrellus hirtus and Scutiger hirtus, this species is the 
most common terrestrial polypore in our area, but is by no means numerous. The evenly 
colored brown hairy cap plus the white pores, bitter taste, and presence of a stalk are good 
fieldmarks (see photos at top of next page). According to mycologist Daniel Stuntz, speci- 
mens in the Pacific Northwest emit an iodine odor soon after being picked, but I have not 
detected such an odor in local material. Bondarzewia montana can be similar when it 
doesn't grow in clusters, but has warted amyloid spores and is not as bitter-tasting. 
. 
.. 
'- 
...... 
'-: 
.. 
 
,.., 
"- 
.., 
". i 
.. 
"10.... 
... 
Polyporus hirtus. Left: Top view showing hairy brown cap. Right: Underside, showing white pores. 
Polyporus decurrens 
CAP 4-14 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, yellowish to yellow- 
brown to ochre or dull orange (rarely reddish-brown), with darker (usually brown) erect 
fibrillose scales which become flattened in age. Flesh thick, white, tough. PORES fairly 
large (0.5-2 mm in diameter), angular or becoming torn or toothlike in age, white, but 
sometimes discoloring when dried; tubes 2-6 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK 2-10 
cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker at either end, solid, tough; white or somewhat 
brownish, usually reticulate above from the decurrent tube walls. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 10-18 )( 4-6 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups or tufts on the ground (usually originating from 
buried wood) or sometimes on dead wood, fall through spring; known from California, 
occasional. It favors hardwoods, but I have found it in a variety of habitats. It is the most 
common terrestrial polypore of southern California. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. The closely related P. squamosus (see comments) is edible 
when thoroughly cooked, but is thoroughly mediocre. 
COMMENTS: The dull orange to yellowish-brown to ochre scaly cap with fairly large 
decurrent pores distinguish this species from A/barrel/us pescaprae and others. It is also 
known as P. mcmurphy;. The "Dryad Saddle," P. squamosus, is a better-known, closely 
Polyporus decurrens has large pores, a scaly cap, and mayor may not be terrestrial. P. squamosus 
(not illustrated) is a similar but larger wood-inhabiting species. 
"-- 
.... 
..... . 
" 
. ..... 
L < 
562 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
related species. It is larger (cap 6-30 (60) cm broad and stalk up to 5 cm thick) and paler 
with dense, flattened brown to dark brown scales (but may become darker brown overall 
in age) and very large pores (1-10 mm each in largest dimension). It usually grows solitary 
or clustered on hardwoods (often living) rather than on the ground and its stem, when 
well-developed, usually has a black base. In North America it is most common east ofthe 
Rocky Mountains, but occurs occasionally in Washington and California. (I've seen what 
might be a photograph ofthis species from Fresno.) Another related species,P.Jagicola 
(=P. lentus) of eastern North America, occurs on hardwoods but is smaller and less scaly. 
Polyporus badius (Black-Leg) 
CAP 4-20 cm broad, convex becoming depressed or umbilicate; surface tan to chestnut- 
brown to dark reddish-brown or often becoming blackish in age; margin usually paler, 
often lobed. Flesh tough when fresh, rigid when dry, very thin, white becoming brownish. 
PORES minute, 4-7 per mm, white when fresh, brownish in age; tubes shallow, adnate to 
somewhat decurrent. ST ALK 1-6 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, central or off-center or lateral, 
more or less equal; pallid above and black below or more frequently black throughout, 
tough. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-9 )( 34 microns, cylindrical to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on rotting hardwoods (especially aspen) or occasionally 
conifers; widely distributed, and occasional in our area in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to eat. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as P. picipes, this species is close to P. elegans but has a darker 
and often larger cap (see photo on p. 42). Also, the entire stalk is usually black and it often 
grows on logs and stumps whereas P. elegans is more common on branches and sticks. 
Both species are retained in the genus Polyporus in its residual (narrowest) sense. For 
similar species, see comments under P. elegans. 
Polyporus elegans (Elegant Polypore; Black-Foot) 
CAP 1.5-7 cm broad, round to kidney-shaped in outline; convex, soon becoming de- 
pressed, vase-shaped, or umbilicate; surface smooth or finely striate, pale tan to tan or 
ochre, often weathering to white; margin often wavy or 10 bed. Flesh tough when fresh, rigid 
when dry, thin, white to pale cinnamon. PORES minute,4-6 permm, white when fresh but 
often becoming grayish or brownish in age; tubes shallow, usually decurrent. ST ALK 0 .5-5 
cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, central or off-center or lateral, more or less equal or swollen at 
base; pallid or tan above, soon becoming black below; tough. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 6.5-10 )( 2.54 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or several together on decaying hardwoods sticks, branches, and 
debris (only rarely on conifers); widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the 
Polyporus elegans. a common wood-inhabitor. Note pale cap and black lower half of stalk. Compare 
it to the photo of P. badius on p. 42. 
. 
. 
.. 
,.' 
 
-..:...--- 
< . >.-:= 
.... 
." ..- 
'" 
..,.. 
'to. .h 
:1... 
Po/yporus arcu/arius grows on hardwoods. Note ciliate (hairy) cap margin and stalk that is not black. 
winter and spring, especially on willow, alder, poplar (cottonwood), and oak. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to eat, but dries nicely for decorative purposes. 
COMMENTS: This dainty polypore is easily recognized by its tan to whitish cap, smalJ 
size, and black "foot:' P. var;us is sometimes listed as a synonym, but is also applied to a 
form with a radialJy streaked cap that is intermediate in color between P. elegans and P. 
badius. The latter species is usually larger than P. elegans, and has a darker cap and entirely 
black stem. Another species, P. me/anopus, grows on the ground or from buried wood; it 
has a velvety stem and velvety-scurfy cap, at least when young. 
Polyporus areularius (Fringed Polypore) 
CAP 1-8 cm broad, round in outline, convex becoming depressed, vase-shaped, or 
umbilicate; surface dry. golden-brown to dark brown, usually minutely scaly; margin 
often ciliate (fringed with fine hairs). Flesh thin, white, tough. PORES large(l-2 per mm), 
angular or hexagonal, white or yellowish; tubes shallow, sometimes decurrent. ST ALK 
2-6 cm long, 24 mm thick, usually central or slightly off-center, more or less equal, dark 
brown to yellowish-brown, smooth or minutely scaly, the base sometimes hairy. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 2-3 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods; widespread, but rare in our 
area. I've seen it in the Southwest and Pacific Northwest in the summer, and in eastern 
North America in the spring. Several closely related species are abundant in the tropics. 
EDIBILITY: Much too small and tough to be edible. 
COMMENTS: The small size and fairly large pores plus the typically central stem and 
frequently ciliate cap margin characterize this attractive polypore. P. mor;(also called 
Favo/us a/veo/ar;s). similar but without hairs on cap, and with a stubby stalk and large. 
diamond-shaped or hexagonal pores, occurs east of the Rockies. P. bruma/;s has much 
smaller pores and its cap is some shade of brown. It is common on birch and other 
hardwoods in eastern North America, rare in the West. M;cropore//us dea/batus has a 
concentrically zoned cap and central stalk; M. obovatus has a whitish, unzoned cap and 
central to lateral stalk. Both are common on dead hardwoods in the southeastern United 
States. ,None of these have the black or half-black stem of P. elegans and P. badius. 
Polyporus tuberaster (Stone Fungus) Color Plate 151 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane with a depressed or umbilicate center or becoming 
funnel-shaped; surface dry, tan to brown or ochre, darker with age and with scattered 
darker brown fibrils or fibrillose scales which are often radially arranged; margin often 
indented or lobed. Flesh thin, pallid, rigid when dry. PORES 1-3 per mm. white to pale 
tan; tubes 1-3 mm long, usually decurrent. ST ALK 2.5-10 (20) cm long, 1-2.5 (4) cm thick, 
more or less equal, central or off-center, brown or colored like cap; solid, tough, arising 
from a large brown to black underground sclerotium ("tuber") which is rather rubbery 
when fresh but rock-hard when dry; exterior of ""tuber" rough and irregular; interior often 
marbled with blackish-brown and paler areas and usually full of dirt and debris. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 10-16)( 3.5-6 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
563 
564 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in twos or threes on ground in woods; widely distributed, but not 
common. I have found it several times in our area in mixed woods and under oak and 
madrone. It fruits in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but tough unless young, fresh, and thoroughly cooked. Native 
Americans ate an underground sclerotium which they called "tuckahoe." It was once 
thought to be this species(as reported in the I st edition of Mushrooms Demystified), butis 
now believed to be the sclerotium of another polypore (see Poria cocos. p. 604). The 
"tubers" of P. tuberaster are inedible because they are full of dirt. However, they are sold 
in southern Italy under the name pietra fungaia ("Stone Fungus"). Buyers plant the 
"tubers" in flower pots, water them regularly, and then eat the fruiting bodies that result. 
COMMENTS: The large underground ..tuber" immediately identifies this polypore. 
The "tuber" might be mistaken for a piece of buried wood or a parasitized potato (it's 
usually the same size or larger), but the texture when fresh is distinctive. It is thought 
to be a resting stage of the fungus, or a secret storage compartment for nutrients. 
Bondarzewia berke/eyi may have a thick, rooting stem or'.tuber," but is much larger. Other 
species: P. radieatus of eastern North America is somewhat similar but larger, and has a 
long, black, narrowed rooting base instead of a sclerotium; P. mylittae of Australia has a 
yellower cap and produces edible sclerotia weighing up to 40 lbs. each! The sclerotia are 
known as "Blackfellow's Bread," a reference to their use as food by the aboriginees. 
Grifola frondosa 
(Hen of the Woods; Sheep's Head) 
FRl"ITING BODY compound, 15-60cm broad ormore,consistingofa mass of numerous 
small, overlapping caps arising from a common, fleshy, repeatedly branched base. CAPS 
2-7 (10) cm broad, spoon-shaped, tongue-shaped, or fan-shaped and tlattened; surface dry, 
smooth or rough to fibrillose, gray to brown or grayish-brown; margin often wavy. Flesh 
white and firm, rather tough; taste mild when young. PORES 1-3 per mm, white or 
yellowish; tubes shallow (2-3 mm long), decurrent. STALKS (branches) smooth, fleshy 
but tough, white or pale grayish, off-center or more often lateral (attached to sides of 
caps). SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: At or near the bases of trees and stumps (usually oak), fruiting year 
after year in the same spots; widely distributed, but common only in eastern North 
Left: The "Hen of the Woods," Grifolafrondosa, is a prized edible mushroom in eastern North 
America. The often massive fruiting body is composed of numerous petal- or fan-shaped caps arising 
from a common base. Right: Grifola umbel/ala mimics G.frondosa. but each of its caps has a more 
or less central (rather than lateral) stalk, as shown here. It is also delicious. 
" 
r 
t 
.'1 . 
, 1# 
GRIFOLA 
565 
America. It has been reported from Idaho, but is rare in the West and apparently absent in 
our area. It causes a delignifying butt rot of both the heartwood and sapwood of its host. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-along with the sulfurshelfand beefsteak fungus, the best 
of the polypores for the table. Long, slow cooking is recommended and only the young, 
tender caps are worth eating. "Allergies" have been reported. It is excellent pickled. 
COMMENTS: The numerous overlapping, more or less spoon-shaped caps are remi- 
niscent of a fluffed-up hen, making this one of the safest and most easily recognized of all 
edible mushrooms. Clusters weighing 100 pounds have been recorded, but 5-10 pound 
specimens are the norm. There are usually more caps per cluster than in Bondarzewia, and 
the stems are attached to the sides of the caps rather than being central. Polyporus or 
Polypilus frondosus are synonyms. G. umbellata(=P. umbellatus}, also edible, is a similar 
species with whitish to gray to smoky-brown, circular caps with central stems. Its fruiting 
bodies arise from sclerotia ("tubers") that have been used by the Chinese as an immune 
system stimulant. It occurs across the northern half ofthe continent, but is not common. 
Bondarzewia montana 
FRUITING BODY simple (with a cap and stalk) or compound (with numerous caps and 
stalks arising from a common base), but often fingerlike when first emerging or taking 
the form of a lumpy, misshapen, or rosette-like mass (when compound); often massive 
when mature (up to I m (3 ft.) broad if compound); usually arising from a rooting base. 
CAP(s) 5-25 cm broad when mature, convex to irregular or depressed; surface dry, finely 
velvety to fibrillose, or becoming smooth; tan or ochre to brown or dark brown, sometimes 
paler when immature. Flesh fairly thick, white, firm but brittle when fresh; taste mild or 
sometimes bitter in age. PORES fairly large (0.5-2 mm broad), usually angular or irregular 
in shape or breaking up to form "teeth"; pore surface often lumpy or nod ulose in com pound 
fruiting bodies, white to creamy or buff, dingier when dried or in age; tubes 1-6 mm long, 
usually decurrent. ST ALK(s) central to lateral, continuous with individual caps and simi- 
lar in color and texture, usually arising from a ta pered, underground, gnarly rooting base 
that is 4-12 cm long and 2-5 cm thick. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 microns, round, 
with conspicuous amyloid warts. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups under conifers, usually near stumps or trunks (pre- 
sumably arising from roots or buried wood); locally common in the late summer and fall 
in western North America, particularly at higher elevations. I have found it in quantity 
near Lake Tahoe under fir and white pine, but ha ve not seen it on the coast. The very similar 
B. berkeleyi (see comments) favors living hardwoods, producing a serious delignifying 
butt rot of the heartwood ("string and ray rot") that completely hollows out its host. 
ED IBILITY : Tempting because of its size, but rather tough and sometimes bitter to boot. 
It is probably harmless, but certainly not the equal of Grifolafrondosa. 
COMMENTS: The warted amyloid spores, often compound fruiting body, and gnarled 
rooting base are characteristic of the genus Bondarzewia. The spores are unique among 
the polypores, leading some investigators to suggest a relationship to the agaric genera, 
Russula and Laclarius. When B. montana has a massive compound fruiting body (see 
photo on p. 548) it is reminiscent of the hen of the woods, Grifolafrondosa, an eastern 
hardwood-loving species with smooth spores. Fruiting bodies with one to several caps, on 
the other hand, are more likely to be confused with Polyporus hirtus, a bitter-tasting, 
smooth-spored polypore. Its only close relative, B. berkeleyi, is quite similar but usually 
has fewer (one to five), broader, paler(whitish to grayish or yellowish-tan) caps and slightly 
larger spores, plus it favors hardwoods (especially oak and maple). It seems to intergrade 
with B. montana, and is very widely distributed. Another sometimes gigantic polypore, 
Meripilus giganteus, occurs at the bases of hardwoods in eastern North America. It stains, 
566 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
ages, or dries gray to dark brown or black on the pore surface and/ or margin and has much 
smaller pores (3-7 per mm). Like Bondarzewia, it often has a compound fruiting body, but 
has smooth, non-amyloid spores. The individual caps in all of these species are usually 
larger than those of Grifo/a. 
H eteroporus biennis 
FRUITING BODY arising from a poorly developed stalk or fleshy base, with one cap or 
several fused together in an overlapping rosette, or very distorted with most of the 
surface covered with pores. CAP 3-9 (20) cm broad when well-developed, plane to de- 
pressed; surface dry, woolly-hairy or felty, white to tan or aging pinkish to reddish. Flesh 
tough, duplex, white or pinkish. PORES 1-3 per mm, angular, irregular, or mazelike, or 
becoming toothlike; whitish, but often discoloring or bruising reddish, dingier in age; 
tubes 2-6 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK central to off-center, poorly developed or 
even absent, continuous with and colored like the cap; hairy. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
4-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth; thick-walled, nearly round spores (chlamydo- 
spores) often present also. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on ground around hardwood stumps and trees (pre- 
sumably growing on the roots), occasionally under conifers; widely distributed, but not 
common. I have found it in our area under oak and pine in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown; too tough to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: Misshapen fruiting bodies are usually found with pores covering much or 
most of the mushroom-the best fieldmark of this otherwise unimposing, profoundly 
forgettable, pitiful excuse for a polypore. The growth habit is sometimes reminiscent of 
Phaeo/us schweinitzii. A bortiporus b;enn;s and Polyporus b;enn;s are synonyms. 
PHAEOLUS, INONOTUS, COLTRICIA,& Allies 
Fruiting body usually annual, small to large, often soft and spongy whenfresh but tough or corky- 
woody in age; growing sheIflike to bracketlike to practically resupinate on wood or growing on 
ground and possessing a stalk and one to several caps. CAP usually hairy, fuzzy, or velvety. Flesh 
orange to yellow-brown. rusty-brown. or brown. PORES orange to greenish-yellow. rusty-brown. 
brown, or grayish (but not white) at maturity; small or large. STALK present or absent. SPORE 
PRINT whitish to yellow or brown when obtainable. Spores usually elliptical, smooth. Setae 
(large brown sterile cells) often present among basidia. Cap tissue darkening (turning red to black) 
in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
THESE orange to brown or rusty-yellow polypores are somewhat intermediate in aspect 
between the woody perennial polypores (conks) and the smaller and thinner, annual 
bracket fungi and stalked polypores. Phaeo/us and Inonotus most closely resemble Phe/- 
linus (a genus of conks), but are usually softer and fleshier when fresh, and have annual 
rather than perennial fruiting bodies. Co/tricia, on the other hand, has a central stalk and 
is reminiscent of a Po/yporus. 
All three genera have tissue that darkens or blackens dramatically when touched with a 
2% aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide (KGH). This feature is also shared by 
Phe//inus, leading some mycologists to sequester the four genera in a family of their own. 
Phaeo/us and Inonotus are wood-inhabiting but appear terrestrial when growing from 
roots or buried wood, while Co/tricia is nearly always terrestrial. Inonotusspecies typically 
produce white rots and Phaeo/us species cause brown ones (P. schweinitzii is a serious 
pest of standing timber). They are not edible because of their tough texture, and P. 
schweinitzii may actually be poisonous. Five species are described here. 
PHAEOLUS, INONOTUS, COL TRICIA, & ALLIES 
567 
Key to Phaeolus, Inonotus, Coltricia, & Allies 
I. Fruiting body with a stalk, typically appearing terrestrial (but may be at or near base oftree) 2 
I. Fruiting body growing shelflike or bracketlike on logs, stumps, trees, etc.; stalk absent ... 5 
2. Underside of cap with concentrically-arranged plates or with very large pores (0.5-2 mm in 
diameter); pores whitish to brownish; stalk 2-5 cm long, with only one cap; confined to eastern 
North America; not common......... . . Coltr;c;a montagne; (see C. cinnamomea. p. 568) 
2. Not as above ......................................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 
3. Stalk well-developed and distinct from cap (only one cap present); flesh corky-tough and thin 
(usually less than 2 mm thick), never spongy ...................................... 4 
3. Stalk often present only as a narrowed, often rooting base, with one to several caps; flesh usually 
thicker than above and spongy when fresh (but tough in age) ....................... II 
4. Cap shiny or silky, rarely more than 5 cm broad; pores usually not decurrent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., C oltr;cia cinnamomea, p. 568 
4. Cap often velvety but not usually silky or shiny, sometimes small but up to II cm broad .... 
....... . .,. ............................ Coltr;c;aperenn;s(see C. cinnamomea. p.568) 
5. Pores small (2-4 per mm) and bright saffron (orange-yellow) to bright orange or red when fresh; 
fruiting body soft or tough; usually found on hardwoods .. (see Trametes& Allies, p. 592) 
5. Not with above features; pores differently colored and/ or larger ...................... 6 
6. Flesh and tubes bright orange or soon becoming orange; typically on conifers _.......... 7 
6. Not as above (but may be rusty-yellow, reddish-brown, etc.) .......................... 8 
7. Pores large (I mm or more in diameter); tubes I cm or more long; cap rudimentary (usually 
present only as a free margin) ............................ Phaeolus alboluteus, p. 571 
7. Pores smaller; tubes shorter; cap present .... Phaeolusf;brillosus(see P. a/bo/uteus. p.571) 
8. Typically growing on or under conifers ... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9 
8. Typically growing on hardwoods (but occasionally on conifers) ...................... 12 
9. Spore-bearing surface taking the form of gills or very long, meandering mazelike pockets or 
if not then fruiting body usually with an anise odor when fresh; flesh corky-tough; pores not 
yellowish or greenish when fresh; found on wood . (see Lenz;tes, Daedalea, & Allies, p. 586) 
9. Not as above; found on wood or ground; flesh often spongy when young and fresh ...... 10 
10. P ores minute (3-6 per mm); cap surface soon more or less bald; growing shelflike or bracketlike 
on wood ............................... Inonotus dryadeus(see I. tomentosus. p. 569) 
10. Pores usually larger (up to 4 per mm); cap surface usually hairy or velvety, at least when young; 
growing shelflike or on ground ................................................ .11 
II. Pore surface yellow to greenish-yellow when fresh and young; cap often showing bright (orange 
to yellow) zones when young (but fruiting body entirely reddish-brown to dark brown in old 
age); stalk (when present) often with more than one cap ..... Phaeolus schwe;n;tz;;, p.570 
II. Pore surface brown to grayish or hoary when fresh; cap yellow-brown to tan when young; stalk 
(when present) typically with only one cap; setae present ..... Inonotus tomentosus, p. 569 
12. Fruiting body a roundish to cylindrical, compact mass of numerous small, thin, tough, closely 
overlapping caps arising from a solid core or "knot"; pores gray to brown; found on hardwoods 
in eastern North America (common name: "Sweet Knot," because it is sometimes very 
fragrant) .................................................. Globifomes graveolens 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Fruiting body usually resupinate (i.e., lacking a well-defined cap), either dark brown to black 
and hard or growing in sheets under oak bark .................................... 14 
13. Not as above; fruiting body usually with a cap (upper sterile surface) .................. J5 
14. Fruiting body yellow-brown to dull brown; usually growing under the bark of living oaks ... 
........... .. .. _.. .. . .. .. . . .. ..... ............ " ..... ..... ... Inonotus anderson;; 
14. Fruiting body dark brown to bJack, hard, often cracked and usually irregular or cankerlike in 
shape; found mainly on birch ..................................... Inonotus obl;quus 
15. Pores often mazelike or pocketlike (elongated), the walls between them fairly thick; cap thin 
(less than I cm, the flesh only 1-4 mm thick), corky or leathery even when fresh ........... 
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Lenzites, Daedalea, & Allies, p. 586) 
15. Notasabove ........................................................ -....... 16 
568 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
16. Cap tan to pale brown (or weathering grayish) and distinctly hairy, usually 2 cm thick or less; 
pores whitish to gray, grayish-brown, or even blackish; found mainly on dead cottonwood 
(Populus) or willow, often in confluent rows ................ Funalia hispida& relatives 
16. Not as above; if growi"ng on cottonwood or willow, then differently colored. etc. ........ I7 
17. Fruiting body soft and watery when fresh, entirely ta wny-yellow to cinnamon or yellow-brown 
and staining red or vinaceous (not black) in KGH; typically found on dead hardwoods in 
eastern North America (reported rarely from the West on conifers) .. Hapalopilus nidulans 
17. Not as above (but may have some of above features) ............... _ . . _ . . _ . . . . . . . .. 18 
18. Fruiting body tough and corky or woody even when fresh; cap surface not hairy or only slightly 
so; usually found on dead trees .......................... (seePhellinus gilvus, p. 582) 
18. At least the upper layer of fruiting body usually fleshy (watery or spongy) when young; cap 
surface often (but not always) hairy; often on living trees Inonotus hispidus& others, p. 569 
Coltricia cinnamomea (Fairy Stool) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk, usually terrestrial. CAP 1-5 cm broad, more Or 
less circular in outline, centrally depressed or umbilicate; surface dry. bright cinnamon 
to reddish-brown, yellow-brown, rusty-brown, or darker, with shiny Or silky striations and 
narrow or inconspicuous concentric zones; margin often fringed or torn. Flesh very thin 
(1 mm thick or less), pliant when fresh; rusty-brown. PORES 2-3 per mm, yellow-brown 
to brown Or reddish-brown; tubes shallow (0.5-3 mm long), typically not decurrent. 
ST ALK 1-5 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, usually central and more or less equal, brown to 
reddish-brown, hairy Or velvety, tough. SPORE PRINT yellowish-brown; spores 6-10 
x 4.5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap tissue staining black in KGH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on ground or moss in woods, often along well- 
beaten paths, road banks, and in clearings (rarely on rotten wood); widespread. In our area 
this species and C. perennis (see comments) occur year-round, but are not very common. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough toeat, but makes an intriguing addition to seedpod arrangements. 
COMMENTS: This beautiful little polypore is easily told by its very thin, silky-shiny, 
cinnamon to amber-brown cap, brown pore surface, and reddish-brown to dark brown 
(not black!) stem. The rusty-brown flesh distinguishes it from Po/yporusand other stalked 
polypores. In similar habitats or on charred ground and just as common is the elegant 
C. perenn;s (see photo below). Its cinnamon to yellow-brown or grayish cap is up to 10 cm 
broad and usually strongly zoned and finely velvety( ratherthan silky). It also tends to ha ve 
a thicker stem and brown to grayish-brown pores that are sometimes decurrent. Itis widely 
distributed, but a third species, C. montagne;, is restricted to eastern North America. It 
has large, often mazelike pores or even thick, concentrically arranged plates Or "gills." 
Left: Coltricia cinna1[lomea has a small silky cap. brownish pores, and thin rusty-brown flesh. Right: 
Co/tricia perennis is often larger and more strongly zoned. Note tough central stalk in both species. 
II> 
,,'" 
-- 
....\ 
11 
.,. 
" 
" 
\ 
""- 
.,.. 
". 
.. 
, 
INONOTUS 
569 
I nonotus hispidus 
FRUITING BODY annual, growing shelflike or bracketlike on wood, at first soft and 
spongy but tough in age and rigid when dry. CAP 5-20 (30) cm broad and 2-10 cm thick, 
convex or plane; surface at first densely covered with stiff or bristly hairs, the hairs 
tending to wear away in age; bright reddish-orange to yellowish-brown to rusty-yellow 
when fresh, becoming brown to dark reddish-brown or even blackish in age. Flesh up to 
5 (10) cm thick, at first watery or spongy(but fibrous), tougher in age; rusty to rusty-yellow 
to dark reddish-brown; odor often rather pleasant when fresh. PORES 1-3 (4) per mm, 
yellowish to brown or rusty-yellow, sometimes with an olive tinge and sometimes beaded 
with droplets, darkening with age or where bruised; tubes 0.5-3 cm long. ST ALK absent. 
SPORE PRINT ochre- to chestnut-brown; spores 7 .5-11 x 6-9 microns, broadly elliptical 
to nearly round, smooth. Flesh darkening (staining red to black) in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Usually solitary (occasionally several) on living or recently dead hard woods 
or rarely conifers; fruiting mostly in the summer and fall but occurring year-round, widely 
distributed. It is a destructive parasite of oak and walnut( causing a white rot of the heart- 
wood), but occurs on a wide range of other trees, including mulberry and willow. The 
fruiting bodies usually emerge from the wounds of trees, often at a considerable distance 
from the ground. I have not seen this species locally but it occurs in southern California. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species and its close relatives (see below) are reminiscent of I. IOmen- 
tosus and Phaeo/us schweinitzii, but are strictly shelving species with no stalk. They can 
also be confused with species of Phellinus, but are soft and spongy when fresh and are not 
perennial. Similar species include: I. cut;cu/ar;s, with a woolly-matted to nearly smooth 
(not bristly) cap, found on various hardwoods such as willow, cottonwood, and pepper 
trees; I. dryoph;/us, with a thick granular core between the upper fibrous tissue and the 
tube layer, found on hardwoods (especially oak); I. texanus, found on desert legumes 
(particularly acacia and mesquite); I. ar;zon;cus, found on sycamore; I. dryadeus (see 
comments under l. IOmenlOsus); and I. radiatus, widespread (but especially common in 
eastern North America) on hardwoods such as birch and alder, with a rather thin, firm, 
brightly colored (golden to rusty-brown or even yellowish-green) cap that is often zoned 
and radially fibrillose plus unpigmented spores. See also l. IOmentosus, which some- 
times grows shelflike on conifers. 
I nonotus tomentosus 
FRUITING BODY usually terrestrial with a cap and a short or rudimentary stalk, but 
sometimes lacking a stalk and growing shelflike on wood. CAP 3-12 (18) cm broad, circular 
to fan-shaped in outline, convex to plane to centrally depressed; surface dry, soft and hairy 
(tomentose) or velvety, whitish when very young but soon yellowish-brown to tan, dull 
ochre, brown, or rusty-brown, sometimes with faint concentric zones. Flesh yellow-brown 
to brown, duplex: upper layer soft and spongy when fresh, lower layer rather thin, firm, and 
fibrous. PORES round to angular or irregular becoming torn or sometimes toothlike in 
age, 24 per mm, pale buff to grayish or beige or becoming brownish, but often with a hoary 
sheen or surface covering; darker brown where bruised; tubes 1.5-7 mm long, usually 
decurrent. ST ALK often rudimentary, when present short (1-5 cm long), 0.5-2 cm thick, 
central to off-center or lateral, continuous with cap and more or less same color and texture, 
or darker. SPORE PRINT pale yellow to pale brown; spores 4.5-7 x 2.54 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, hyaline under the microscope. Brown sterile cells (setae) abundant 
among basidia, straight and pointed. Cap tissue blackening in KOH (sometimes with a 
fleeting red intermediate phase). 
\!  
.... . 
 
" 
, " . 
 .. 
.I ,4'" 
.J. " 
II ....' "f AI 
" .. . -......... 
, 
,- \ ( 
. 
 
.... 
- 
.- 
Inonotus tomentosus is reminiscent of Phaeo/us schweinitzii, but is usually smaller and paler in 
color. In addition, the fruiting body is usually simple (with one cap rather than several). Note how 
pine needles and sticks are incorporated into the fruiting bodies. 
HABI AT: Solitary or in groups on ground under conifers (presumably arising from 
roots or buried wood), sometimes also on stumps or bases of trunks; widely distributed. 
In our area it is fairly common throughout the mushroom season, especially in coastal 
pine forests. It causes a white pocket rot of the roots and butt of a wide variety of conifers 
in the pine family, but is especially fond of pine and spruce. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too tough to be of value. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Onnia tomentosa and Polystictus (or MucTonopoTus) 
tomentosus, this common polypore can be recognized by its soft hairy or velvety cap and 
overall brown to yellow-brown color. I t is thicker and spongier than Co/tricia; it could be 
confused with Phaeo/us schweinitzii, but is dullerincolor, somewhat smaller, and does not 
usually have a compound fruiting body. Also, the fresh pore surface is brown to grayish 
or hoary rather than yellow or greenish. I. ciTcinatus is a very similar species with hooked 
setae; it is also common on or near conifers across North America. I. dTyadeus favors 
conifers in the West (but oak in the eastern states); it always grows shelflike on wood, 
has a bald or nearly bald cap, minute pores, and attains sizes of30 cm broad or more. For 
shelflike (stalkless) species of Inonotus that favor hardwoods and have more highly pig- 
mented (browner) spores, see I. hispidus and the species listed under it. 
Phaeo/us schweinitzii 
(Dyer's Polypore) 
Color Plate 153 
FRUITING BODY usually compound, composed of several caps arising in tiers from a 
common base, but sometimes simple (with one cap) and sometimes growing shelflike on 
wood. CAP(s) 5-30 or more cm broad, circular to fan-shaped in outline; cushion-shaped 
becoming plane or depressed; soft and spongy when fresh and often knobby when actively 
growing, tough Or corky in age, rigid and brittle when dry; surface covered with a dense felty 
or woolly mat of hairs, smoother in age; color variable: orange to ochraceous to yellowish 
or greenish-yellow (especially on the margin) when growing, becoming rusty-brown to 
dark brown in age (or from the center outward); staining brown to blackish when bruised 
and becoming entirely dark brown to blackish in old age; sometimes concentrically zoned 
with several of above colors; margin often wavy. Flesh yellowish to rusty-brown or brown, 
often appearing zoned. PORES 1-3 per mm or fused together to form larger pores; 
mustard-yellow to greenish when fresh, but quickly becoming brown or blackish when 
bruised or in age; tubes 2-10 mm long, usually decurrent. ST ALK(ifpresent) 1-6 cmlong 
and 1-5 cm thick, usually tapered downward, often rooting, central or off-center, same 
color and texture as cap. SPORE PRINT white or tinged yellow to green; spores5-9 x 3.5-5 
microns, elliptical, smooth. Setae absent. Cap surface and tissue staining black in KOH, 
often with a fleeting cherry-red intermediate phase. 
1:;.7(\ 
.. 
. 
. 
I 
"\ 
.. 
 
'" 
<' 
\ 
 
- 
\ 
.'(' 
Phaeo/us schwe;n;tzii, a common conifer-lover. Note compound fruiting body; these are rather small 
specimens. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on or around dead and living conifers, usually but not 
always appearing terrestrial (originating from the roots); widely distributed and very 
common throughout the West. In our area it favors pine and Douglas-fir, the fruiting 
bodies usually appearing after the first fall rains but persisting year-round. The mycelium 
attacks the roots and heartwood of its host, causing a serious carbonizing decay known as 
"red-brown butt rot." It fractures the wood into cubical blacks as high as fifteen feet up the 
trunk, weakening the tree so that it blows over easily. It also occurs on coniferous slash, 
in which case it is more apt to be shelflike than terrestrial. In the West it is one ofthe two or 
three most prevalent brown rot fungi. There is one report of it growing on eucalyptus. 
EDIBILITY: Possibly poisonous. It contains a stimulant found in the roots ofthe kava 
kava plant, but apparently some toxic substances as well. It is too tough and hairy to be 
of food value anyway. However, it is prized by dye-makers for the rich and varied hues 
it imparts to yarn. 
COMMENTS: One of the most common and conspicuous of the larger polypores, this 
cosmopolitan species is apt to confuse the beginner because of the color and texture 
changes it undergoes as it ages. However, the yellowish to greenish-yellow pores when 
young, yellow to rusty-orange tones in the caps of young specimens, and growth at the base 
of or near conifers are diagnostic. (The color plate shows young specimens that are pre- 
dominantly orange rather than greenish-yellow.) It grows gradually, engulfing pine 
needles, sticks, plants, and other debris in its way, as shown in the color plate. Old, 
weathered fruiting bodies are quite light in weight and entirely dark brown in color. 
Inonotus tomentosus is somewhat similar, but has a tan to dull brown cap and brownish or 
hoary pore surface. Hydnellum species are superficially similar, but have short, blunt 
spines or ""teeth" on the underside of the cap instead of pores. 
Phaeolus alboluteus (Orange Sponge Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY resupinate and spreading or bracketlike, soft and spongy when 
fresh, up to I meter or more in length. CAP (upper surface) usually present only as a free 
margin, soft and spongy; surface bright orange but eventually weathering or fading to 
whitish. Flesh thin, orange. PORES large(l-3 mm or more in diameter), angular, the walls 
often jagged or splitting to form ""teeth"; whitish or yellowish soon becoming orange (or 
tubes orange with white edges); tubes long (1-3 cm). STALK absent. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores (7) 10-14 )( 34 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Flesh reddening in KOH. 
571 
572 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
HABIT AT: On fallen logs of conifers, usually on the undersides and often developing 
in snow; common in the subalpine forests of the West, fruiting mainly in the spring but 
persisting into summer, fall, or even winter. It is quite common in the southern Rocky 
Mountains, and I have also seen it in the Sierra Nevada. It prod uces a brown rot (carbon- 
izing decay) and is said to occasionally occur on aspen. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species, which has also been placed in Pycnoporel/us and Aurantio- 
porel/us. is easily told by its large pores and orange spongelike fruiting body that peels off 
in one continuous felty layer. P.fibrillosus is a somewhat similar species that is shelflike 
(i.e., with a well-defined fiery red to orange or brownish-orange cap). It has creamy to 
orange pores and grows on conifer slash or rarely aspen. Pycnoporus. A urantioporus. and 
several Porias are -also brightly colored, but are tougher and/ or have much smaller pores. 
LAETIPORUS 
THIS is a small genus of large, fleshy, shelflike fungi. Only one colorful species-the 
well-known and edible sulfur shelf-is described here. A key hardly seems necessary. 
Laetiporus sulphureus Color Plates 154, 155 
(Sulfur Shelf; Chicken of the Woods) 
FR UITIN G BO D Y annual, emerging kno blike or fingerlike, soon becoming shelflike; soft 
and fleshy when young, tough in age. CAP 5-50 (70) cm broad and up to 4 cm thick, 
fan-shaped to elongated or semi-circular in outline; surface smooth to suede like, often 
uneven or wrinkled; red-orange to bright orange, yellow-orange, sulfur-yellow, or salmon 
(the margin usually yellow), fading slowly with age to yellowish, buff, or eventually dull 
whitish; margin at first thick and blunt. Flesh thick, soft and watery when very fresh, 
becoming tough and eventually crumbly; white to pale yellow or salmon-tinged; when 
very fresh often exuding yellow or orange droplets and reminiscent of uncooked chicken; 
odor fungal or rather pungent; taste nearly mild or acidic becoming quite sour or un- 
pleasant in age. PORES 2-4 per mm but barely visible when young, bright sulfur-yellow, 
but often darkening when bruised and fading slowly in age; tubes shallow (1-4 mm long). 
ST ALK absent or present only as a narrowed base. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary or more often in overlapping clusters or shelving masses on dead 
stum ps and logs, sometimes also on living trees or sometimes growing in rosettes from roots 
or buried wood; usually appearing on the same stumps year after year; widely distributed 
and common. In our area it fruits mainly in the late summer and fall, but old fruiting bodies 
may persist for months. It grows on a wide range of hardwoods and conifers. In coastal 
California it favors eucalyptus (September-October, ushering in the new mushroom 
season) and to a lesser extent conifers and oaks (N ovember-December). In the Sierra 
Nevada it is common on fir in the summer; in eastern North America it favors oak. It 
causes a destructive red-brown carbonizing heart rot that eventually hollows out the tree, 
producing cracks in the wood in which thin sheets of white mycelium may appear. It is 
said to have caused considerable damage to British sailing vessels. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delectable when thoroughly cooked. However, there have been 
several cases of sulfur shelf poisoning on the west coast, so try it cautiously the first time 
and never eat it raw. When young the succulent flesh has a mild flavor, tofu-like texture, 
and ..Candy Corn"-like color, making it especially attractive and delicious in omelets. 
Maturing specimens are tougher and develop a strong sour flavor; their texture when 
LAETIPORUS 
573 
cooked is reminiscent of white chicken meat, so they're good in sandwiches. If the 
specimens you find are mature (but not so old as to be asbestos-like)" you can trim offthe 
tender, rapidly growing margin (about 5 cm), and perhaps return later for more! 
COMMENTS: One ofthe"F oolproofF our"- the brilliant yellow-orange shelving masses 
are unmistakable. Actually, nothing is foolproof, but the sulfur shelf is certainly 
intelligence-proof, and I trust that no one reading this book is a fool! I always experience 
an element of disbelief when I stumble onto a large cluster. It looks like something out of a 
Jacques Cousteau movie-you no more expect to find it on an aging eucalyptus stump by 
the railroad tracks than you do a freight train at the bottom of the sea! Fresh specimens 
can be so soft that it's difficult to handle them without leaving fingerprints. They are 
full of water and weigh far more than their size suggests (I have found clusters weighing 
over 50 pounds!). It seems strange that such a large fungus should require so little moisture 
to fruit, for in our area it often appears before the arrival of the fall rains. The cap color 
ranges from deep orange to yellow or salmon, but the fresh pore surface is always sulfur- 
yellow-except in the rare var. sem;alb;nus, which has a salmon-colored cap, white pores, 
and a frequently rooting base. Polyporus su/phureus and Grifola su/phureaare synonyms. 
Other species: L. persicinus is a southeastern species that usually grows in stalked clumps; 
it has whitish to creamy pores and a buff to pinkish-brown or darker cap. 
ISCHNODERMA 
THIS genus is easily recognized by its roughened, resinous, dark brown to blackish, 
shelflike fruiting body. A single species is described here. 
I schnoderma res;nosum (Resinous P olypore) 
FRUITING BODY annual; shelflike or bracketIike, watery at first and often exuding 
droplets, especially near margin of cap, becoming tougher and drier in age. CAP 5-30 cm 
broad and 1-3 cm thick, fan- to kidney-shaped or semicircular in outline; surface rough 
or velvety (like sandpaper) at first (but often nearly smooth in age), often wrinkled radially 
and saturated or incrusted with a resin (the resinous areas often darker and more metallic- 
looking and sometimes slightly bluish), often concentrically zoned or ridged in age; color 
usually dark brown to blackish, but often overlaid with a thin golden or ochre coating 
when very young; margin usually quite thick. Flesh whitish to beige, tan, or brownish, 
watery when young becoming tough and corky in age. PO RES minute(3 -6 per mm), white 
or creamy, but often becoming brownish when bruised and ochre-brown to brownish in 
age; tubes 1-10 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-7 )( 1.5-2.5 
microns, sausage-shaped to cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or several together (often overlapping) on dead hardwoods and 
conifers, fruiting mostly in the summer and fall; widely distributed but not particularly 
common, at least in my experience. In northern California and the Pacific Northwest it 
favors larger (first-growth) conifers. It cases a delignifying decay of both the sapwood 
and heartwood, and the infected area sometimes has a strong aniselike odor I have not 
seen it ih our area. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible when young and watery, but soon tough and corky. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive shelving polypore is easily identified by its resinous dark 
brown to blackish cap that is often radially wrinkled and its tendency to exude droplets 
of liquid (especially when young or in wet weather). Some mycologists reserve the name 
I. resinosum for the form that grows on hardwoods (particularly elm), while using the 
name I. benzo;num for the conifer-loving version with darker (browner) flesh and tubes. 
574 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
GANODERMA, FOMITOPSIS, PHELLINUS, & Allies 
(Conks) 
Fruiting body medium-sized to very large; tough, woody, corky, or punky, usually perennial (but 
some spe('ies annual); often thick; growing on dead or living trees. CAP knoblike to hooflike to 
shelflike or bracketlike. sometimes with a hard surface crust; often zoned. ridged. or grooved. 
PORES fairly small to minute or barely visible; lUbes often stratified (with more than one layer) 
as seen in longitudinal section. STALK usuaJ/y absent or rudimentary, but sometimes present asa 
lateral extension of the cap (see G. lucidum). SPORE PRINT brown to whitish but difficult to 
obtain. Spores smooth or minutely prickly. 
THESE are the tough, woody, hoof-shaped or shelflike growths you see so often on the 
trunks of dead trees or in the wounds and crotches ofliving ones. They are commonly called 
"conks" because of their woody to corky texture and the frequent presence of a hard 
surface crust. Conks are larger and thicker than the other tough bracket fungi (e.g., 
Trametes) and usually-but not always-have perennial fruiting bodies (i.e., each year a 
new tube layer is added onto the already-existing ones). In many species these tube layers 
are distinctly stratified so that the age of the fruiting body can be determined by 
counting the number of layersUust like counting the growth rings on a tree). Ages of50-70 
years have been recorded! If the yearly tube layers are not stratified, the age can often be 
estimated by the number of growth zones (represented by ridges or furrows) on the cap. A 
new zone is "issued" each year as an outer or downward extension ofthe cap in conjunction 
with the new tube layer. 
Most conks have at one time or another been classified in the genus Fomes. However 
Fomes, like Polyporus, has been obliterated by the "splitters," so that it now contains 
only one common species (F. fomentarius). The principal genera recognized here are 
Ganoderma, with a hard, sometimes shiny surface crust, whitish to pallid pore surface 
when fresh, and minutely prickly, double-walled spores; Fomitopsis. with whitish to pale- 
colored flesh and smooth spores; and Phellinus, with rusty-brown to yellow-brown flesh 
that darkens in potassium hydroxide (KOH), and smooth spores. Several small genera 
(e.g., F omes in its resid ual sense and Heterobasidion) are also described and/ or keyed out. 
Conks are responsible for many serious rots. Phellinus pini, Fomitopsis ojJicinalis. and 
Heterobasidion annosum are especially destructive to living or standing conifers, Fomi- 
topsis pinicola to dead ones, and the Ganoderma applanatum group to living and dead 
hard woods. 
Conks are obviously far too tough or woody to eat (see comments on the edibility of 
Fomitopsis pinicola!), but several enjoy other uses (see in particular Ganoderma lucidum. 
G. applanalUm, and Fomitopsis officina lis). Only some of the more distinctive and/ or 
common species in North America are treated here. 
Key to Ganoderma, F omitopsis, Phellinus, & Allies 
I. P ore surface rosy or pink when fresh (but often duller or darker in age); flesh usually pinkish also 
(when fresh) .................................. Fomitops;s cajanderi & others, p. 580 
I. Not as above; pore surface not rosy .............................................. 2 
2. Cap (and stalk if present) with a surface crust that appears varnished, at least whenyoung( unless 
covered by spore dust); fruiting body usually annual (with one tube layer); flesh usually light- 
weight or punky;fresh pore surface white, but typically turning brown if rubbed or in age 3 
2. Varnished surface crust absent, or if present then not as above; stalk typically absent ..... 6 
3. Typically growing on hardwoods ................................................ 4 
3. Typically growing on conifers ................................................... 5 
4. Cap ochre to whitish or only partly red; stalk typically present; mainly southern (southeastern 
United States), rare northward ............. Ganoderma curt;s;;(see G. /ucidum, p. 577) 
4. Cap usually reddish (or mostly reddish), at least in age; stalk present or absent; widespread in 
temperate zone and tropics ............................. Ganoderma /uc;dum, p. 577 
GANODERMA, FOMITOPSIS, PHELLINUS, & ALLIES 
575 
5. Stalk usually absent; flesh up to 10 cm thick; known only from western North America ..... 
...... . ........ ... . . ... . . ... ... .. .. .. Ganoderma oregonense{see G. lucidum. p. 577) 
5. Stalk usually present; flesh up to 3 cm thick. . . . . Ganoderma tsugae{see G. lucidum. p. 577) 
6. Flesh bright reddish-orange to rusty-orange; fruiting body often thick (tall) in relation to 
diameter; restricted to j uni per ........ T runcospora demidoffii (see Phellinus pini. p. 582) 
Not as above ................................................................. 7 
6. 
7. 
7. 
8. 
Flesh bright yellow-brown to rusty-brown, brown, or dark brown when fresh ........... 8 
Flesh whitish to yellowish or straw-colored (or light brown to dingy yellow-brown in age) 18 
Pore surface white when fresh but turning brown when scratched (or in old age); cap with a hard 
surface crust; very common ..................... Ganoderma applanatum group. p. 576 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. 
12. 
Fruiting body annual (though sometimes large), i.e., with only one tube layer; usually soft or 
spongy or exuding water droplets when fresh, but usually tough in age; iffound on hardwoods, 
the hardwoods usually living ......... (seePhaeolus, Inonotus, Coltricia, & Allies, p. 566) 
9. Not as above; fruiting body very tough (corky or woody) even when fresh, usually with more 
than one tube layer (perennial), especially if growing on living hardwoods ............ 10 
Typically growing on conifers ........................... Phellinus pini & others, p. 582 
Typically growing on hardwoods ............................................... II 
Fruiting body typically without a cap (resupinate) or with only a rudimentary one ...... 12 
Fruiting body with a cap (upper sterile surface), usually hooflike or shelflike ........... 13 
Fruiting body hard and woody; free margin ("cap") when present often with a surface crust 
. . . . . . . . _ _ . . . . . . . _ . _ . . . . . .. Phellinus laevigatus& P. pomaceus (see P. igniarius. p. 581) 
Fruiting body corky or fibrous-tough but not woody; free margin when present not incrusted 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Phellinusferruginosus & P.ferreus (see P. gilvus. p. 582) 
Fruiting body with a clearly differentiated hard surface crust (at least in older specimens), or 
if not then the older (buried) tube layers showing whitish flecks or streaks when sectioned; cap 
gray, brown, or black; pore surface brown or gray; especially common in northern regions 14 
Not with above features ....................................................... 15 
Older (buried) tube layers typically stuffed with white hyphae that show as white streaks or 
flecks when broken open; old caps often black and cracked ..... Phellinus igniarius, p. 581 
Not as above ....................... Fomesfomentarius (see Phellinus igniarius. p. 581) 
Typically growing on locust or other legumes .... _ . Phellinus rimosus{see P. gilvus. p. 582) 
Not as above .................................................... _ . . . . . . . . . .. 16 
Cap ochraceous to rusty-brown (sometimes blackish in old age); flesh usually less than 1.5 cm 
thick; usually found on dead wood .......:............ Phellinus gilvus & others, p. 582 
16. Cap differently colored and/ or flesh thicker; usually found on living trees ............. 17 
17. Flesh bright yellow-brown ..................... Phellinus robustus{see P. gilvus. p. 582) 
17. Flesh rusty-brown or darker .................. Phellinus everhartii{see P. gilvus. p. 582) 
18. Growing on incense cedar; pore surface usually yellow or yellowish when fresh; typically with 
only one layer of tubes ............................... (see Tyromycesamarus, p. 601) 
Not as above; usually growing on a different host .................................. 19 
Cap distinctly hairy and white to pale ochraceous (or greenish from algae and moss) .... 20 
Not as above ................................................................ 21 
Fruiting body often massive; cap surface coarsely hairy "like a doormat" (Stuntz); found on 
conifers in western North America; rare ........ _ . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . Oxyporus nobilissimus 
Not as above; found on hardwoods (especially maple) in eastern states . Oxyporus populinus 
Flesh cheesy when young but soon becoming chalky, very bitter-tasting; cap white to yellowish 
or becoming grayish or greenish in old age; found on conifers . Fomitopsis officinalis, p. 579 
Not as above ................................................................ 22 
Underside of cap with mazelike or elongated pores or sometimes even gills; cap 5-15 cm broad, 
tube walls often thick; found mainly on hardwoods (see Lenzites, Daedalea, & Allies, p. 586) 
Not as above ............................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 23 
Cap surface usually (but not always) partly or entirely reddish to reddish-brown or reddish- 
black; cap smooth or grooved; tube layers stratified .......... Fomitopsis pinicola, p. 578 
Cap surface usually roughened, pitted, knobby, ridged, etc., not normally reddish; tube layers 
not usually stratified .. Heterobasidion annosum& others (see Fomilopsis pinicola. p. 578) 
10. 
10. 
II. 
II. 
12. 
13. 
13. 
14. 
14. 
15. 
15. 
16. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
20. 
20. 
21. 
21. 
22. 
22. 
23. 
23. 
.. 
" 
. 
:,,-. 
'... 
J 
,(. 
 
')000. 
, 
Artist's Conk (Ganoderma applanatum group), with my wife Judith Mattoon included for scale. 
This large specimen shows ridges and furrows characteristic of many perennial polypores (conks). 
The underside is white when fresh and turns brown when scratched (see photo on next page). 
Ganoderma applanatum group (Artist's Conk; Artist's Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY emerging whitish and knoblike, becoming hooflike or shelf1ike to 
somewhat irregular; very hard and woody; perennial. CAP 5-75 cm broad or more, 2-20 cm 
thick, usually fan-shaped or semi-circular in outline, with a hard surface crust that is 
usually cracked, furrowed, ridged, and/ or lumpy or knobby in age, but not varnished; 
surface gray to brown or grayish-brown, sometimes aging grayish-black, but often covered 
with brown to cocoa-brown spore powder. Flesh punky or corky, 0.5-5 cm thick, brown or 
cinnamon-brown, rarely whitish. PORES barely visible (4-6 per mm), white or whitish 
when fresh but instantly turning brown when scratched; often dingy yellowish to brown 
when dried or in old age; tube layers distinctly stratified and separated by a thin layer of 
chocolate-brown tissue; each tube layer 4-12 or more mm deep. STALK usually absent. 
SPORE PRINT brown or reddish-brown; spores 6-9.5)( 4.5-7 microns, broadly elliptical 
to slightly truncate at apex, thick-walled, appearing minutely spiny. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on hardwood logs and stumps, or growing from wounds 
in living trees (usually near the ground); also common on conifers in some areas. Very 
widely distributed, found year-round. Its hosts include virtually every hardwood found in 
North America, plus numerous conifers. In coastal California it(and close relatives-see 
comments) is especially common on bay laurel, but can also be found on oak, magnolia, 
pepper trees, acacia, eucalyptus, elm, and Douglas-fir. Along with F omitopsis pinicola. it 
is the commonest conk in our area. The only regions where it seems to be absent are those 
where there aren't any trees! It usually attacks dead ordyingtrees, but can also be parasitic, 
producing a whitish, delignifying decay ofthe sapwood and heartwood. I nfected trees blow 
over easily, so if one appears on a tree near your house-watch out! 
EDIBILITY: Much too tough and woody to be worthwhile (see edibility of Fomitopsis 
pinicola); however, sturdy specimens can be made into stools. 
COMMENTS: This is the hard, woody growth you see so often at the bases of bay laurels 
and other hardwoods. Since the brown-staining of the pore surface is reasonably per- 
manent, it makes an excellent medium for etching( or better yet. lea ving cryptic messages in 
the woods)-hence its popular .name, artist's conk. It's been calculated that a large 
specimen (I've found one weighing 26 pounds) liberates 30 billion spores a day, 6 months a 
C"U.. 
BRA Yo 
5('.;. 
- 
-.. 
)# 
.I 
.. . 
I 
c.1<\ 
-::- 
.. 
. .. 
. 
"""" 
.( 
, 
'!' 
YOV 8f. 
10 tHE 
.. "at ''" 
. \ 
'. ;;t 
BQ 
,, ." 
, , 
 
... 
...... ... 
., 
. 'I 
'". 
1'1 
ES 
(S 
.. 
Ganoderma app/anatum group, underside (pore surface). It is sometimes called the "Artist's Conk" 
because the white pore surface turns brown w hen scratched. This means you can dra w pictures on it, or 
better yet, leave messages such as this one in the woods! 
year-or over 5,000,000,000,000 (5 trillion!) spores annually. Millions of these may be 
borne aloft by air currents and deposited on top of the cap, turning it brown. G. app/anatum 
as discussed here is actually a "collective" species, embracing at least two others: G. 
annular;s, with unstratified tubes and no flesh; and G. brown;; (=G. adspersum? G. 
europaeum?), with thicker (3-8 cm), darker flesh. Both have longer spores(9-12 microns) 
than the "true" G. app/anatum. The latter is especially common in our area on bay laurel, 
perhaps more so than G. app/anatum. All of these conks used to be placed in Fomes and 
have also been put in E/fvingia. 
Ganoderma /ucidum (Varnished Conk; Ling Chih) 
FRUITING BODY annual, corky and tough; often emerging as a whitish or pallid knob 
but soon becoming shelflike or developing a cap and stalk. CAP 2-20 (35) cm broad, 4-8 
cm thick, circular to semi-circular to fan-shaped or kidney-shaped in outline; surface 
usually with a varnished (shiny) surface crust, smooth or often concentrically zoned and 
grooved; color variable: dark red to reddish-brown, orange-brown, mahogany, or 
reddish-black, but often ochre or yellowish toward the margin (which is often white when 
actively growing); surface sometimes covered with brownish spore powder. Flesh ochra- 
ceo us-brown to dark brown, or pallid near the cap and brownish near the tubes; soft- 
corky or punky when fresh, tough when dry or old. PORES minute( 4-7 per mm), whitish or 
yellowish-white when fresh, usually bruising or aging brown; tubes 2-20 mm long, one 
layer only (rarely two). STALK sometimes absent, but often present; usually attached 
laterally, but often vertical and well-developed, 3-14 cm long, 0.5-3 (4) cm thick; often 
gnarled or twisted, equal or enlarged below; dark red to reddish-black and appearing 
varnished like the cap. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 7-13 x 5-8 microns, elliptical, 
double-walled, appearing minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups at bases of living hardwoods or on stumps and 
roots, very rarely on conifers; fruiting during mushroom season but often persisting year- 
round. Distribution worldwide-in both the tropical and temperate zones, from Canada 
to Argentina and Europe to Siberia, China, India, Australia, and Africa. It is fairly 
common in eastern North America but rather infrequent in California. It occurs on a wide 
577 
578 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
range of hosts, but in North America is partial to maple. The very similar G. tsugae and 
G. oregonense occur on conifers (see comments). It is sometimes parasitic, but can also 
be saprophytic, producing a wet white rot in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to be edible, but in the Orient it is pictured in many classical art 
works and has been revered for centuries as a symbol of success and well-being ( Ling Chih 
means" marvelous herb" or"mushroom of immortality"). It has been used in the treatment 
of cancer and various other maladies, and is believed by some to have the power of arousing 
the dead. One method of preparation is to soak the fruiting body in wine for several 
months. The resulting liquid "essence" or elixir is then drunk or put into candies. The 
varnished fruiting bodies are also used for decorative purposes. 
COMMENTS: This striking polypore and its close relatives are easily recognized by 
their shiny ochre to reddish-black caps that look as if they had been artificially varnished 
or shellacked (see Color PIa te 156) unless old orcovered by spore powder. Like PiplOporus 
belUlinus. the fruiting bodies are annual (with one tube layer) but persist for months. 
Two extreme growth forms occur: one is fairly large, often sessile( with little or no stalk) and 
particularly common in North America. The other is smaller( cap rarely over 15 cm broad), 
has a long slender stalk, and appears to be more common in the tropics and Old W orid. 
However, a large number of intermediate forms also occur, plus occasional abnormal ones 
in which the fruiting body is branched and antler- or tree-like, and these are all currently 
thought to be forms of one highly variable, farflung species. G. curtisii is a similar species 
with an ochre to whitish or only partly reddish cap that often lacks the varnish in age. It 
typically has a stalk and grows on hardwoods in eastern (especially southeastern) North 
America. G. tsugae (COLOR PLATE 156) is also very similar to G.lucidum. but has 
white flesh and grows only on conifers, particularly hemlock, in northern North America. 
Still another similar species, G. oregonense, also grows on conifers, but is usually 
larger ( ca p 5-100 cm broad, 2-20 cm thick!), with larger spores and a somew hat darker or 
slightly duller ca p. It is the most common "Varnished Conk" of Washington, Oregon, and 
California. All of these can be distinguished from FomilOpsis pinicola by their punkier 
(softer) flesh, annual fruiting body, and brown-staining pore surface (when fresh). 
Fomitopsis pinicola (Red-Belted Conk) 
FRUITING BODY emerging as a whitish, pale yellow, or lilac-tinged knob, becoming 
hoof-shaped or shelflike or sometimes bracketlike; hard and woody in age. CAP 540 (75) 
cm broad, 3-22 cm thick, usually fan-shaped to semi-circular in outline; surface developing 
a thin, hard, resinous crust in age which is sometimes slightly varnished; usually at least 
partially reddish to dark red, but sometimes brown and often rusty or blackish-brown 
toward the base and brightly colored (white, yellow, ochraceous, or reddish) at the margin; 
concentrically furrowed and/ or zoned in age; growing margin rounded, thick, and blunt. 
Flesh corky or woody, very tough, white to pinkish-buff or yellow when young, pale 
brownish or straw-colored in old age; usually bruising pinkish when actively growing; odor 
when fresh rather strong and fungal. PORES minute (3-5 per mm), white or pale yellow 
becoming brownish in old age; not turning brown when scratched but sometimes bruising 
yellow or pinkish-lilac; tube layers distinctly stratified, each layer 2-8 mm deep. STALK 
typically absent. SPORE PRINT white or pale yellowish; spores 5-8 x 3.5-5 microns, 
cylindrical to elliptical, smooth. Flesh staining reddish to dark reddish-brown in KOH. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on dead trees, logs, and stumps or rarely on living trees, 
perennial; very common and widely distributed. It has been recorded from a wide range of 
hosts but is found mainly on conifers (in our area primarily Douglas-fir and redwood). It 
attacks both the heartwood and sapwood of its host, producing a slow carbonizing rot 
which fractures the wood and turns it brown ("brown crumbly rot"). Large mycelial mats 
can often be seen in the fractured wood. 
.. 
.'. 
, 
. 
'" 
... 
"""'- 
)t 
: 
..".."." , 
"t ' '. , . \ \ 
;.. 
1 
. J;t' . - 
.,I 
T 
1 
, .. ,... 
'( 
 .... 
""" ' 
Left: Fomilopsis pinico/a. one of the most common of all the conks (top view). Right: A large, old 
specimen of Fomilopsis officina/is (described below). Note how small the penny is! 
EDIBILITY: This woody conk is not often eaten, but in a pinch you can use the following 
recipe developed by my wife: "Saw into 2-inch cubes, then marinate in olive oil and 
dandelion wine for at least 48 hours (be sure to use LOTS of garlic!). Roast slowly on 
skewers over charcoal indefinitely (minimum time: 20 hours). Cool. Pound vigorously 
with a large mallet between two pieces of thick leather. Pulverize in a meat grinder and 
then force through a braced sieve (allow several hours for this step). Wrap the resulting 
mess in several thicknesses of cheesecloth and hang up someplace high and out of the way 
(on a clothesline or TV antenna). Allow to dangle thus for at least one week. (Aging has 
a mellowing effect, so you may want to try one year.) Wring periodically, making sure 
to reserve the drippings for gravy or as a motor oil additive. To eat, boil for twenty-four 
hours, squeeze thoroughly, garnish with gravel, and serve forth." 
COMMENTS: This beautiful but cosmopolitan conk is a major destroyer of dead coni- 
ferous timber. The reddish or partially reddish cap with a brightly colored margin (when 
growing) and pallid pores that do not bruise brown are good field marks. Varnished spe- 
cimens might be confused with Ganoderma tsugae or G. oregonensis(see G. lucidum), but 
are perennial and much harder and denser. Fomes pinicola and Vngulina marginata are 
synonyms. Another common, widespread woody conk with whitish flesh and white to 
yellowish pores is H eterobasidion annosum (=F omes annosus). I t has a bracketlike to 
shelflike to resupinate or irregularly knobby fruiting body that, when shelflike, is usually 
thinner and rougher (knobby, pitted, grooved, etc.) than F. pinicola. The cap is usually 
brown to grayish-brown with a pallid growing margin, but is sometimes reddish-brown 
(and can be whitish when very young) and its flesh does not redden in KOH. It is a frequent 
parasite of conifers ( or occasionally hardwoods) and usually grows at the base ofthe trunk 
or from its roots. It is especially common on second-growth mountain conifers (e.g., pon- 
derosa and Jeffrey pines). Two other species with whitish to yellow-brown flesh,F.fraxi- 
nophilus and F. ellisianus, somewhat resemble H. annosum but have different hosts: 
the first favors ash trees, while the second grows on buffalo berry (a shrub). 
Fomitopsis officina/is (Quinine Conk; Quinine Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY perennial, emerging as a whitish knob, then becoming convex and 
finally hoof-shaped to cylindrical; hard and tough in age. CAP 4-30 cm broad and 5-40 
cm or more thick (high); surface with a thin crust, often cracked and/ or furrowed in age; 
579 
580 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
white to yellowish, but aging grayish and sometimes with a greenish covering of algae. 
Flesh thick, white, cheesy when young but chalky or friable (crumbly) in mature or old 
specimens; odor farinaceous; taste very bitter. PORES 34 per mm, white or whitish when 
fresh, discoloring in age or drying; tube layers each 3 -20 mm long, often stratified. ST ALK 
absent. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 4-5.5 x 34 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or several on living and dead conifers; common year-round 
throughout much of the West, especially on larch and pine, but also on spruce, fir, hemlock, 
and Douglas-fir. It apparently does not occur in our area, but I have seen it on sugar pine 
and ponderosa pine on the slopes of the Sierra Nevada. It is said to be one of the three major 
destroyers of standing coniferous timber in the West (Phellinus pini and Phaeolus 
schweinitz;; are the other two). It causes "felted heart rot," an extensive carbonizing trunk 
rot with thick mycelial mats often several feet long. 
EDIBILITY: Friable but not fryable-it is inedible due to the bitter taste and tough 
texture, but has been used as a laxative and quinine substitute. (It does not have anti- 
malarial properties, but was thought to because of its taste.) Since the fruiting bodies often 
grow high above the ground, commercial "quinine" collectors used to dislodge them with 
rifles. 
CO MMENTS: Also known asLaricifomes officina/is andF omes officina/is, this destruc- 
tive conifer-killer is easily recognized by its pale color, chalky white flesh, bitter taste, 
and sometimes massive size. New fruiting bodies are convex, but add layers yearly until 
they are hoof-shaped if growing on slash or vertically elongated (cylindrical) if growing 
high up on living trees (see photo at top of p. 579). Specimens 60 cm(2 ft.) in height with 
more than 70 tube layers have been recorded! 
Fomitopsis cajanderi (Rosy Conk) 
FRUITING BODY often perennial; shelflike or bracketlike to somewhat hoof-shaped, 
tough in age. CAP 2.5-10 (13) cm broad, 0.3-2 cm thick; surface covered with hairs, 
becoming nearly bald in age (but often roughened), not incrusted; pinkish-red to pinkish- 
brown becoming brown to grayish-brown and in old age blackish except for the margin; 
often zoned or grooved concentrically; margin usually thin, acute. Flesh rosy-pink to 
reddish-brown or pinkish-brown, rather soft when fresh but corky in age. PORES minute 
(3-5 per mm), rosy to pinkish-red or pinkish-brown when fresh, often duller and darker 
(reddish-brown) in age; tube layers not distinctly stratified; each layer 1-3 mm deep. 
ST ALK absent. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 4-8 x 1.5-2.5 microns, cylindrical but 
slightly curved (sausage-shaped), smooth. 
HABIT AT: Usually in colonies on dead conifers, but also reported on madrone and 
various fruit trees; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area, especially on 
Douglas-fir, and is usually but not always perennial. I find it most often on the cut ends of 
recently felled trees. It produces a carbonizing brown pocket rot but is of minor economic 
importance. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible (but see comments on edibility of F. pinicola). 
COMMENTS: The beautiful rosy pore surface is the outstanding feature of this out- 
standing polypore, which is better known as Fomes subroseus. The upper surface is not as 
hard and crusty as that of many species of F omitopsis and F omes, and the fruiting bodies 
are not so obviously perennial- therefore it is apt to be looked for in another genus. Other 
species: F. rosea is practically identical, but has paler (silvery-pink to pale rose) flesh, 
slightly broader, cylindrical (not curved) spores, and a cap surface that is sometimes 
incrusted slightly in older specimens. It also favors conifers, causing a top rot of dead trees. 
. . 
. 
" 
'I' 
, 
J' 
'- 
Phellinus ;gn;ar;us. The black cracked cap is typical of older specimens. The fruiting body can 
be hoof-shaped as well as shelflike. 
Phe//;nus ;gn;ar;us (False Tinder Polypore; False Tinder Conk) 
FRUITING BODY perennial, soon shelflike or bracketlike to hoof-shaped; hard and 
woody. CAP 5-20 cm or more broad, 2-12 (20) cm thick; surface usually with a crust, at 
least in older specimens; brown and finely hairy or velvety when young, soon becoming 
bald and grayish, then finally black; often cracked, furrowed, and/ or knobby in age; 
margin brown and velvety when actively growing. Flesh hard, woody, rusty-brown to 
brown; taste sour or bitter. PORES minute, 4-5 per mm, grayish-brown to brown; tube 
layers each 2-5 mm long but not always stratified; tubes and pores of older(buried) layers 
often stuffed with white mycelial threads that show as streaks or flecks when cut open. 
ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 5-7 )( 4-6 microns, round 
or nearly round, smooth. Brown sterile cells (setae) sometimes abundant among the 
basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on hardwood trunks (usually living); widely 
distributed. It is especially common on birch and aspen in the northern half of North 
America, and occurs year-round. In our area it grows on alder, madrone, manzanita, 
maple, and willow, but in my experience is not common. It can be quite destructive, causing 
an intensive white heart rot that reduces its host to a "soft, spongy, whitened mass." 
EDIBILITY: Inedible unless you are fond ofwood(see recipe under Fomitopsispinicola). 
COMMENTS: This conk is easily recognized by its brown to grayish-black cap and 
pores, brown to rusty-brown flesh, velvety brown actively-growing margin, and whitish- 
flecked or streaked tubes when old. A smaller variant, often called P. tremulae, is com- 
mon on aspen. P. laevigatus is a closely related resupinate variety that usually grows 
on birch; P. pomaceus, often resupinate, causes extensive heart rot in fruit trees (Prunus), 
especially wild ones; P. robusluS( see comments under P. gilvus) is similar, but has yellow- 
brown flesh and favors oak or eucalyptus. Finally, there is the "true" tinder polypore or 
"Amadou!" Fomesfomentarius. This hoof-shaped fungus resembles P. igniarius in color 
but has a hard thick surface crust, non-stratified tubes without white mycelial threads, 
and cylindrical spores 14-20 microns long. It grows on dead hardwoods (especially birch 
and maple) or from wounds in living trees, and is widely distributed. Unlike Ganoder;"a 
581 
582 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
applanaturn, its pore surface is not white and does not turn brown when scratched. As its 
name implies, it has been used for centuries to ignite fires. Since the tubesare not stratified, 
they are quite long and readily soak up liquids through capillary action. Chunks of the 
tube layer were soaked in a salt peter solution, then dried and used as "matches." 
Phellinus gilvus (Oak Conk) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike, often perennial; tough and corky when 
fresh. CAP 2.5-15 cm broad and 1-3 cm thick; fan-shaped or semi-circular in outline; sur- 
face at first velvety Uust the growing margin if perennial), becoming rough to nearly 
smooth and/ or somewhat zoned; bright rusty-yellow to ochraceous when young(as is the 
growing margin of older specimens), dark rusty-brown and finally blackish in age; not in- 
crusted. Flesh tough, bright ochraceous to dark yellow-brown or colored like cap. PORES 
minute( 4-8 per mm), grayish-brown becoming reddish-brown or dark brown; tubes in 1-5 
layers, each 1-5 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 4-5 x 2.5-3.5 
microns (but rarely found), oblong-elliptical, smooth. Large brown sterile cells (setae) 
abundant among the basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in colonies on dead or occasionally living hardwoods 
(rarely on conifers); widely distributed. It occurs year-round in our area on oak and tan- 
oak and is our most common perennial polypore of dead hardwoods. It produces a 
general delignifying decay of the sapwood, rendering it whitish and very brittle. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The dark rusty-brown color and velvety yellow-ochre growing margin 
are the fallible field marks of this common conk. The upper surface is not crusty as in many 
conks, and the color and texture are somewhat reminiscent of old Phaeolus schweinitzii, 
which grows with conifers( usually on the ground). A specimen of P. gilvus can be seen in the 
photograph at the bottom of p. 887. Other Phellinusspecies that favor hardwoods include: 
P. robustus, widespread, especially on oaks, large and woody but not incrusted, with a 
gray-brown to blackish cap, bright yellow-brown flesh, and stratified tubes (it also grows 
on eucalyptus, pittosporum, walnut, cactus, various other hardwoods, and on conifers); 
P. everhartii (see photo at bottom of p. 583), very hard and woody, up to 40 cm broad, 
growing mainly on oak, with unstratified tubes, brown spores, and setae;P. rimosus(=P. 
robiniae), with a rich brown cap, growing on locust, acacia, and other legumes; and P. 
ferruginosus and P. ferreus, common on dead hardwoods and rather similar to P. gilvus, 
but with a rusty-brown resupinate (capless) fruiting body. Most of these were once placed 
in Fornes, but now belong to Phellinus because they darken in KOH, have rusty-brown to 
ta wny flesh, and often possess setae. For conifer-loving species, see P. pini, and for a similar 
but more brightly colored annual species, see Inonolus radial us (under /. hispidus). 
Phellinus pini (Pine Conk) 
FRUITING BODY perennial; shelflike, hooflike, or bracketlike, very tough or woody. 
CAP 2-20 cm broad and 1-15 cm thick; hoof-shaped to convex or fan-shaped; surface hard, 
often crusty but not shiny; rough or cracked, minutely hairy orroughened(like sandpaper) 
at first, often concentrically grooved in age; tawny to rusty-brown becoming brown to 
reddish-brown or brownish-black in age; margin sometimes brighter. Flesh less than I cm 
thick, tough, tawny to rusty-reddish or ochre. PORES 2-5 per mm, round to irregularly 
sinuous, ochraceous-tawny to rusty-brown becoming brown; tubes2-5 mm long, in one or 
several layers. ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT brown; spores4 x 3.5-5 
microns, round or nearly round, smooth. Large brown sterile cells (setae) intermingled 
with basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in rows or columns up and down living or recently 
tf, 
-11:-" ..T./ 
'f',,"\ 
' 
., 
'J 
. #l . 
l\. 
,".i ., 
. <:t. 4 
.ati,., 
,yt:f:r.' 
" 
, .... ,; 
{ 
. i 
.Y" 
.. " 
... 
.. . 
.8. 
(\ 
I 
" 
 
........ 
Phe//inus pini is a major parasite of conifers, particularly pines. The tough fruiting bodies often 
form lines along the entire length of the trunk. Note the somewhat sinuous pores. 
conifers; widely distributed and common, infecting all important members of the pine 
family (pine, Douglas-fir, etc.). Perennial, in our area occurring mainly on pine. It attacks 
the heartwood and sometimes the sapwood ofliving trees, resulting in a delignifying pocket 
rot known as "conch rot." The fruiting bodies are largely confined to older trees, partly 
because years of growth must take place before the mycelium can fruit. As a result, the 
appearance of a single fruiting body means that extensive heart rot has already taken place 
10-15 feet above and below it. This fungus is said to cause more timber loss than any other. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible (but see comments on edibility of Fomitopsis pinico/a). 
COMMENTS: The rough unpolished cap, frequently sinuous pores, ochraceous to rust- 
colored flesh, and growth on conifers are the fallible fieldmarks of this destructive fungus. 
It varies considerably in size, from large hoof-shaped specimens to moderately sized ones 
( see photo), to a small thin shelving form that often occurs in fused masses and is considered 
a distinct species, P. chrys%ma, by many investigators. Other species: Truncospora demi- 
doffii (also known as Fu/vijomes, Pyrofomes, or Fomesjuniperinus) is somewhat similar, 
but has rusty to reddish-orange flesh and grows only on juniper; P. texanus resembles a 
small P. robustus (see comments under P. gilvus) but also grows onjuniper, while a resu- 
pinate form of P. robustus with bright yellow-brown flesh often grows on conifers; P. 
taxodii causes heart rot in bald cypress; P. nigro/imitatus, common on conifers in the 
Rocky Mountains, usually has a spongy upper layer oftissue and fine black lines running 
through its flesh;P. toru/osus looks like P. gilvus, but has yellow-brown pores and grows 
on conifers in Arizona. For hardwood-loving species, see P. gilvus and P. igniarius. 
An old Phe//inus everharlii(see comments under P. gi/vus). Bark protects a tree from infection, but 
nailing a signboard to a tree(as shown here) or otherwise defacing it can allow fungal spores to enter! 
. 
"' 
.,,-t 
 
...  
 -1 ., 
. 
1\. ....:.. ',' 
'"" ..;.. 
,- \ . 
,ill' . 
" , 
""i'  
. 
 
.\ 
.. 
-. 
'" 
.' 
'. 
, -> 
,;, '(' 
1 
'. . 
\ 
584 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
PIPTOPORUS & CRYPTOPORUS 
THESE two oddball genera are each represented in North America by a single farflung 
species. Piptoporus has a conklike (but annual) fruiting body whose margin projects 
be/ow the pore surface to form a "curb." In Cryptoporusthis theme is carried to its illogical 
extreme: the margin of the cap is so ingrown (or overgrown) that it completely covers the 
pore surface, thus hiding it from view! 
Key to Piptoporus & Cryptoporus 
I. Pore surface exposed; cap margin curblike; found on birch ............ P. belulinus, below 
I. Pore surface completely hidden (at least until old age); found on conifers C. volvalus, p. 585 
Piptoporus betulinus (Birch Conk; Birch Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY annual, nearly round becoming shelflike or hooflike at maturity; 
tough or corky when fresh, rigid and hard when dry. CAP (2.5) 5-25 cm broad, 2-6 (10) cm 
thick, kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline, convex to nearly plane; surface covered 
by a thin, smooth or suedelike, white to buff, tan, brown, or grayish-brown crust that often 
breaks up into scales or flat patches or wears away, revealing the whitish undersurface; 
margin thick, blunt, inrolled, curblike (projecting below the pore surface), sometimes 
wavy. Flesh punky or corky, thick, white. PORES appearing recessed due to curblike 
margin, 24 per mm; white when fresh, in age becoming pale brown or grayish-brown and 
occasionally torn up or toothlike; tubes 2-10 mm long, one layer only. STALK absent or 
present only as a stubby extension of the cap; lateral or attached to top of cap. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 1.5-2 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or columns on dead or sometimes living birch trees; 
common year-round in the northern hemisphere throughout the range of birch. I have not 
seen it in California, undoubtedly because birch does not occur naturally. However, it 
is found in Washington and Idaho and is very abundant in northeasternN orthAmerica. It 
causes a reddish-brown to yellow-brown carbonizing decay. 
ED IBILITY: Edible when young (according to McIlvaine), but tough. The fruiting bodies 
are quite attractive, however, and have enjoyed a variety of non-culinary uses, e.g., as 
Piptoporus betu/inus. Note the thick blunt margin and recessed pore surface of this unique birch- 
loving polypore. 
, 
\. IIf ...' 
-- , 
. 
; 
.. 
 
\ 
,. 
 
PIPTOPORUS 
585 
tinder, as a razor strop, and as a mounting medium for pinned insect specimens. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Polyporus betulinus, this common and distinctive 
polypore is easily told by its recessed pore surface with a curblike margin ( see photo) plus 
its white to tan or grayish-tan color and growth on birch. The fruiting bodies are annual 
in the sense that they possess only one tube layer; however, they remain intact for many 
months and as a result can be found year-round. 
Cryptoporus volvotus (Cryptic Globe Fungus; Veiled Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY annual, tough or corky, more or less round to oval to slightly com- 
pressed or hooflike; 1.5.5 cm broad, with a hollow interior. CAP(upper or outer surface) 
with a thin, smooth, glazed or resinous crust; whitish to warm tan or yellowish, drying 
darker( ochre-brown to reddish-brown); margin extending down and under to form""veil" 
which completely covers pore surface; in age the underside perforated by one (rarely two) 
holes. Flesh whitish, tough; odor often fragrant (like Sparassis). PORES hidden by the 
""veil," 3-4 per mm, white becoming pinkish or brownish in age; tu bes2-5 mm long. ST ALK 
absent. SPORE PRINT pinkish or flesh-colored; spores often collecting in a heap on the 
inner ""floor" of fresh specimens), 8-12 x 3-5 microns, cylindrical to elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in groups on dead or occasionally old living conifers 
throughout northern North America. Common year-round in our area, especially on 
pine. It seems to favor standing or recently felled trees and produces a delignifyingdecay 
that scarcely damages its host. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to be edible. However, Alexander Smith says that "worms" 
(insect larvae) found inside the fruiting bodies can be used as fishbait. So can worms 
found outside the fruiting bodies. 
COMMENTS: This bizarre evolutionary anomaly looks like a cross between a confused 
puffball and a bemused oak gall. The smooth, warmly tanned exterior is quite attractive 
(often reminding me of a small loaf of bread) and gives no hint of the tube layer within. 
Slicing it open, however, reveals a hollow interior with a ""ceiling" of tubes. The ""floor" 
eventually ruptures and tiny bark-boring beetles enter the ""trap door" in search of tasty 
tube tissue and spores. After feasting they depart to construct brood tunnels in old or 
dying conifers, and the spores they carry with them gain entry to a new host. Later, fruiting 
bodies may emerge through the very holes bored by the beetles! 
Cryptoporus volvatus can be hoof-shaped (like these specimens here) or spherical. The tube layer is 
inside the fruiting body, as shown in sectioned specimen at right. 
""' 
.. 
.. 
- )," ... 
J' . , 
I , . 
& 
I ,. . ..".. 
.. .  
.. 
. ;*  
,- 
.- 
'. . . --   
.- . -. . -: 
"'" 
. .... 
. ..-  -  
J __..  - - 
Close-up of the pore surface in Daeda/eopsis confragosa (po 588). Note how the pores range from 
round (bottom left) to elongated or maze like. 
LENZITES, DAEDALEA, & Allies 
Fruiting body small to medium-sized, tough and leathery or sometimes woody, usually dnnual 
(but often perennial in Daedalea), growing sheItlike or bracketlike on wood. CAP zoned or 
unzoned, variously colored, hairy to smooth. PORES usually mazelike, sinuous, or meandering, or 
forming plate-like gills. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT whitish to brown, but 
difficult to obtain. Spores usually cylindrical, smooth. 
THESE corky or leathery fungi can betoldfrom Tramelesand other bracketlike polypores 
by the configuration of their spore-producing surface. In Daedalea and Daedaleopsis 
(derived from the Greek word daedalus. meaning "maze") the pores are usually long and 
sinuous or mazelike and have relatively few cross-walls. In Lenzitesand Gloeophyllum. on 
the other hand, the cross-walls have all but disappeared, leaving plate-like gills instead of 
pores! However, the configuration varies considerably, especially in Daedalea and 
Daedaleopsis. leading to confusion with numerous other polypores( when the pores are not 
distinctly mazelike), and with species such as Phellinus pini. a "conk" with somewhat 
SInUOUS pores. 
Like most polypores, the species treated here are too tough to eat. If your polypore has 
gills, it should key out here. If it has mazelike pores, however, it may not key out 
convincingly, in which case other groups of polypores should be checked. 
Key to Lenzites, Daedalea, & Allies 
1. Flesh and gills or pores yellow-brown to reddish-brown or brown when fresh; flesh typically 
at least I mm thick and usually darkening or blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH) . 2 
I. Not as above; flesh white or pale-colored when fresh (but may become pale brown in old age or 
after weathering), or if brown when fresh then typically less than I mm thick; pores or gills 
variable in color (white, violet-tinged, brown, gray, blackish, etc.) .................... 5 
2. Typically growing on hardwoods (or occasionally on conifers such as bald cypress); flesh thin 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Gloeophyllum trabeum (see G. saepiarium, p. 590) 
2. Typically growing on conifers (but occasionally on hardwoods) ....................... 3 
3. Fruiting body usually with an anise-odor when fresh; underside of cap usually with pores ... 
. ... .... ..... ..... . ..... . .. Osmoporusodoratus{see G/oeophy//um saepiarium. p.590) 
3. Notasabove ................................................................. 4 
586 
LENZITES, DAEDALEA, & ALLIES 
587 
4. Underside of cap usually with gills; cap surface often (but not always) with white, yellow, or 
orange tones or zones when fresh; very common Gloeophyllum saep;ar;um & others, p. 590 
4. Underside of cap usually with sinuous or mazelike pores; cap dark or dull brown .......... 
......................................... Daedaleaberkeley;(see D. quercina, below) 
5. Cap surface decidedly hairy, woolly, or velvety when fresh (but may be nearly smooth in old 
or very weathered specimens) .................................................. 6 
5. Cap surface not hairy or only very slightly so when young ........................... II 
6. Underside of cap typically composed of gills or plates (but sometimes varying to mazelike) 7 
6. Underside of cap typically composed of elongated pockets or mazelike pores (but sometimes 
forming gills or regular pores) .................................................. 9 
7. Gills crisped (crimped), usually forked or shallow and veinlike; cap up to 2.5 cm broad, typically 
not zoned concentrically; found on hardwoods in eastern North America ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .' (see PI;caturops;s cr;spa under Schizophy//um commune, p. 590) 
7. Not as above; larger or cap concentrically zoned or found on conifers or in West ......... 8 
8. Gills often violet-tinged when fresh; cap often grayish to blackish in old age, zoned or unzoned; 
typically found on conifers (see Tr;chaptum ab;et;nus var. ab;et;s under T. abietinus, p. 593) 
8. Not as above; cap usually zoned; usually found on hardwoods ..... Lenz;tes betul;na, p. 589 
9. Fruiting body soft or watery when fresh, discoloring rusty or reddish after handling, or if not, 
then often quite thick (3-8 cm); fresh pore surface whitish . (see Tyromyces & Allies, p. 597) 
9. Not as above; fruiting body usually quite thin and tough when fresh, not soft and watery; pore 
surface often gray to brown or blackish, at least in age ............................. 10 
10. Cap brown to blackish and velvety when fresh; tubes often unequal in length or appearing slot- 
like (see photo on p. 596) ............................... (see Datron;a moll;s, p. 595) 
10. Cap white to grayish, brown, greenish, etc., usually hairy; tubes often breaking up in age to 
form "teeth" ................... Cerrena un;color(see Daedaleopsis con/ragosa, p. 588) 
II. Gills when present thick, blunt, and widely spaced (I mm or more apart); pores when present 
I mm or more broad, the walls thick and blunt ................................... 12 
II. Gills when present thinner and closer (less than-I mm) than above; pores when present smaller 
(averaging 1-3 per mm), the walls thin .......................................... 14 
12. Typically found on hardwoods ............................. Daedalea querc;na, below 
12. Typically found on conifers (occasionally on hardwoods) ........................... 13 
13. Found on juniper ........................ Daedaleajun;per;na (see D. quercina, below) 
13. Found on other conifers; cap often poorly developed .................................. 
. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . (see Cor;olellus heteromorpha under Poria corticola, p. 603) 
14. Cap white, at least when fresh ............ Daedaleops;s amb;gua (see D. con/ragosa, 588) 
14. Cap pallid to brown, grayish, reddish-brown, etc. ......... Daedaleops;s con/ragosa, p. 588 
Daedalea quercina (Thick-Walled Maze Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY usually perennial; shelflike, rigid and very tough or corky. CAP 4-20 
cm broad and 1.5-8 cm thick, more or less fan-shaped; convex or plane; surface uneven 
or roughened, usually concentrically furrowed or zoned in older specimens (from new 
growth layers); whitish to tan, ochraceous, grayish, or brown (usually quite pale when 
fresh), often blackening and cracking in old age; margin often thick. Flesh very tough and 
corky; white to buff, ochraceous, or pale brown (never dark). PORES usually greatly 
elongated and pocket- or mazelike, sometimes even forming gills; whitish to buff, tan, 
or dull ochre; tube walls ( or "gills") thick (1 mm or more), the spaces between them at 
least I mm broad; tubes 0.5-3 cm long, the layers not distinctly stratified. STALK absent 
or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 5-7.5 )( 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical to 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or sometimes in shelving groups on dead or living hardwoods, espe- 
cially oak, chestnut, and chinquapin; widely distributed, but especiallycommonineastern 
North America. 1 have seen it in northern California and Oregon, but have yet to find it in 
our area. It causes a brown heart rot, and the tough fruiting bodies occur year-round. 
'"  ....'-"'-..... 
,,...,- 
 "' 
. "",;..., 
," '-"".... "'.. 
,-.::s ..* -.. 
. 
-,", 
*, 
;":!"...:.,"""'' '. 
-  --,..., -, 
......-  ..- 
- .. ""'" ,.  "'-. 
" -.. ......................  
 """'-. ... .. 
,.... .  ,..... ." ..............  
.,. - .-.... -.., ... 
-- -..I . _. _ __ 
..;.- ... -....... - ... 
-" - - '.. 
- .- .. '. 
.....;::.r _.'" ..::: :, 
- .". . . .."...'!':.;.-.",.. # . / 
-  --" Jo 
:.,. '... . 
- - . 
Left: Mazelike pore surface of Daeda/ea quercina. Note the thick walls separating the "pores," and 
compare them to the thinner walls of Daeda/eopsis confragosa (photo on p. 586). Right: Close-up 
of the thick gills of G/oeophy//um saepiarium (see description on p. 590). 
EDIBILITY: Much too tough to be edible. 
COMMENTS: The color of this species is rather variable, but the configuration of its 
sporebearing surface is relatively constant (i.e., mazelike), and not nearly as polymorphic 
as that of Daedaleopsis confragosa. In addition, the tube walls are thicker and often 
deeper (see photo) and the fruiting body is usually perennial. Daedalea berkeleyi is 
a southern species that grows on dead conifers and has dark brown to dark rusty-brown 
flesh. Daedalea juniperina is a widespread but smaller pale-fleshed species that grows 
on juniper. Both of the above tend to have mazelike pores and neither is worth eating. 
Daedaleopsis confragosa (Thin-Walled Maze P olypore) 
FR UITIN G BOD Y usually annual, shelflike or sometimes bracketlike, leathery or corky 
when fresh, rigid when dry. CAP (3) 5-15 (22) cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular in 
outline, broadly convex to plane; surface dry, smooth or slightly hairy, usually zoned or 
ridged concentrically, often radially wrinkled or bumpy in age; reddish-brown to brown 
to grayish, sometimes blackish in old age; margin thin, acute. Flesh white to pinkish or 
brownish, tough. PORES 0.5-1.5 mm in diameter, usually elongated and maze like with 
relatively thin walls, but sometimes circular and at other times forming gills or becoming 
toothlike in age; white to tan or brown. sometimes bruising pinkish or reddish; tubes up to 
1.5 cm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 2-3 microns, cylin- 
drical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods or from wounds in living trees, 
occurring year-round (sometimes perennial); widely distributed. I ts favorite host is willow, 
but it also occurs on birch and other hard woods and very rarely on conifers. I have yet to 
find it in our area, perhaps because it is not fond of oak. However, it occurs in the Pacific 
North west and is very common in eastern North America. I t produces a delignifyingdecay 
of the sapwood. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible. 
COMMENTS: The maze-like ("daedaloid") pattern of the pores is characteristic of this 
species and several others, all of which were originally placed in a single genus, Daedalea. 
588 
DAEDALEOPSIS 
589 
The configuration of the pores is extremely variable, however, leading to confusion with 
Lenzites and Gloeophyllum (when they form gills), and dozens of other polypores(when 
they are not noticeably daedaloid). This species can usually be recognized, however, 
by its relatively thin, corky, fan-shaped, brown to grayish cap with a bald, often zoned 
surface. The depth of the tubes and thickness of the cap are also quite variable, depending 
on how old the fruiting body is, but the tube walls are never as thick as those of Daedalea 
quercina (see photo at top of p. 586). Daedalea confragosa is an older name for it. Other 
species: Daedaleopsis ambigua is a similar southern species with a whiter cap. Cerrena 
(=Daedalea) unicolor has a thin, hairy, white to grayish (or greenish from a coating of 
algae) cap and pallid to grayish or even blackish mazelike pores that often break up to 
form small "teeth." It is common on dead hardwoods in many regions, but not ours. For 
other ..daedaloid" species, see Daedalea quercina and Gloeophyllum saepiarium. 
Lenzites betulina (GiBed Polypore) 
FRUITIN G BODY usually annual; shelflike, bracketlike, orforming rosettes; tough and 
leathery. CAP 2-13 cm broad, nearly round to fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, velvety 
or hairy, with narrow concentric zones or grooves of various colors: whitish, tan, buff, 
gray, brown, yellow-brown, dull orange, etc. (or in old age often greenish from algae). 
Flesh thin (1-2 mm), tough, white. GILLS platelike, often branching toward the margin 
or forming elongated pockets (especially in young specimens); white or whitish, drying 
dingy yellowish or darker, often wavy in age. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 4-7 )( 1.5-3 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or more often in overlapping rows, columns, or shelving masses on 
rotting hardwood logs and stumps (rarely on conifers); widely distributed and very 
common in our area throughout the year, often sharing logs with Trametes versicolor and 
Stereum hirsutum. The species epithet means birch, but it grows on a wide range of hard- 
woods, especially oak and willow. It produces a de lignifying decay of the sapwood. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible, but dries nicely. If you are adamant about trying it, see comments 
on the edibility of Trametes versicolor for cooking suggestions. 
COMMENTS: This species is an excellent example of convergent evolution-a gilled 
fungus that is not an agaric. Inall respects save the gills it is a typical polypore-the multi- 
colored, hairy, zoned cap bearing an uncannY resemblance to Trametes species. In fact, it 
sometimes can't be distinguished from those mushrooms without examining the underside 
ofthecap. Itcanalsobeconfused with Gloeophyllum, which has brown gills, and Daedalea 
and Daedaleopsis, which ha ve ..daedaloid"( elongated or mazelike) pores. In eastern North 
America, L. betu/ina often shows orange tones on the cap, whereas in our area it is usually 
quite dull in color (grayish, buff, etc.). 
unzites betulina is a common hardwood-loving polypore with a hairy zoned cap and gills instead 
of pores. It is often found with Trametes versicolor. 
. 
_. .. ... , 
.- 
I  .  
I{II\I \'  . 
I . f_ 
/ 
590 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
Gloeophyllum saep;ar;um (Rusty Gilled Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY annual; shelflike or bracketlike, leathery when fresh, rigid when dry. 
CAP 2-12 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, hairy to nearly smooth, 
concentrically zoned or ridged and often radially wrinkled, rusty-brown to dark brown or 
maroon-brown, often with brighter (yellow, orangish, etc.) zones, but sometimes fading or 
weathering to grayish; margin orange, yellow, or whitish when actively growing. Flesh 1-5 
mm thick, yellow-brown to rusty-brown. GILLS close, ochre to yellow-brown or rusty- 
brown becoming brownish in old age, often fused to form elongated pores or sometimes the 
underside of cap entirely poroid or even toothlike. ST ALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 8-13 x 3-5 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Cap tissue blackening in potassium 
hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or overlapping tiers on dead conifers ( or occasionally 
dead hardwoods, particularly aspen); very widely distributed. I have yet to find it in our 
area, but it is very common in the Southwest, Pacific Northwest, and the mountains of 
California. It causes a rapid carbonizing decay (brown rot) of both the heartwood and 
sapwood, and along with G. trabeum (see comments), is a pest of telephone poles, struc- 
tural timber in houses and bridges, etc. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Lenzites saepiaria, this common conifer-lover, like 
the hardwood-loving Lenzites betulina, typically has gills instead of pores (see photo on 
p. 588). However, the gills are not white and the flesh is rusty-brown-a typical feature of 
Gloeophyllum. The gills at times join to form mazelike pockets and sometimes there are 
pores instead of gills (leading to confusion with Daedalea and Daedaleopsis), but the rusty 
to orange-yellow colors ofthe cap are distinctive. A related species, G. trabeum, hasagray 
to brownish, unzoned cap. It usually grows on dead hardwoods (but occasionally on 
conifers), and is more apt to have mazelike pores than gills. It is said to be common on the 
woodwork of automobiles! Another unzoned species, G. striatum, occurs only on dead 
juniper and cypress. Other species: Osmoporus odoratus is rather similar in color to 
G. saepiarium, but usually has pores on the underside of the cap and often has an aniselike 
odor when fresh. It is widely distributed and produces a brown rot in dead conifers. 
SCHIZOPHYLLUM 
SCHIZOPHYLLUM is unique by virtue of its longitudinally split or grooved gills (see 
description and photographs). It has few close relatives and is placed in its own family, 
the Schizophyllaceae, by most taxonomists. It looks like a polypore, however, and is 
treated as one here. One cosmopolitan species is described here. 
Sch;zophyllum commune (Split-Gill) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or with a narrowed base, tough and leathery both fresh and 
dry. CAP 1-4 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped (or vase-shaped if stalk central); surface 
dry, densely hairy, white to grayish-white, gray, or sometimes brownish-gray when wet; 
margin usually lobed and imolled in dry weather. Flesh tough, leathery, thin, pallid or 
grayish. GILLS radiating from point of attachment, well-spaced, white to grayish; edges 
appearing split or grooved lengthwise (i.e., cuplike in cross-section), rolling back in dry 
weather. STALK absent or present only as a narrowed basal point of attachment. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 3-4 (6) x 1-1.5 (3) microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups, rows, or fused clusters on hardwood sticks, stumps, 
. "' 
 \'  
'''' \\ 
,,- - 
, 
.... 
 
;\\4 
/ 
- 
-.,."  
l .' 
".- 
/' 
\, 
I<f 
Schizophy//um commune. This close-up shows how each gill is actually composed of two adjacent 
plates. Note hairs on cap. 
logs, etc.; distribution worldwide. It survives dry spells by folding back its gills, and hence 
can be found practically year-round. In our area it is common on oak, producing a white 
rot (delignifying decay) in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Too small and tough to be of value. However, some natives of Madagascar 
are said to chew them, for reasons unknown. 
COMMENTS: The hairy white to grayish cap of this farflung fungus is reminiscent of the 
common bracket polypores in the genus Trichaplum. However, the peculiar manner in 
which the gills split lengthwise is unique. The "split" gills are actually two adjacent plates 
which separate and roll up in dry weather, thus protecting the spore-bearing surface 
(see photographs). Specimens sealed in a tube in 1911, then moistened 50 years later, 
unrolled their gills and began shedding spores! Schizophyllum has been widely used in 
genetic studies because it fruits readily in the laboratory. Trog;a(=P/;caturops;s} cr;spa of 
eastern North America is a related mushroom with crisped (wavy) gills and a tough, hairy, 
tan to yellowish cap. 
Schizophy//um commune. Left: Mature specimens. Cap color ranges from pure white to brownish or 
grayish. Right: A close-up of the "split" gills. 
..) 
,\1 · , 
\ \, \ 
,  
'\ ," 
,;J._-" 
" 
. 
j 
\'. 
.. 
, 
\\1 
I 
. I 
( 
',- 
" 
. 
. " 
592 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
TRAMETES & Allies 
Fruiting bod y small to medium-sized. usually annual but persistent; tough and leathery even when 
fresh; growing shelj1ike or bracketlike on wood (usually dead wood), often in masses. CAP often 
hairy or velvety and zoned concentrically, usually thin. PORES variouslycolored, often minute and 
barely visible, round to angular or becoming toothlike or rarely gill-like; tubes usually shallow, one 
layer only. STALK absent or rudimentary. spa RE PRINT whitish to yellowish (when 0 btain- 
able). Spores typically oblong to cylindrical or sausage-shaped, smooth. 
GROUPED here are a number of smallish tough or leathery bracket fungi. The fruiting 
bodies are much thinner than those ofthe perennial polypores or "conks," and are not soft 
and spongy when fresh as in Tyromyces. In age the tube walls may break up to form small 
"teeth," but do not normally form the mazelike pattern characteristic of Daedalea and 
Daedaleops;s. 
The various genera treated here are not closely related and can easily be distinguished 
by pore (not spore!) color. The most common genus, Trametes, usually has a zoned cap 
and white to dingy buff pores. Tr;chaplUm, also abundant, has violet to brownish pores, 
while Bjerkandera and Datron;a, with brownish to gray or black pores, and Pycnoporus. 
with brilliant red to orange pores, are less frequent. 
All five genera feed largely on dead wood-logs, branches, even twigs. They are by 
far the most numerous polypores, often completely smothering their substrate in hundreds 
of shelving fruiting bodies arranged in attractive clusters or rosettes. Unfortunately, they 
are not tender enough to eat. Six widespread species are described here. 
Key to Trametes & Allies 
I. Pore surface bright saffron to orange-red or red . Pycnoporus c;nnabar;nus & others, p. 597 
I. Not as above (but fertile surface may be rosy, violet, or rusty-reddish) .................. 2 
2. Fertile surface (or pores) typically rosy, violet, or with a distinct violet tinge when fresh '" 3 
2. Fertile surface not rosy or violet-tinged, or rarely with a very faint lavender tinge (and then 
growing on poplar or willow) ................................................... 4 
3. Cap pinkish to reddish or brown when fresh (never white), often fairly thick; pores rosy when 
fresh ................................. (see Ganoderma, Fom;tops;s, & Allies, p. 574) 
3. Not as above; pores tinged violet or lavender when fresh; cap thin and differently colored 8 
4. Fruiting body fleshy (watery or spongy) when fresh (but may toughen in age) and either staining 
rusty-reddish when handled or in age or with bluish spores and bluish or bluish-gray-tinged 
pore surface ....................................... (see Tyromyces & Allies, p. 597) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Pore surface brown (or gray from a hoary coating), the tubes otten of unequal length or slotlike 
(see photo on p. 596) but not usually forming..teeth"; cap very thin, brown to blackish, velvety 
(but not coarsely hairy) when fresh, usually zoned ............... Datron;a mollis, p. 595 
5. Not as above (but pores may be brown or grayish) .................................. 6 
6. Pore surface (tube walls) often breaking up in age to form numerous small "teeth"; cap typically 
hairy ....................................................................... 7 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
7. Pore surface usually grayish to smoky-brown or even blackish in age; cap usually zoned con- 
centrically. . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. Cerrena un;color(see Bjerkandera adusta. p.596) 
7. Pore surface violet-tinged, brown, or occasionally pallid; cap zoned or unzoned ......... 8 
8. Cap commonly up to 7 cm broad; found mainly on hardwoods, especially common in eastern 
North America ........................ Tr;chaptum biform;s (see T. abielinus. p. 593) 
8. Cap usually less than 4 cm broad, or iflarger then usually with gills on underside; found mainly 
on conifers; common and widespread ..................... Tr;chaptum ab;et;nus, p. 593 
9. Pore surface soon gray to smoky-brown or black; pores small to minute (3-7 per mm), not 
pallid when young or if so then tubes usually separated from flesh by a narrow dark line '" 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bjerkandera adusta & others, p. 596 
9. Not with above features (but pore surface may become beige or slightly grayish in age) .. to 
TRAMETES & ALLIES 
593 
10. Cap smooth (bald) or nearly so, or if not then growing on living cypress or juniper and causing 
a brown rot ....................................... (see Tyromyces & Allies, p. 597) 
10. Not as above; cap hairy or velvety; very common, usually on dead wood .............. II 
II. Cap typically Jacking marked concentric zones, grayish to ochraceous to tan or tawny; found 
mainly on poplar, willow, or birch; not common ........ (see Tyromyces& Allies, p. 597) 
II. Cap usually zoned and/ or differently colored; very common on many trees (including poplar, 
willow, and birch) ........................................................... 12 
12. Cap typically 2-7 (10) cm broad, usually with zones of contrasting colors; surface velvety or 
with velvety zones alternating with silky-smooth zones ....... Trametes versicolor, p. 594 
12. Cap 2.5-10 cm broad or more, usually hairy throughout, the zones not sharply contrasting 
in color .......................................... Trametes hirsuta & others, p. 595 
Tr;chaptum ab;et;nus (Violet-Pored Bracket Fungus) 
FR UITIN G BO D Y shelflike or bracketlike, tough and leathery whenfresh, rigid when dry. 
CAP 14 cm broad, fan-shaped to kidney-shaped or elongated in outline; surface dry, 
covered with coarse, stiff hairs; usually concentrically zoned or grooved, white to grayish, 
but old weathered specimens often greenish from algae or blackish; margin often wavy. 
Flesh very thin (up to 1 mm thick), tough, pale gray to brownish or purplish. PORES 24 
per mm, round to angular but in age often irregularly torn or toothlike; whitish to brownish 
but usually tinged bright lavender to purplish when fresh, especially toward cap margin; 
duller or browner in age; tubes very shallow (up to 3 mm long). STALK absent. SPORE 
PRINT whitish; spores 4-8 x 2-4 microns, cylindrical or sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: In groups, shelving masses, or overlapping tiers on decaying conifers; widely 
distributed and common practically year-round. It is said to be the most important de- 
lignifier of coniferous slash in North America. In our area it fa vors Douglas-fir and pine. 
EDIBILITY: Boil for 26 hours, squeeze thoroughly, and serve forth. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hirschioporus abietinus, this little polypore is roughly to 
rotting conifers what Trametes versicolor and Lenzites betu/ina are to rotting hardwoods 
-overwhelmingly abundant. The violet-tinged pores (when fresh) that break up into 
"teeth" are the best field character. The cap is usually zoned, but not multicolored as in 
Trametes versicolor. Fomilopsis cajanderi has rosy pores, but is much thicker and has a 
reddish to brown cap. Other species: T. biformis (better known as Hirschioporus par- 
gamenus) is a hardwood-loving version of T.' abietinus with a cap 2-7 cm broad, violet- 
tinted pores that quickly become toothlike, and soft, velvety hairs on the cap. It is one of 
the most common polypores of eastern North America (even more abundant than 
Trametes versicolor!), often growing in huge masses that completely cover rotting logs, 
but is not as prevalent in the West. T. abietinus var. abietisresembles the typical variety but 
is usually larger, weathers darker, and has "gills" instead of pores on underside of cap. 
Trichaptum (=Hirschioporus) abietinus is abundant on rotting conifers. Note hairy white cap. The 
fertile surface is violet-tinged when fresh and features pores, tiny spines, or even gills! 
.... 
( . 
,. - 
- 
'&:, 
. .. 
. 
 
"- 
., 
,. 
" 
 
0)} 
" 
./ 
- , ) 
r  . 
'l 
... 
........ 
 
, ...:.., 
\. 
 
;:::.:' 
.,. 
" 
Trametes (= Corio/us) versicolor. This picture shows why it is called the "Turkey Tail." Multi-colored 
zones on the cap are distinctive. 
Trametes versicolor Color Plate 158 
(Turkey Tail; Many-Colored Polypore) 
FR UITIN G BODY shelflike or bracketlike, thin and leathery when fresh, rigid or slightly 
flexible when dry. CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, tongue-shap0d becoming fan-shaped, or 
growing in circular rosettes; plane or wavy; surface dry, velvety (covered with fine hairs) 
or silky, strongly zoned with narrow, concentric bands of contrasting colors (but more 
uniformly colored in sheltered situations), hairy zones usually alternating with silky- 
smooth ones; colors extremely variable: a mixture of white, gray, brown, yellowish-buff, 
bluish, reddish, or black (or even greenish from a coating of algae), or sometimes dark 
brown with a white margin; margin often wavy and white or creamy when actively growing. 
Flesh very thin (1-2 mm), tough, white. PORES white to dingy yellowish, minute(3-5 per 
mm) but visible; tubes shallow (up to 2 mm long). ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE 
PRINT white or yellowish; spores 4-6 )( 1.5-2.5 microns, cylindrical or sausage-shaped, 
smooth. 
HABIT AT: Typically in groups, rows, tiers, shelving masses, or overlapping clusters on 
logs, stumps, and fallen branches of dead hardwoods (particularly oak), sometimes also 
on wounds in living trees and rarely on conifers; very common and widely distributed. It is 
abundant in our oak woodlands year-round, but fruits mainly in the winter and spring-it 
can be seen on almost any jaunt through the woods. I t causes a general delignifying decay of 
the sapwood, and along with T. hirsuta, is sometimes parasitic on wounded fruit trees 
and lilac bushes. 
EDIBILITY: Boil for 62 hours, squeeze thoroughly, and serve forth. 
COMMENTS: Our most common polyp ore, this species is well known-by sight if not by 
name-to everyone who spends time in the woods. The multicolored, concentrically zoned 
caps do not decay readily, making beautiful ornaments, brooch clips, earrings, and 
necklaces. The multiplicity of colors is both its most bewildering and most distinctive 
characteristic-no two are colored quite alike. Other Trametes species are less radically 
colored and/ or hairier (see T. hirsuta). Stereum species are superficially similar, but 
lack pores; Trichaptum species have violet-tinged to brownish pores. Synonyms include 
Coriolus versicolor,Polystictus versicolor, andPolyporus versicolor. 
594 
 
, 
. 
"" 
Trameles hirsuta. This species resembles T. versicolor. but is not as colorful and is often larger. 
Trametes hirsuta (Hairy Turkey Tail) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike, tough and leathery when fresh, fairly rigid 
when dry. CAP 2.5-15 (30) cm broad, fan-shaped to nearly circular in outline; surface 
dry, densely and conspicuously hairy to coarsely velvety, usually concentrically zoned or 
grooved, but the colors of each zone dull and not sharply contrasting; whitish to grayish, 
yellowish, dull ochre, buff, beige, or pale brownish, the margin sometimes darker and often 
wavy (but entire surface sometimes greenish from algae). Flesh tough, white (or pale 
brownish to yellowish in age), 1-5 mm thick PORES (1) 24 per mm, white to dingy 
yellowish or buff when fresh, often tinged brownish or gray in age; tubes 1-3 (5) mm long. 
STALK usually absent. SPORE PRINT whitish or pallid; spores 4.5-7.5)( 1.5-3 microns, 
cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in groups, fused rows, or overlapping clusters on dead 
hardwoods (or occasionally conifers); widely distributed throughout the northern hemis- 
phere. It occurs year-round in our area on oak, alder, and other hardwoods, but is rather 
uncommon, at least in comparison to T. versicolor. Like the latter species, it causes a 
general delignifying decay of the sapwood and sometimes parasitizes fruit trees. 
EDIBILITY: Tough and hairy (but see T. versicolor for cooking suggestions). 
COMMENTS: This lesser known cousin of T. versicolor is thicker and often larger than 
that species, but not as brightly colored. Also, the cap is hairier. T. occ;denta/;s is a very 
similar, slightly larger species with a southern and tropical distribution. I t is so similar, 
in fact, that the two may very well be forms of a single wide-ranging species. For a list of 
synonyms for T. occidentalis, see p. 550. Lenzites betu/ina looks quite similar from the top, 
but has gills on the underside ofthe cap. Other species: T. ve/ut;na is very similar, but has a 
more velvety cap and its pores are often smoky-tinged; T. pubescens is smaller and has a 
white to grayish-yellow, silky-hairy cap with a radially striate margin plus a somewhat 
fleshier texture when fresh; both occur on hardwoods and are widely distributed. 
Datronia mollis 
FRUITING BODY annual; bracketlike or at times resupinate; tough when fresh or dry. 
CAP (when present) 1-7 cm broad, shelflike and often wavy; surface umber-brown and 
velvety when fresh but becoming smooth and dark brown to blackish in age; usually zoned 
concentrically. Flesh thin, tough, pale brown, often separated from the velvety surface 
c:nc: 
"1 ,?"! ': 
-:::. 
.w, 
- .......#f 
,ij\ 
\ . \\'\ 
 \\i 
. I.. 't jK  
,. " f:H\r',. : \\'.:.' 
;*.:., :, tt4fJ \\. \ . 
.' ',t.. 
......, -, ... ., \, 
..; . I I'  
,\:<,' ti\' . 
.,t1:. . 
.  '::'" 
;, . 
',' 
".. 
 
.-. 
....  : .......".. < " 
 .....;.. N1 ',« 
· .:::....J.  \.. .1 
" ....\:.. :.,. '\\ 
'. \.. t 10' 
':1 
': ,; 
". ,< A.':". 
- . ' . 
\.... . 
 -. 
\........ ,. 
",. 
.... 
. .. 
, ' 
T 
. 
"i,t 
1" . 
..........;; 
'. 
... 
.' 
. 
'., 
JII',. 
"- -- 
... -  
,," ff.......,J 
1P::.. 
iI.' 
Left: Close-up of slotlike pores of Datronia mollis. Right: Dark gray pore surface of Bjerkandera 
adusta. 
by a thin dark line. PORES 1-2 per mm, often becoming elongated and sinuous (slot- 
like); brown, but covered with a hoary bloom when fresh that gives them a grayish appear- 
ance, the bloom rubbing off easily (i.e., surface bruising brown); tubes 0.5-5 mm long. 
STALK absent. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 )( 2.5-4 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Usually in groups on dead hardwoods, but also reported on conifers; widely 
distributed and fairly common, but often overlooked because of its small size. In our area 
I have found it several times in the winter and spring on dead oak. It causes a delignifying 
decay ofthe sapwood. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but like myself, too small, thin, and tough to bother with. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Trametes moll is and Daedalea mollis, this small, 
nondescript hardwood-lover is best recognized by its thin, tough, velvety cap and grayish 
to brown, slotlike pores (see photograph). It is most likely to be confused with Bjerkandera 
species, but has larger pores and a thinner cap. 
Bjerkandera adusta (Smoky Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike, several often fused together; tough or corky 
when fresh, rigid when dry. CAP(s) 1.5-7 cm broad, plane or wavy, elongated or fan- 
shaped in outline; surface white to tan, smoky-gray, or grayish-brown, dry, finely hairy 
(velvety or suede-like) to nearly smooth; margin whitish when young, darkening or black- 
ening in age. Flesh thin (1-6 mm), tough, white becoming grayish or brown; odor fungal, 
taste often rather sour. PORES very minute (5-7 per mm), scarcely visible, at first whitish 
and darkening where bruised, but soon becoming gray or smoky throughout, and finally 
blackish; tubes shallow (up to 2 mm long). STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white or 
yellowish; spores 4-6 )( 2.5-3 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABITAT: On dead hardwoods (or rarely conifers), usually in dense, overlapping or 
fused clusters; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area throughout the mush- 
room season, but not nearly as abundant as T. versicolor. It produces a general deligni- 
fying decay of the sapwood, giving it a whitish-flecked appearance. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible. 
COMMENTS: The gray to black pore surface is the principal fieldmark of this small, 
tough bracket fungus. Gloeoporus adustus is a synonym. B. Jumosa is a very similar 
species that is somewhat larger and thicker; it has slightly larger, pale gray to smoky- 
brown (rarely black) pores, larger spores, and a stronger (aniselike to unpleasant) odor. 
596 
BJERKANDERA 
597 
In both species, but particularly B.fumosa. a thin dark line separates the pores from the 
flesh. Intermediate forms occur, however, and it is questionable whether the two are 
distinct. Cerrena un;color (see comments under Daedaleopsis confragosa) is somewhat 
similar, but its grayish to blackish spore-bearing surface usually breaks up into small 
flattened "teeth"; it is widely distributed on hardwoods. 
Pycnoporus cinnabarinus (Red Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike, tough when fresh, nearly rigid when dry. CAP 2-12 cm 
broad, nearly round to elongated or fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, smooth or finely 
hairy, wrinkled or warty, bright orange to orange-red, red, or cinnabar-red, but fading 
in age. Flesh red to yellowish-red, tough, up to 1.5 cm thick. PORES 2-4 per mm, bright 
orange to orange-red or red, scarcely fading; tubes 1-6 mmlong. ST ALK absent. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5-6 x 2-2.5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, Cap tissue staining 
magenta or black in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods (particularly cherry, but also oak, 
birch, etc.) or occasionally on conifers; mainly northern in distribution. I have not found 
it in California, but it occurs in the Southwest and Pacific Northwest and is quite common 
in eastern North America. The very similar P. sanguineus (see comments) is prevalent in 
the southern United States and tropics. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to be edible, but makes a colorful ornament. 
COMMENTS: The beautiful bright red to orange color ofthe pores makes this one ofthe 
easiest of all polypores to recognize. The cap may fade in age, but the pores will retain their 
color for years if stored properly. The fruiting bodyis not spongy when fresh as in Phaeolus. 
and has much smaller pores. P. sangu;neus is a closely related brilliant red to orange-red 
southern species with a thinner (up to 5 mm) cap. A urant;oporus croceus has saffron to 
bright orange pores when fresh; it is also larger (cap 5-30 cm broad) and softer when 
fresh, and grows on eastern hardwoods. 
TYROMYCES & Allies 
Fruiting body typically small to medium-sized (occasionally large) and annual; usually soft. watery. 
spongy. or cheesy whenfresh. becoming tougher in age; growing she/jUke or bracketlike on wood. 
CAP usually dull colored (white, gray, etc.). cottony or hairy to smooth. usually not zoned. Flesh 
usuall}' white. pallid. or pale brown. PORES minute to fairly large, usually white, pallid, or yellow 
when fresh, but sometimes bruising darker. STALK absent or rudimentary or present only as a 
narrowed. lateral extension of the cap. SPORE PRINT white or bluish(when obtainable); spores 
usually smooth and cylindrical or sausage-shaped. 
TYROMYCES is an undistinguished genus of fairly forgettable, fan-shaped to hooflike 
fungal fructifications with a fleshy rather than leathery texture when fresh. The latter 
feature distinguishes them from Trametes and other tough, bracketlike polypores. 
Over 20 species of Tyromyces occur in North America. Most cause brown rots in 
dead conifers (in contrast to Trametes, which causes white rots in dead hardwoods). 
However, a few common species (e.g., T. chioneus) occur on hardwoods. Despite their 
fleshiness they are not good edibles, being infrequent, indigestible, and insipid. 
Key to Tyromyces & Allies 
I. Spore print bluish or bluish-gray; fruiting body often tinged blue or bluish-gray, especially 
at cap margin ................................... Tyromyces caes;us & others, p. 599 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
598 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
2. Fruiting body spongy, watery, or cheesy when fresh and quickly staining rusty-reddish or red- 
dish-brown when handled or in age (especially the pore surface) or staining yellow and then 
rusty-reddish; usually found on dead conifers ..................................... 3 
2. Not as above (but pore surface may stain pinkish-red if found on dead hardwoods) ...... 4 
3. Pores averaging 3-5 per mm, usually staining yellow before reddening .... T.fragil;s, p. 600 
3. Pores averaging 1-3 per mm, reddening directly ... T. mollis & others (see T.fragi/is. p. 600) 
4. Upper layer of cap very soft (marshmallow-like) when fresh (but may toughen in age); cap often 
elongated and narrow, its margin often projecting below the pore surface; found only on dead 
mountain conifers (usually above 4,000 ft.) ..................... T. leucospong;a, p. 600 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Tube walls soon breaking up to form spines or "teeth"; cap white to ochre .............. 6 
5. Not as above (but tube walls may sometimes be toothlike or partially toothlike in old age) . 7 
6. Found on conifers; "teeth" 5-10 mm long Spongipel/ispachyodon(see T. /eucospongia. p.600) 
6. Found mainly on hardwoods (rarely conifers); "teeth" 1-5 mm long; cap hairy, white, leathery; 
flesh very thin ..................................................... lrpex lacteus 
7. Either pore surface staining dark brown to gray or black whenbruisedordriedandfruitingbody 
often large or forming white to creamy rosettes on tropical and subtropical hardwood stumps 
and roots or fruiting body with very dense, heavy flesh that dries hone-hard; usually growing 
in groups or clusters ..................... (see Polyporus, A Ibatrel/us, & Allies, p. 554) 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Cap small (up to 4 em), with a narrowed stemlike base T.floriform;s(see T. chioneus. p. 599) 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Found on incense cedar; fruiting body fairly large (7 em broad or more when mature) and pore 
surface usually yellow or yellowish when fresh ...................... T. amarus, p. 601 
9. Not as above (usually found on a different host) ................................... 10 
10. Found on cypress or juniper (usually living); fruiting body very tough or corky, even when 
fresh .......................................... T. basi/aris (see T. chioneus. p. 599) 
10. Not as above; usually found on a different host .................................... II 
II. Fruiting body leathery or corky when fresh; cap lacking scales and usually bald or nearly bald, 
often concentrically zoned or furrowed near margin; pores varying from mazelike to round, 
sometimes staining pinkish-red when bruised; found almost exclusively on hardwoods .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . (see Daedaleopsis confragosa& others, p. 588) 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Pores fairly large (usually averaging I mm broad or more in widest dimension) ......... 13 
12. Pores smaller (averaging 1-5 per mm) ............................................ 15 
13. Pores hexagonal or angular and usually arranged in radiating rows, orifnot then cap ochre-buff 
to tan, often with darker scales; rudimentary stalk often present; found on or near hardwoods 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (seePolyporus, Albatrel/us, & Allies, p. 554) 
13. Not as above; cap smooth or hairy but not normally with scales ...................... 14 
14. Cap 4-30 em broad and 3-8 em thick, spongy or watery when fresh, the margin usually thick; 
found on hardwoods ......................... T. un;color(see T. /eucospongia. p.600) 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. Cap often poorly developed or rudimentary; tubes often unequal in length; pores large or 
small .................................................. (seePor;a& Allies, p. 602) 
15. Not as above; cap usually well-developed and pores small... . . .... .......... ........ 16 
16. Fruiting body tough (corky or leathery) even when fresh; pore surface often grayish to smoky- 
brown in age or when dry; found mainly on poplar, willow, or birch ................. 17 
16. Not as above; fruiting body usually watery, spongy, orcheesywhenyoung(but often toughening 
in age); found on a variety of hosts ............................................. 18 
17. Odor aniselike when fresh; cap hairy or smooth ....... Cor;olel/us(=Trametes) suaveolens 
17. Odor not aniselike; cap hairy ......................................... Funal;a trog;; 
18. Odor fragrant when fresh and taste not bitter; usually found on hardwoods T. ch;oneus, p. 599 
18. Odor not fragrant and/ or taste bitter; found on hardwoods or conifers ................ 19 
TYROMYCES & ALLIES 
599 
19. Taste bitter; usually found on conifers .. T. guttulatus & T. stipt;cus (see T. chioneus, below) 
19. Taste not bitter; on hardwoods or conifers T. tephroleucus & others (see T. chione us, below) 
Tyromyces caes;us (Blue Cheese Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike, soft and spongy or watery when fresh, 
tougher when dry. CAP 1-5 (8) cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular in outline; surface 
white to gray, but usually tinged or mottled bluish or blue-gray, especially toward the 
margin; covered with soft, whitish hairs; not zoned. Flesh up to I cm thick, white or aging 
gray to yellowish, spongy when fresh; odor often sweetish. PORES 24 per mm, white or 
colored like cap; tubes 2-8 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT pale ashy-blue; 
spores 3-6 )( 1-2 microns. cylindrical or sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on decaying wood of both hardwoods and conifers; 
widely distributed and fairly common but rarely occurring in large numbers. In our area 
it can be found practically year-round. It is associated with a brown carbonizing decay. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The delicate bluish-gray tint to the cap and soft texture when fresh 
distinguish this unobtrusive polypore. Other species: T. perdelicatus also has pale bluish 
spores, but the cap is smaller (up to 2 cm broad) and not normally bluish, and the taste is 
bitter. It is fairly common on dead conifers in the Pacific Northwest. 
Tyromyces ch;oneus (White Cheese Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike; fleshy and rather soft or spongy-watery when 
fresh, rigid and tough when dry. CAP 2-12 cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular, broadly 
convex to plane; surface smooth or slightly haity, pure white to buff, yellowish-buff, or 
watery gray, not zoned. Flesh 2-15 mm thick. white; soft and spongy with a fragrant odor 
when fresh, crumbly when old and dry. PORES 3-5 per mm, white to creamy or yellowish; 
tubes 1.5-3 (7) mm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 3.5-5 )( 1-2 
microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods or occasionally on dead conifers; 
widely distributed and common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area it is fairly 
frequent in the fall and winter. especially on oak. It produces a wet, stringy delignifying 
decay of the sapwood. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The pale color, spongy or cheesy texture when fresh, modest size, 
fragrant odor, and absence of any staining reactions are the principal characteristics of this 
polypore, which is better known as T. albellus. There are a number of more or less similar 
white or pallid Tyromyces species that are best differentiated microscopically, including: T. 
tephroleucus (=T. lacteus), with a mild odor, on both hardwoods and conifers; T. galac- 
tinus, common on hardwoods in eastern North America, with a hairier cap and elliptical 
spores; T. balsameus, small, thin, with a faintly zoned cap, on conifers; T. spraguei, with a 
cap margin that stains greenish or blackish when young and nearly round to elliptical 
spores, on hardwoods; T. guttulatus, often larger (cap up to 16 cm broad), with circular 
spots, pits, or droplets on the cap, growing mainly on conifers; T. stipticus(=T. immitis), 
even more bitter but lacking spots or pits, on conifers; T. florijormis, usually bitter but 
small ( cap up t04 cm broad) and petal-like (i.e., the cap has a narrowed, stemlike base), on 
conifers; and T. basilaris, tough, attacking living juniper and cypress trees (including 
Monterey cypress). T. spumeus should also be mentioned. In contrast to T. chioneus, 
nearly all of the above species produce brown rots (carbonizing decays) in their hosts. 
" .- 
" 
. - 
.. 
.." #\->f" .Ii 
 
.. 
"t 
j 
..." 
-, \"' 
Tyromycesfragilis. a nondescript polypore that stains rusty-yellow to reddish when handled. 
Tyromyces jragilis (R usty-S taining Cheese P olypore) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike or bracketlike, soft and spongy Or watery when fresh; rigid 
and brittle when dry. CAP 2-10 cm broad, fan-shaped to elongated in outline; surface 
covered with soft white hairs that become matted in age; white, but becoming reddish to 
pinkish-red in age; staining yellowish, then rusty to reddish when handled. Flesh soft when 
fresh, white, discoloring like the cap surface. PORES 3-5 per mm, white, quickly bruising 
yellowish, then rusty-reddish; tubes 2-8 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT 
whitish; spores 4-5 x 1-2 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or fused clusters on rotting conifers; widely distributed. 
In our area it is fairly common (along with T. mollis-see comments) in the fall and winter 
on pine and Douglas-fir. It produces a brown carbonizing decay in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like myself, likely to remain so. 
COMMENTS: The tendency of all parts, especially the pores, to stain rusty-red when 
handled is the one noteworthy feature of this otherwise unnoteworthy polypore. There 
are several very similar reddish-staining species with slightly larger pores ( 1-3 per mm) and 
thicker flesh (0.5-2 cm) that are best differentiated microscopically, including: T. mollis, 
also common in our area, with a larger, smoother cap that stains rusty-red directly; T. 
transmutans, with dextrinoid spores; and A mylocystis lapponica, with amyloid cystidia 
and spores 7-11 microns long. 
Tyromyces leucospongia (Marshmallow Polypore) 
FR UITIN G BODY annual, shelflike or bracketlike to somewhat irregular; soft and rather 
watery when fresh, but soon becoming tough and rigid except for the soft upper surface. 
CAP usually elongated (2-10 cm long and 1-5 cm wide), convex; surface white to bun, 
grayish-buff, pinkish, or even brown or cinnamon; usually velvety and very soft or spongy 
to the touch, but sometimes papery and fairly firm if the velvety layer wears away; margin 
usually extending below the pore surface and sometimes partially covering it. Flesh white 
and rather tough, but covered by a thick( up to 1.5 cm), soft, spongy layer of cottony tissue 
that is pallid to pinkish-buff or cinnamon. PORES 2-3 per mm, angular and often 
becoming torn and markedly toothlike in age ( or interspersed with spines or" teeth"); white 
when fresh, often discoloring (buffto tan, brownish, or cinnamon) in age or when dried; 
tubes 2-6 mm long. ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 1- 
.5 microns, more or less sausage-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on dead conifers, usually fruiting from fissures in 
the bark; common at higher elevations throughout most of western North America. It 
usually fruits in the spring (often beginning its development under the snow), but the 
fruiting bodies persist for months without decaying, and can thus be found most anytime. 
It causes a brown (carbonizing) rot of both the heartwood and sapwood of its host. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible. 
600 
" 
Tyromyces (=Spongiporus) /eucospongia has a unique cottony or marshmallow-like texture. Note 
how the margin of the cap extends over the pore surface. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Spongiporus (or Spongipellis) leucospongia, this is one of 
my very favorite polypores because of the unique texture of its skin. The texture is difficult 
to describe, but it is undeniably soft-something like cotton candy (but not sticky) or a 
chamois-covered cotton ball, and also reminiscent of a "N erf ball." I n age it may toughen 
and is not so readily identified, but the tendency ofthe margin to grow over the pore surface 
is also distinctive. Other species: Spongipellis pachydon (=lrpex mollis) is a widely 
distributed species that grows on conifers and has pores which soon become toothlike; itis 
tough, has a spongy skin only when very young, and lacks the extended cap margin of T. 
/eucospongia. T. (=Spongipellis) unicolor is also widespread and spongy when fresh, but 
has larger pores (1 mm or more broad), nearly round spores, a thicker(3-8 cm) and larger 
cap, and grows on living or dead hardwoods (usually oak). 
Tyromyces amarus (Incense Cedar Polypore) 
FRUITING BODY more or less hoof-shaped, annual; soft and watery when very young, 
hard and rigid in age or when dry. CAP 7 -30 cm broad and 4-20 cm thick, convex; surface 
downy when young, usually bald in age but often becoming roughened, wrinkled, or 
shallowly fissured; whitish or buff to pale brown, sometimes darkening or becoming 
more ochraceous as it dries; surface usually quite hard (or even crustlike) in age; margin 
thick and blunt. Flesh thick, soft when fresh but very hard when dry; yellowish to pale 
brown. PORES 2-3 per mm(but may fuse to form larger pores), yellowish to bright lemon- 
yellow when fresh, often discoloring with age or handling; tubes 5-15 mm or more long. 
STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 6-7.5 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or occasionally several together on incense cedar (Libocedrus); 
known only from western North America, fruiting mainly in the late summer, fall, and 
early winter (but persisting year-round) wherever incense cedar occurs. It causes a de- 
structive carbonizing trunk rot that creates large tunnels in the wood. One third of all 
logged incense cedar is infected by it, and must either be rejected or used as "pecky cedar" 
for fencing and other purposes. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too tough to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: This interesting polypore is restricted to incense cedar (although there 
is one report of it from Idaho, on fir). It might be mistaken for a conk (Fomitopsis or Phe/- 
linus) because of its large size and tough texture in age, but the fruiting body is usually 
annual and quite watery when actively growing. The yellow pore surface and growth on 
incense cedar are the principal field marks. 
601 
602 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
PORIA & Allies 
Fruiting body usually annual but sometimes perennial, resupinate (lying flat on the substrate); 
soft, tough, or chalky; growing on wood. CAP absent or rudimentary. PORES fairly large to 
minute; tube layer always present. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white or yellowish. Spores 
elliptical to cylindrical, smooth. 
THIS large group of polypores is distinguished by its resupinate fruiting body: a simple 
layer of tubes devoid of cap and stem. In several other genera the fruiting body is some- 
times resupinate-especially when growing on the undersides of logs-but in Poria it is 
nearly always resupinate. 
Because they lack both a cap and stem, Porias are among the most lackluster of fleshy 
fungi-they just lie there on their logs, listless and limpetlike, unobtrusively going about 
their business while boletivores and polyp ores blatantly go about theirs. They usually 
grow on dead wood and play an important role in the forest ecosystem. A few are pests of 
structural timber in mines, cellars, and other dank places where the dismal, abysmal 
conditions are to their liking. 
More than 150 species of Poria have been described from North America, but identi- 
fication is a difficult, tedious, and time-consuming task. Like Polyporus and Fornes, 
Poria has been split into several smaller genera on the basis of microscopic and chemical 
characters beyond the scope of this book. Two representative species are described here, 
and a few others are keyed out plus several resupinate species that belong to other genera. 
They represent but a fraction of the total number, however, and serious students will want 
to consult the technical literature on the subject. If the fruiting body is tough and possibly 
perennial, check the key to the conks (Ganoderma, Fomitopsis, Phellinus, & Allies). 
Key to Poria & Allies 
1. Spore-bearing surface composed of meandering veins that form shallow pits .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Stereaceae & Allies, p. 604) 
1. Spore-bearing surface composed of a layer oftubes (pores) or sometimes "teeth" ........ 2 
2. Spore-bearing surface soon breaking up into small ""teeth" and/ or violet-tinged when fresh 3 
2. Spore-bearing surface not normally violet-tinged or composed of ""teeth" ............... 4 
3. Spore-bearing surface violet-tinged when fresh ............ (see Trametes & Allies, p. 592) 
3. Spore-bearing surface white or pallid ................... (see Tyromyces & Allies, p. 597) 
4. Pore surface and/ or flesh pink to orange, salmon, or reddish ......................... 5 
4. Not as above; pore surface white to yellow or some shade of brown or gray ............. 7 
5. Pores large (typically at least I mm broad); found on conifers (seePhaeolusalboluteus, p. 571) 
5. Pores minute (3-7 per mm); found on hardwoods or conifers ......................... 6 
6. Pore surface dark reddish-orange; fruiting body cheesy when fresh; pores scarcely visible 
(averaging 7-9 per mm); found mainly on hardwoods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . P. sp;ssa 
6. Not as above; pore surface pink to salmon or brick-red ..... Chaetoporus euporus & others 
7. Flesh yellow-brown to rusty-brown, dark brown, etc. ............................... 8 
7. Flesh white to creamy, straw-colored, yellowish, or beige (at least when fresh) .......... 10 
8. Found on charred conifers; pores fairly large (1-2 per mm) and usually hexagonal; fruiting body 
not normally perennial ............. Cor;olellus carbonar;us (see Poria corticola. p. 603) 
8. Not as above ............................................................. _ ... 9 
9. Fruiting body either dark brown to black, hard, often cracked and cankerlike, and usually found 
on birch or fruiting body growing in sheets under the bark of living oak ................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Phaeolus, Inonotus, Coltr;c;a, & Allies, p. 566) 
9. Not as above; fruiting body usually perennial, quite tough or woody ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Ganoderma, Fom;tops;s, Phell;nus, & Allies, p. 574) 
10. Found on living cypress or juniper (causing a brown rot) ... (see Tyromyces & Allies, p. 591) 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
{, 
'" 
 
.! 
i 
.. t .... 
A)":- 
#t-  
-. 
.. 
..... 
A member of the Poria corticola group. Note the absence of both cap and stem-most Porias consist 
solely of a layer of tubes. 
] I. Fruiting body hard or woody even when fresh, the margin often incrusted; usually perennial 
. . .. . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . (see Ganoderma, Fomitopsis, Phellinus, & Allies, p. 574) 
] I. Not as above ................................................................ ]2 
]2. Rudimentary cap often present; tubes often unequal in length ....................... 13 
]2. Not as above ................................................................ ]4 
13. Pores large (1-3 mm in diameter) .... Coriolellus heteromorpha (see Poria corticola. below) 
13. Pores smaller ................... Coriolellus sepium & others (see Poria corticola. below) 
]4. Pore surface bright yellow; found on dead conifers ...... P. xantha (see P. corticola. below) 
]4. Not as above (pore surface may be yellowish, but not bright yellow) .................. ]5 
]5. Fruiting body sometimes growing from an underground "tuber"; uncommon P. cocos, p. 604 
]5. Not as above; very common. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. 16 
]6. Pores averaging 4-6 per mm; fruiting body often perennial (with more than one tube layer) 
................................... Perenniporiasubacida(see Poriacorticola. below) 
]6. Pores larger than above and/ or fruiting body not perennial P. corticola & many others, below 
Poria corticola (Boring Poria) 
FR UITIN G BO DY usually annual, rather tough; resupinate (consisting of a simple layer 
oftubes). CAP absent or sometimes present as a free margin. Flesh thin, white, fibrous but 
rather soft when fresh. PORES white or creamy, discoloring to pale tan in age or upon 
drying, 14 per mm; tubes 3-10 mm long, rather soft when fresh but drying rigid and tough. 
ST ALK absent. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 3-5 microns, broadly elliptical, 
smooth. Cystidia present among the basidia. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in rows or fused masses on rotting hardwood logs and 
branches, less commonly on conifers; widely distributed and fairly common in our area 
practically year-round. I t produces a white rot; many similar species occur on conifers. 
EDIBILITY: The entire group is worthless from an edibility standpoint. 
COMMENTS: This species typifies a large number of white to yellowish Porias that can 
only be differentiated microscopically. Another common species,Perenniporia subacida, 
is often perennial (i.e., with more than one tube layer). It is usually creamy or yellowish, 
has minute pores (4-6 per mm), occurs on both hardwoods and conifers, and is particularly 
abundant in the Pacific Northwest. There are several similar species that cause brown rots 
in structural timber as well as in dead conifers and hardwoods, including: P. vail/antii, 
whitetoyellowish;P. incrassata, white to yellowish but drying grayish-brown to black and 
with yellow spores; P. xantha, yellow or yellowish-white with a crumbly or chalky 
texture, bitter taste, and minute pores; and P. sequoiae, which infects the butts of living 
redwoods. Several Corio/ellus species should also be mentioned. They were formerly 
placed in Trameles because they often possess a cap, but can also be resupinate or have 
only a rudimentary cap. Coriolellus serialis is a corky or woody, white to creamy, 
resupinate species that is common on dead conifers and hardwoods; C. carbonarius has 
brownish pores and flesh and grows on charred conifers, including redwood; C. hetero- 
morphus is whitish and has a rudimentary cap or free margin and large pores( 1-3 mmeach 
in diameter); C. sepium also has a rudimentary cap but its pores are smaller (1-2 per mm); 
and C. alaskanus is a resupinate species with very thin (less than 1 mm) flesh. 
603 
604 
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES 
Poria cocos (Tuckahoe) 
FRUITING BODY annual, rather tough; resupinate (consisting of a simple tube layer), 
but sometimes arising from a buried sclerotium ("tuber"). CAP absent or rudimentary. 
Flesh thin, ivory-whitish to tan. PORES yellowish-white to tan or pinkish-buff, 1-3 per 
mm. STALK absent. SCLEROTIUM when present often large, somewhat resembling an 
oblong coconut; outer surface brown and scaly, interior white and cheesy when fresh. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 )( 3-4 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Cystidia absent. 
HABIT A T: Occasionally growing on conifer logs, but more often infecting tree roots and 
stumps (of both hardwoods and conifers), and the fruiting bodies appearing terrestrial 
if they arise from sclerotia; widely distributed, but most common in southeastern North 
America. It is reported from California, but I have not seen it in ourarea. It causes a brown 
cubical root and butt rot in its host. 
EDIBILITY: The fruiting bodies, like those of other Porias, are worthless, but the large 
underground "tuber" was apparently eaten by various tribes of Native Americans (some 
of whom called it "tuckahoe"). The "tubers" are said to be visually unappetizing, but I've 
seen "Unnative" Americans foraging for even stranger fare in supermarkets-Spam, for 
instance, or pickled pig's feet. 
COMMENTS: The ability to form large, coconut-sized sclerotia is the only redeeming 
feature of this otherwise boring Poria. 
Crust and Parchment Fungi 
@ 
spores 
STEREACEAE & Allies 
Fruiting body soft and spongy to thin and tough; resupinate. bracket like. shelj1ike. or oaasionally 
stalked; usually growing on wood. CAP present or absent, when present usually small. SPORE- 
PRODUCING SURFACE smooth to wrinkled. veined. or warty. STALK usually absent but 
occasionally present. SPORE PRINT white to yellow or brown. but often not obtainable. Spores 
variously shaped. 
THIS is a very difficult and immense group of very simple, less-than-immense fungi witha 
smooth to wrinkled, veined, or warty spore-bearing surface. They can be found almost 
anywhere, at almost any time, and play an integral role in the breakdown of wood and 
plant material. Some forms, such as Srereum, mimic polypores by fruiting in shelving 
masses on wood, but the majority (Corricium, Peniophora, etc.) are resupinate, i.e., they 
form crust- or parchment-like sheets on logs or stumps. Others form small, tile-like 
plaques (Xylobolus), ..whitewash" sticks and branches, orcause dark discolorations on the 
bark of trees. Still others cause serious damage to structural timber (e.g., rickety bridges 
and rotting rafters), and a few, such as Cory lidia, are stalked or branched and/ or grow 
on the ground. Whatever their shape and growth habit, however, they all differ 
fundamentally from the polypores by virtue of their relatively unspecialized spore- 
producing surface-in other words, they lack a layer of tubes and pores. 
Most of the crust and parchment fungi were originally classed together in a single 
family, the Thelephoraceae. On the basis of various chemical and microscopic features 
several families are now recognized: the Stereaceae, Corticiaceae, Coniophoraceae, 
Hymenochaetaceae, etc. As relatively few are conspicuous or fleshy enough to warrant 
attention from the average mushroom hunter and even fewer can be accurately identified 
without painstaking microscopic examination and still fewer are edible, only a very very 
few are described here. 
STEREACEAE & ALLIES 
605 
Key to the Stereaceae & Allies 
I. Growing in white to creamy rosettes of flattened segments or lobes on hardwood stumps and 
roots in tropics and along Gulf Coast _. _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Hydnopolyporus palmatus 
1. Not as above ............................................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 
2. Fruiting body with a cap and stalk, the stalk central to somewhat off-center; usually growing on 
ground or on very rotten wood ................................................. 3 
2. Not as above .......................... _ _ . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4 
3. Fruiting body chocolate- to purple-brown or dark brown Thelephora terrestris group. p. 608 
3. Fruiting body paler (hazel to buff, whitish, or yellowish) Cotylidia diaphana & others, p. 608 
4. Fruiting body hard, black, usually cracked, somewhat irregular in shape or cankerlike; growing 
on hardwoods, especially birch ....... (see Phaeolus, Inonotus, Coltricia, & Allies, p. 566) 
4. Notasabove ................................................................. 5 
5. Fruiting body bright to dark blue or purple or with a purple tinge when fresh; on hardwoods 6 
5. Not as above ....................... _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
6. Fruiting body bright to dark blue, velvety ..................... Pulcherricium caeruleum 
6. Fruiting body purple or purple-tinged, at least when fresh .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chondrostereum purpureum (see Stereum hirsutum group, below) 
7. Spore-bearing surface smooth to slightly uneven or sometimes cracked ................ 8 
7. Spore-bearing surface conspicuously warty, lumpy, furrowed, ridged, wrinkled, pitted, or 
honeycombed with large "pores" ............................................... 13 
8. Fruiting body terrestrial and branched (coral-like), usually dark brown or purple-brown . .-- . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Thelephora palmata, p. 609 
8. Fruiting body usually found on wood, or if on ground then usually with a cap (upper surface) 9 
9. Fruiting body purple- to chocolate-brown or dark grayish-brown, usually growing on herba- 
ceous stems or in rosettes or clusters on the ground; spore print brown; spores warty or angular 
under the microscope ............................. Thelephora terrestris group. p. 608 
9. Not as above ............... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 10 
10. Fruiting body usually "bleeding" when cut or handled (exuding a red juice); found on conifers 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Stereum sanguinolentum (see S. hirsutum group, below) 
10. Not as above; found on hardwoods and/ or fruiting body not "bleeding" ............... II 
II. Cap silky-striate, thin; found on hornbeam in eastern North America Stereum striatum, p. 607 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Cap very thin, pliant, typically with long, loosely-arranged white hairs pointing toward the 
margin ................................................. Stereum striatum, p. 607 
12. Not as above (but cap usually with fine velvety hairs) Stereum hirsutumgroup & others, below 
13. Growing on structural timber (in houses, mines, etc.) ............................... 14 
13. Growing in the wild (on logs, stumps, etc.) ........................................ 15 
14. Spore-bearing surface.honeycombed with large pits .... _ . . . . . .. Serpula lacrymans, p. 610 
14. Spore-bearing surface wrinkled or bumpy Coniophora puteana (see Serpu/a /acrymans. p.61O) 
15. Spore-bearing surface irregularly warty or with radiating or concentric wrinkles or furrows; 
cap absent ........................................ Phlebia radiata & others, p. 610 
15. Not as above; spore-bearing surface usually with a honeycombed or veined appearance; cap 
or free margin sometimes present .............................................. 16 
16. Cap or free margin hairy, white ...... Merulius tremellosus (see Serpu/a /acrymans. p. 610) 
16. Cap or free margin bright pink to reddish Merulius incarnatus (see Serpu/a /acrymans. p. 610) 
Stereum hirsutum group (False Turkey Tail; Hairy Stereum) 
FRUITING BODY thin, leathery, pliant when moist, rigid when dry, annual but per- 
sistent; bracketlike to shelflike or partially resupinate with a free margin. CAP 0.5-4 (5) 
cm broad but sometimes fused laterally to form larger, lobed shelves 10 cm long or more; 
plane to folded or wavy (crisped); surface dry, often zoned concentrically, with whitish to 
brownish or grayish matted hairs (but often smooth toward the margin), the hairs wearing 
<} . 
1 ' 
# , 
, .... 
... 
-  
t- 
 
/ 
;. 
Slereum hirsulum group. Noted the zoned cap which is finely hairy (under a hand lens) when fresh 
but often smooth in old age. The underside is golden to orange or buff when fresh (specimen at top 
right), but often darkens in old age (specimen at top center). 
away in narrow zones to reveal the reddish-brown to dark chestnut-brown cap cuticle; 
margin often orange to golden or tawny, especially when young or growing; overall color 
thus variable: orange-brown to reddish-brown to cinnamon when moist, but appearing 
buff to grayish or paler from the hairs when dry; in old age sometimes greenish from algae 
or even blackish. Flesh thin, tough. UNDERSIDE smooth to slightly bumpy or cracked 
(when dry), sometimes exuding a red or yellow liquid when cut (fresh); color variable: 
orange to dull orange-buff or ta wny to ochraceous, varying to buff or pinkish-buff, some- 
times zoned concentrically, often browner or darker toward the base; in old age often dark 
brown to chestnut-brown. STALK absent or present only as a narrowed lateral base. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: In groups, rows, fused masses, or dense overlapping clusters on hardwood 
sticks, fallen branches, logs, stumps, etc., occasionally on living trees or conifers; widely 
distributed and extremely common. Found in our area year-round, especially ondead oak. 
Trametes, Lenzites, and/ or Tremella species often co-inhabit the same piece of wood. 
EDIBILITY: Like myself, too thin and too tough to be edible. 
COMMENTS: This omnipresent little bracket fungus can be mistaken for the turkey tail 
(Trametes versicolor), but a close inspection of the spore-bearing surface reveals the 
complete absence of tubes or pores. The above description is rather lengthy because it 
encompasses a number of confusing forms that are sometimes recognized as distinct 
species. For instance, the common North American variety with a bright orange to 
orange-buff spore-bearing surface has been called S. complicatum and S. rameale. 
Another variety, S. gausapatum, "bleeds" red when cut, others exude a yellow juice, 
while typical S. hirsutum does not bleed at all. However, these "species" grade into each 
other, making a neat, clean separation almost impossible. As a group they can be 
recognized easily by their omnipresence (in the hardwood forests of California they 
outnumber even Trametes versicolor), the reddish-brown cap cuticle (best seen by sec- 
tioning the fruiting body) beneath the hairs, the frequent orange to yellowish tones on 
the cap margin or underside, and the smooth spore-bearing surface. 
Other species: S. fasciatum (=S. ostrea, S. lobatum) differs microscopically, but can 
usually be told by its slightly larger caps (1-7 cm broad) that are more prominently zoned 
(dark reddish and brown) and usually form individual brackets rather than fusing, and 
buff to cinnamon-buff underside; it, too, is common on hardwoods, especially oak. 
S. (= Haematostereum) sangunolentum is one ofthe few widespread Stereums to grow on 
conifers. When fresh its fertile surface "bleeds" dramatically when cut, sometimes even 
staining one's hand. Hymenochaete tabacina resembles the S. hirsutum group in shape 
and color, but its tissue blackens in potassium hydroxide (KOH). H. rubiginosa also 
blackens in KOH but has a velvety, rusty-brown to chestnut-brown to blackish cap and 
rusty-brown underside. Both of these favor oak. Chondrostereum purpureum is purple 
when fresh and often resupinate; it parasitizes apple and plum trees, causing "silver leaf' 
606 
STEREUM 
607 
disease, but is also frequent on other trees (including oak in ourarea).Laxitextumbicolor, 
found on hardwoods, has a brown cap and white to pale bufffertile surface. Peniophora 
gigantea forms a paper-thin crust on dead conifers. Veluticeps berkeleyi has a minutely 
bristly fertile surface and grows on both hardwoods and conifers. but favors ponderosa 
pine. Dozens of other species also occur. 
Stereum striatum 
FRUITING BODY very thin, leathery and pliant when fresh, annual but persistent; 
bracketlike to cuplike. CAPO.3-3 (4) cm broad but sometimes fused laterally to form lines 
10 cm long or more; flat and circular to fan-shaped in outline or if small, often conical 
(inverted cup-shaped); surface dry, whitish to buff or pale brown, sometimes zoned con- 
centrically when moist; covered with long, loosely-arranged white hairs which usually 
point toward the margin (var. ochraceoflavum) or the hairs pressed against the cap to give 
it a silky-shiny striate appearance (var. striatum). Flesh very thin, tough. UNDERSIDE 
(fertile surface) smooth, buff to pale brown or in some forms yellow to yellow-brown, 
sometimes fading in age to whitish, sometimes zoned concentrically. STALK absent or 
present only as a small knob or "umbo" on top of the cap. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 
5-8.5 x 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: In groups or masses on dead branches and twigs (rarely logs) of hardwoods; 
widely distributed. Variety ochraceoflavum can be found year-round in our oak wood- 
lands, but is shrivelled up and inconspicuous in dry weather. Variety striatum occurs in 
eastern North America on hornbeam (Carpinus). 
EDIBILITY: Not edible. 
COMMENTS: Like myself, this species is too tough, too thin, and too small to be edible. 
Unlike myself, it contents itself with unambitious undertakings-decomposing branches, 
sticks, and lopped-off limbs-while leaving the larger stumps, logs, and standing trees 
to the polypores and other bracket fungi. Variety ochraceoflavum (=8. ochraceoflavum) 
can be distinguished from the more common S. hirsutum group by its duller, paler color 
and thinner, more pliant cap with long white hairs pointing toward the margin, plus the 
absence of a red-brown cap cuticle. Variety striatum (=8. sericeum) is easily told by its silky- 
striate cap. At least two growth forms ofvar. ochraceoflavum occur in our area: a small 
one with a concave spore-bearing surface and a somewhat conical cap less than I cm 
broad that is usually attached by its top to small twigs; and a larger one with a flatter cap 
that usually inhabits larger sticks and branches and is often partially resupinate. 
Stereum striatum is common on sticks and branches of various hardwoods. Note the long hairs that 
protrude from cap. 
 
\. 
... 
-. < .. 11 
J ".,. 
"", 
.... 
.. 
. 
... 
"" 
# " 
l 
.. 
... 
, 
" 
" 
A', 
Left: Top view of Cotylidia diaphana (this specimen has several caps). Center: Underside of Coty!idia 
diaphana. Right: The!ephora terrestris group. Note how underside is darker than that of Coty!idia. 
Cotylidia diaphana (Stalked Stereum) 
FRUITING BODY annual, erect, thin and tough, with a cap and stalk. CAP 0.5-3 cm 
broad, vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or often split into petal-like lobes; surface dry, with 
fine radiating silky fibrils, whitish to buff to pale hazel-brown, sometimes with obscure 
concentric zones. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) smooth or somewhat uneven but without 
pores, whitish to buff, pinkish-buff, or tinged cap color. STALK 0.5-3.5 cm long, 1-2 mm 
thick, more or less central, solid, smooth, colored like rest of fruiting body; base usually 
with white mycelial down. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 4-6 (8) )( 2.5-4 microns, ellip- 
tical, smooth. Long, narrow, projecting cystidia present among the basidia. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups among humus and debris in woods; widely distributed. 
Occasional in our area in the fall and winter, but easily overlooked. 
EDIBILITY: A worthless, miniscule morseL 
CO MMENTS: Formerly known asStereum diaphanum, this species differs from Stereum 
by its well-developed, more or less central stalk, and from Thelephora terrestris by its 
paler color and whitish spores. It is considered by some to be a variety of C. aurantiaea, 
a widely distributed, often larger and yellower species. Other species: C. deeolorans 
(=Stereum burtianum) of eastern North America is similar but lacks cystidia. 
Thelephora terrestris group (Earth Fan; Fiber Vase) 
FRUITING BODY annual but persistent, tough; usually vase-shaped to fanlike, often 
clustered or in confluent masses, sometimes bracketlike or shelflike on plant stems. CAP 
2-5 cm broad or forming rosettes or clusters up to 12 cm broad; surface dry, with radiating 
silky fibrils or small scales; brown to reddish- or chocolate-brown to grayish-brown or 
fuscous, often darker in age; margin usually fringed, splitting, often paler or whitish. Flesh 
very thin, tough; odor mild or earthy. UNDERSIDE smooth or wrinkled, without pores; 
some shade of brown. STALK when present lateral to central, thin and tough, colored like 
cap or paler, short. SPORE PRINT purplish-brown; spores 8-12 )( 6-9 microns, 
elliptical-angular, warted (often minutely so). 
HABIT A T: Occasionally solitary but more often in groups or clusters in humus, sandy soil, 
and decomposing vegetable matter; sometimes on old stumps or climbing up herbaceous 
stems or tree seedlings; widespread and common. In our area it grows year-round, but is 
easily overlooked. I've seen it several times on potted plants in nurseries. 
608 
I 
" "," 
\ 
\  
"t 
....., ' 
, ... JI 
t . I. , 
".. 
" 
. 
4"Q' " 
-to 
. '... 
, 
. ' 
'-- 
.\' 
" 
.<\ 
..., 
. . 
" 
f 
, 
... 
" 
.. 
'./ 
\ 
Left: Thelephora terrestris group, top view of a compound fruiting body. Right: At top is Thelephora 
palmata-note its flattened branches. At bottom are small specimens of the Thelephora terrestrlS 
group. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: The size and shape of this species is fairly variable but the color is quite 
constant (quite variable? fairly constant?). When growing on the ground in small, erect 
clusters it might be mistaken for an emaciated Cratere/lus, but is smaller and differently 
colored. When growing on herbaceous stems, on the other hand, it looks more like a 
Stereum. T. /aciniata is apparently a synonym. Other species: T. mu/tipartita is a small 
(1-3 cm high), widespread, terrestrial species with a vase-shaped cap that splits into several 
lobes or "branches"; T. via/is of eastern North America is a terrestrial species with a larger 
fruiting body and a fetid odor in age, and smaller spores; T. spicu/osa encrusts twigs and 
stems, but has spiky protuberances and a whitish growing margin;Sebacina incrustansalso 
grows on herbaceous stems (usually at their bases) but is paler in color and has white spores. 
N one of these are worth eating. 
Thelephora palmata (Fetid False Coral) 
FRUITING BODY annual, erect, usually profusely branched from a common base; 
2-10 cm high and just as broad or broader. BRANCHES purplish-brown to chocolate- 
brown or darker, flattened; tips also flattened (palmlike) and usually paler (whitish) 
when actively growing. STALK present only as a common base or short "trunk" below 
the branches. Flesh tough, leathery; odor garliclike becoming fetid (unpleasant) in age. 
SPORE PRINT dark reddish-brown; spores 8-11 x 7-8 microns, elliptical-angular, spiny. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on moist ground in woods and at their edges; widely 
distributed. It often grows along woodland paths but blends uncannily into its sur- 
roundings. In our area it fruits in the late fali, winter, and spring, but is not particularly 
common. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This mushroom looks like a coral fungus and is keyed out under that 
group. However, the flattened branches, dark color, fetid garlic odor, and angular- 
elliptical spores are distinctive. Other species: T. via/is of eastern North America is more 
variable in color and has smaller spores. 
609 
,., 
. ',' 
:l \.. 
.. I ,-' 
,,"',- ' .,:- 
4,'):. 0'" . . J: 
, - r.... : - . .. 
.... -4 4 
{ 
:S> 
, , 
' 
 
;0 
, : ':.. , :.,.; 
':I , ' '.( 
. . 
. 
 
 
;... . 
.> ..... .M(-  
-.: ....  
J .. . . 
 .  i 
? t 
''! t 
0' ... 
., :: 
. .c.._.. 
.f 
- ($ ..- 
: .".. trd 
v r 
.. 
t ...:;,.. 
.- 
 
1&."" 
, 
... 
t. 
..I 4!' ,..4., .. 
 
.) 1- '1.. .!'  J:' 
t':  
- 'f. .' 
 
\. 
Left: Radu/um orbicu/are (see comments below) forms sheets of irregularly warted or lumpy tissue. 
Right: The veined underside of Meru/ius tremel/osus (see comments under Serpu/a /acrymans). 
Phlebia radiata 
FRUITING BODY annual, resupinate (lying flat on substrate), sometimes with a free 
margin but no cap or stalk; soft when fresh, tough in age. FERTILE SURFACE usually 
fused to form patches 30 cm or more long, but often with smaller, discrete systems of 
radiating wrinkles or warty veins 1-4 cm broad; flesh-colored to bright orange to pinkish- 
red, fading to whitish inoldage. Underside ofmargin(iffree) with white woolly hairs. Flesh 
thin, rather soft or slightly gelatinous when fresh, tough in age or when dry. SPORE 
PRINT whitish; spores 3.5-7 x 1-3 microns, sausage-shaped or elliptical. smooth. 
HABIT A T: On fallen logs and branches of both hardwoods and conifers; widely dis- 
tributed. I find it occasionally on oak logs in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible. It looks as if it has already been eaten (see comments). 
COMMENTS: Also known as P. merismoides, this species is unique by virtue of its 
resupinate, orange to pinkish fruiting body with radiating wrinkles. Its overall appearance 
is somewhat reminiscent of regurgitated dog food, and a similar species, Radulum 
orbiculare, has an irregularly lumpy or warty spore-producing surface that is distinctly 
reminiscent of regurgitated dog food. Other species: Punctularia strigoso-zonata is also 
similar, but has concentric wrinkles and furrows instead of radiating ones; it grows on 
dead hardwoods. 
Serpula lacrymans (Dry Rot Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY annual, forming widely-spreading, nearly flat, fanlike sheets on 
horizontal substrates, but sometimes bracketlike if growing on vertical substrates; soft and 
spongy when fresh, 5 cm-l m (3 ft.) broad or more. Upper surface (or free margin) silvery- 
white to gray, hairy. Flesh thin, dingy yellowish; odor often unpleasant, musty. FERTILE 
SURF ACE consisting of very shallow (I mm deep), large, irregular pits orLLpores" formed 
by a honeycomb-like network of folds and ridges rather than by tubes; olive-yellow to 
brownish-yellow, rusty-brown, orange-brown, or cinnamon. STALK typically absent, but 
white or grayish mycelial strands (by which it spreads) often present. SPORE PRINT 
orange-brown to orange-yellow to brownish; spores 8-12.5 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, thick-walled. 
HABIT A T: A serious pest of structural wood in old houses, buildings, ships, etc., usually 
developing indoors or in poorly ventilated situations, often hiding under floorboards. 
Bulging wood and a musty odor are telltale signs of its presence. Common in Europe, where 
the ventilation in many houses was sealed off during the war; less common in North 
America. It is called dry rot because it extracts water from the wood and cracks it into 
610 
SERPULA 
611 
cubical blocks, eventually reducing it to a fine, dark powder. A related species,S. himan- 
tioides, turns up occasionally in the wild (on dead conifers), as do Merulius species (see 
comments). 
EDIBILITY: Utterly and indisputably inedible. 
COMMENTS: One of the few fleshy fungi that lives up to the labelfungus in its most 
pejorative sense-odious, insidious, hideous, obnoxious, downright abominable. Once it 
gains a foothold it is hard to eradicate because the often gigantic, padlike fruiting bodies 
exude great quantities of water, stimulating further fungal growth. The mycelial strands 
spread with astonishing rapidity. Like a horde of hungry army ants in search offood, they 
will overrun anything and everything in their way: bricks, stones, tiles, plaster, drain 
pipes, wires, leather boots, cement floors, books, tea kettles, even corpses. For a fascinating 
account (and pictures) of some of its more heroic feats, see John Ramsbottom's 
mycological treasure trove, Mushrooms and Toadstools. 
The veined or honeycombed network oflarge, irregular, shallow "pores" is characteristic 
of Serpula (colored spores) and Merulius (white spores). Both are now quite rightfully 
placed in families of their own, apart from other crust and parchment fungi. Other species: 
Coniophora puteana ("Wet Rot") is another pest of structural timber; it has a similar 
growth habit but has an irregularly wrinkled to bumpy fertile surface. Merulius tremellosus 
(see photo on p. 610) has an orange to orange-buffto pinkish, veined or honeycombed fer- 
tile surface and a hairy white cap or free margin; it grows in the wild, mainly on dead hard- 
woods. M. incarnatus is an eastern species with a bright coral-pink cap and paler, duller, 
honeycombed or veined fertile surface. Several other species differ microscopically. 
HYDNACEAE 
 
()@@ 
spores 
Teeth Fungi 
As their name implies, the teeth fungi produce their spores on pendant spines or"teeth" 
(see Color Plate 159). The fruiting body is usually stipitate (equipped with acapand stem), 
with the spines lining the underside of the cap. Hericium, however, grows on wood and has 
spines which hang like icicles from a rooting base or network of branches, and several 
others are shelflike, i.e., withacap butnostalk. Thosethatgrowon the ground can be tough 
and quite reminiscent of polypores (Hydnellum and Phellodon) or fleshy, brittle, and 
agaric-like (Hydnum and Dentinum). 
The teeth fungi include many highly distinctive mushrooms and some strikingly 
beautiful ones. They are most common and diverse in northern pine and spruce forests, but 
relatively sparse in our area. Hericium and Dentinum are excellent eating and have the 
added advantage ofbeing virtually unmistakable. Most of the others are either too tough or 
too bitter (or too tough and too bitter) to eat. 
Just as all the boletes were once lumped together in Boletus, so all the teeth fungi were 
originally placed in a single genus, Hydnum. Several families and genera are now 
recognized based on differences in the shape and texture of the fruiting body and color and 
ornamentation of the spores. However, to facilitate identification all of the teeth fungi 
have been retained here in a single family, divided into the five groups keyed below. 
Key to the Hydnaceae 
I. Growing on decaying conifer cones or sometimes in mats or debris made up partly of cones; 
cap and stalk hairy, brown to dark brown; stalk only 0.5-3 mm thick . Aur;scalp;um, p. 629 
I. Not as above; not growing on cones; stalk if present usually thicker .................... 2 
612 
HYDNACEAE 
2. Fruiting body rubbery and flexible, small (cap typically 5 cm broad or less), translucent white 
to watery gray or with a brownish cap; stalk lateral (attached to side of cap); spines minute 
and very short ............................. (seePseudohydnumgelatinosum, p. 671) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Growing on wood ............................................................. 4 
3. Growing on ground (or rarely on very rotten wood) ................................. 5 
4. Fruiting body a branched framework or unbranched cushion of tissue from which spines are 
suspended (i.e., icicle-like); lacking a distinct cap ..................... Hericium, p. 613 
4. Fruiting body resupinate (i.e, crustlike or sheetlike) or more often with a cap (clearly defined 
upper sterile surface), the spines lining the underside ofthecap Echinodontium& Allies, below 
5. Fruiting body tough and fibrous or woody or if soft and spongy then with a tough, fibrous inner 
core (especially in stalk); fruiting body sometimes encompassing needles and other debris as it 
grows; surface of cap often roughened irregularly by projecting spikes, lumps, warts, ridges, 
pits, etc.; stalk continuous with cap and sometimes not well-defined; flesh sometimes showing 
zones or lines when fruiting body is sliced open lengthwise Hydnellum& Phellodon, p.622 
5. Not as above; fruiting body fleshy and usually brittle (not spongy or woody), not typically 
absorbing needles and other debris as it grows; cap smooth, cracked, or scaly but not normally 
roughened by projecting spikes, lumps, pits, or ridges; stalk usually well-defined; flesh not 
often zoned by lines ............................. Hydnum, Dentinum, & Allies, p. 616 
ECHINODONTIUM & Allies 
Medium-sized to large, fleshy to very tough or woody fungi growing on wood FRUITING BODY 
typically shelflike or hoo/like. CAP clearly defined, smooth to hairy, rough, or cracked. SPINES 
long or short, variously colored. STALK typically absent (except in Mycorraphium). SPORE 
PRINT typically white (when obtainable). Spores smooth or minutely spiny, sometimes amyloid. 
THESE shelving mushrooms are more likely to be mistaken for polypores than for other 
teeth fungi. However, they bear their spores on numerous downward-pointing spines 
instead of in tubes or pores. They differ from the genus Hericium in possessing a clearly 
defined, sterile upper surface (cap) and fertile lower surface (spine layer). Several diverse 
genera are keyed below. They are not closely related but share a similar growth habit. Only 
one species is described, the others being rare or absent in the West. N one are worth eating. 
Key to Echinodontium & Allies 
I. Stalk often present; cap more or less kidney-shaped, less thanS cm broad, white to tan (but may 
blacken when handled); spines only 1-3 mm long, whitish becoming pinkish, brown, orcinna- 
mon in age; found on dead hardwoods in eastern North America ....................... 
.......................................... . Mycorraphium(=Steccherinum)adustum 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Entire fruiting body white to yellowish or pale ochre or pale gray when fresh (but may discolor 
in old age), fleshy or tough but not woody; flesh white; growing mostly on hardwoods ... 3 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
3. Usually growing in overlapping, shelving masses high up on living hard woods( especially maple); 
caps usually 10-30 cm broad, several arising from a common base; fairly common in northern 
North America (see photo at top of p. 613) ... Climacodon (=Steccherinum) septentrionale 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Cap(s) usually roughened or with sterile upright spines; spines on underside usually quite long 
(up t02 cm); spores amyloid; usually on hardwood stumps; rare .... Creolophuscirrhatus 
4. Not with above features; pores often present when very young( the tube walls that form the pores 
often breaking up in age to form spines); common ..... (see Polyporaceae& Allies, p. 549) 
5. Fruiting body woody, more or less hoof-shaped; flesh bright orange to rusty-red or cinnamon; 
growing on conifers in western North America ........ Echinodontium tinctorium, p. 613 
5. Not as above; pores often present when young (their walls breaking up to form spines or"teeth" 
in age) .......................................... (see Polyporaceae & Allies, p. 549) 
-. 
\. 
.. ' 
., 
\ 
I" 
'I. 
Y" 
I 
, 
.. 
t 
., 
,.... 
c\. "' 
'\ - 
" 
, 
",., 
\.. " 
", . 
.....' " 
:- v. 
l " 
'. 
'" 
. 
.... 
'- 
.';  110 '\ ' 
 
. 
Climacodon septentrionale looks like a polypore but has spines under the cap instead of pores (see 
key at bottom of p. 612). It forms large shelving masses on northern hardwoods such as maple. 
Echinodontium tinctorium (Indian Paint Fungus; Toothed Conk) 
FRUITING BODY shelflike, very tough or woody, often perennial, up to 15 cm thick. 
CAP 4-25 cm broad, more or less hoof-shaped; surface dry, finely hairy to rough, often 
covered with moss. Flesh very tough or woody, bright orange to rusty-red or cinnamon, 
zoned. SPINES brittle, blunt, thick, flattened, long (1-3 cm); grayish to pale olive-buff, the 
tips sometimes darker. ST ALK absent. SPORE PRINT white (when obtainable); spores 
5.5-8 )( 3.5-6 microns, elliptical, minutely spiny, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or several on living or occasionally downed conifers; known only 
from western North America, where it favors mountain conifers such as fir and hemlock 
(I haven't seen it on the coast). It causes an extensive white heart rot in its host. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible, but can be used as a red dye. Its common 
name is a tribute to its use by Native Americans in the preparation of war paint. 
COMMENTS: The woody hoof-shaped fruiting body looks like aconk, but has long spines 
or "teeth" on its underside. The bright orange to reddish-orange flesh is also distinctive. It 
is not closely related to other teeth fungi and is now sequestered in a family of its own. 
HERICIUM 
Medium-sized to very large fleshy fungi growing on wood FRUITING BODY usually white to 
yellowish or pale salmon. branched or unbranched but lacking a distinct cap; spores borne on 
clusters or rows of delicate hanging spines. SPORE PRINT white. Spores more or less round, 
smooth or minutely roughened, amyloid. 
A PRISTINE full-grown Hericium is a breathtakingly beautiful sight. The fruiting body 
is unmistakable: a mass of fragile "icicles" suspended from a branched supporting frame- 
work, or in the case of H. erinaceus, from a tough, unbranched cushion of tissue. 
Hericiums are as delectable as they are beautiful, providing they are not too old or too 
tough-and providing you can bear to pick them in the first place. They are excellent fresh 
as well as marinated or pickled, and they have absolutely no poisonous look-alikes. They 
grow exclusively on wood and are easily cultivated. Their amyloid spores and novel 
fruiting body have led some taxonomists to reward them with a family of their own. 
Four well-known species occur in North America. Three favor hardwoods, while H. 
abietis grows on conifers. In most regions, including California, they are infrequent to 
rare, so you should consider yourself fortunate to find one. 
614 
HYDNACEAE 
Key to Hericium 
I. Fruiting body unbranched, consisting of a tough cushion of tissue from which long (2-7 cm) 
spines are suspended (but spines short in one eastern variety); found on hardwoods, especially 
oak ........................................................... H. erinaceus, 615 
I. Fruiting body branched, the spines hanging from the branches or branch tips (sometimes 
scarcely branched and very compact, but if so, then usually growing on conifers) ....... 2 
2. Growing on conifers in western North America: fruiting body white to salmon- or yellowish- 
tinged when fresh ............................................... H. abietis, below 
2. Growing mainly on hardwoods; fruiting body white when fresh (but may turn yellowish in 
age); widely distributed ...................... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '. 3 
3. Spines rather short (3-10 mm), arranged in rows along the branches (like teeth on a comb); 
branching usually open rather than compact; fruiting body often delicate H. ramosum, p.615 
3. Not as above; spines often long (up to 4 cm), arranged mostly in tufts or clusters, especially 
at the branch tips; branching open or compact ...... H. coral/oides (see H. abietis. below) 
Her;c;um ab;el;s (Conifer Coral Hericium) Color Plate 163 
FR UITIN G BO D Y 10-75 cm or more broad and high at maturity, consisting of an open to 
compact branched framework from which tufts of icicle-like spines hang; branches arising 
from a thick, tough, rooting base; color variable: white to creamy, yellowish-buff, pale 
ochraceous, or salmon-buff. SPINES up to 25 mm long but usually 5-10 mm; soft but 
brittle, arranged in tufts or clusters that are mainly grouped at the branch tips. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 4.5-5.5 x 4-5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely 
roughened, amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary or sometimes several together on dead conifers (especially fir and 
Douglas-fir); known only from the Pacific Northwest and northern California, fruiting 
mainly in the fall. It is rather infrequent but locally common, particularly at higher eleva- 
tions (the largest fruitings I've seen were in the Cascades). It appears year after year on the 
same logs, causing a conspicuous white pocket rot. The closely related H. coral/oides 
(see comments) favors hardwoods and is more widely distributed. 
EDIBILITY: Eminently edible, delectably delicious. When thoroughly cooked it is 
reminiscent of fish and is excellent sauteed, curried, or marinated. Its large size (a 100-lb. 
specimen was wheeled into one mushroom show!)plus its distinctive appearance make it an 
excellent mushroom for beginners. However, its breathtaking beauty poses a minor moral 
dilemma: should one ruthlessly uproot it for the sake of a meal, or leave it for others to see? 
COMMENTS: It is hard to believe that this astonishing Hericium, with its cascading 
clusters ofpristine..icicles,"isafungus. It is easily distinguished from other Hericiums by its 
white to salmon-buff color, clustered spines, and growth on conifers. It has long been a 
favorite among nature-lovers and photographers in the Pacific Northwest, but only 
recently has it been recognized as distinct from the better known, equally beautiful and 
delicious H. coral/oides. Some investigators, in fact, still consider the two to be the same 
species. Others reserve the name H. coral/oides for a pure white (when fresh) hardwood- 
loving form with slightly longer spines (up to 4 cm) and slightly larger spores. This form 
occurs in eastern North America, but reports of it from the West are based at least in part 
on H. abietis. To complicate matters, it has now been suggested that the name H. cora/- 
Joides is better applied to H. ramosum, and that the eastern form traditionally called 
H. coral/oides should be given a new name, H. americanum! To muddle matters even 
more, there are several growth forms of H. abietis, including a very compact, scarcely 
branched one (formerly H. weir;') that somewhat resembles H. erinaceus, and an exten- 
sively branched one with very short spines (1-5 mm) that mimics H. ramosum (both forms 
grow on conifers, however). Since all of these Hericiums are equally edible, their exact 
identities needn't concern you-at least, they don't concern me! 
HERICIUM 
615 
Hericium ramosum (Comb Hericium) Color Plate 164 
FRL"ITING BODY 8-35 cm broad and 6-15 cm high when mature, comprised of an open 
framework of rather delicate, toothed (spine-laden) branches arising from a tough, 
repeatedly branched rooting base or "trunk"; pure white when fresh, discoloring creamy to 
buff or yellowish-tan in old age. Flesh white. SPINES more or less evenly distributed in 
lines along the branches (like teeth on a comb), sometimes also in small tufts at the branch 
tips; spines rather short (3-10 mm long or up to 25 mm long in the tufts). SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 3-5 x 3-4 microns, nearly round, smooth or minutely roughened, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on fallen hard wood branches, logs, and stumps; 
widely distributed. It is said to be the most common Hericium in North America, but like 
the others, is uncommon in our area. I have found it in the fall, winter, and early spring on 
dead oak, and I have seen it in the summer on aspen and poplar in New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious when cooked slowly, but not as fleshy as the other 
Hericiums. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as H. laciniatum, this lovely species is smaller and more 
delicate than H. abietis and H. coral/oides, with slightly shorter spines and smaller spores. 
Also, the branching is more open and the spines are arranged in lines length wise along the 
branches, rather than exclusively in tufts. A compact form of this species occurs, but is rare. 
Hericium erinaceus (Lion's Mane Hericium; Old Man's Beard) 
FRUITING BODY an unbranched mass of numerous long, closely-packed, icicle-like 
spines hanging from a tough, solid, hairy, rooting cushion of tissue; 8-40 cm or more broad 
and high when mature; entirely white when fresh, discoloring yellowish to tan or dingy 
ochre in age. Flesh white. SPINES (1) 2-5 (7) cm long, soft and pliant when fresh, with 
pointed tips. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical to 
nearly round, smooth to minutely roughened, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary (rarely several together) on wounds of living hard woods or on the cut 
ends of recently felled logs; widely distributed. In our area it favors oak and is fairly 
common (for a Hericium) in the fall, winter, and spring; farther north it grows on maple. 
EDIBILITY: Excellent when fresh, but tougher than other Hericiums and sometimes 
Left: Hericium ramosum is the most delicate species in its genus. It favors dead hardwoods. Right: 
Hericium erinaceus has long spines hanging from an unbranched cushion of tissue. It fa vors living or 
recently killed hardwoods. 
.\. .. .. 
q 4. 
.. 
...;. 
....... 
 
.. 
 
, 
\, 
\ 
-'" , 
.... 
. I.,.'ll 
 .(} .\\} 
\ 
\ 
, ' 
, . 
",,' 
,. 
'III I. , 
1 1 1 1 ," f' " t. 
, " II 
t I ! .' 
Hericium erinaceus. Note how long the spines are in this rather small specimen. 
developing a rather sour, unpleasant taste in age. Slow cooking is called for and the base 
should not be eaten-it's so tough that it's difficult to remove from the tree without a knife! 
COMMENTS: The unbranched white to yellowish fruiting body and long, slender spines 
distinguish this impressive fungus from its relatives. Though hardly common, it is more 
numerous in our area than the branched Hericiums and is one of our most distinctive 
wood-inhabiting fungi. Gigantic specimens weighing several pounds each are not un- 
common. An unbranched version completely covered with small short spines occurs on 
hardwoods in eastern North America, but I have not seen it in the West. 
HYDNUM, DENTINUM,& Allies 
(Hedgehog Mushrooms) 
Medium-sized to fairly large, fleshy, terrestrial fungi with a cap and stalk. CAP smooth or cracked 
to conspicuously scaly. Fresh/irm. usually brittle. SPINES soft, brittle. STALK central or off- 
center, usually well-developed. fleshy but not woody. SPORE PRINT white (Dentinum) or 
brown (Hydnum). Spores smooth (Dentinum); rough to warty or angular (Hydnum). 
HEDGEHOG mushrooms are the best known and most common of the teeth fungi, and 
as a group are easy to recognize. The fruiting body has a well-defined cap and stalk and 
might be mistaken for a gilled mushroom but for the layer of delicate spines or "teeth" 
on the underside of the cap. Also significant is the texture of the flesh: fleshy or firm but 
brittle, rather than tough and pliant or leathery or woody as in the other major genera of 
terrestrial teeth fungi (Hydnellum and Phellodon). 
In the small but common genus Deminum. the spores are white and smooth, the spines 
white to pale orange, and the cap usually smooth. In the larger genus Hydnum. the spores 
are brown and warty, the spines are variously colored but usually darker than in Dentinum. 
and the cap is often scaly. A third genus, Bankera. has a brownish fruiting body and white 
roughened spores but is relatively rare, at least in the West. 
Although there is no doubt as to what hedgehog mushrooms are, there is, as usual, 
considerable controversy as to what hedgehog mushrooms should be called. Some 
mycologists campaign for the use of Hydnum instead of Deminum, and the creation 
of the genus Sarcodon to account for the Hydnums of this book. A "correct" classi- 
fication of the teeth fungi may not be essential to your well-being (it certainly isn't to 
616 
HYDNUM, DENTINUM, & ALLIES 
617 
mine), but please bear in mind that the exacting specialists owe their livelihoods to the 
resolution of such matters-and that they are doing their best. Giving even tacit approval 
to one system of classification at the expense of another is thus transformed into an act of 
inordinate importance, with the taxonomist's professional reputation at stake. Why they 
can't arrive at a consensus is anyone's guess-but since when do human beings agree on 
anything? I for one find them (human beings, that is) even more perplexing and mystifying 
than mushrooms! 
Dentinums are delicious and a good choice for beginners since nothing poisonous 
remotely resembles them. Hydnums, on the other hand, though sometimes beautiful, 
are mostly bitter-tasting or of unknown edibility. 
Both Dentinum and Hydnum species are strictly woodland fungi with rather erratic 
fruiting habits. For instance, in February and March of 1975 Dentinums were out- 
rageously abundant on the poison-oak-shrouded hillsides of our coastal pine forests. 
While barely denting the crop I managed to harvest and can over 200 pounds, which I am 
still enjoying today. For several years thereafter, however, they were practically absent 
in the same area, then produced another stupendous crop in 1981. Similarly, I did not find a 
single Hydnumfuscoindicum in our area until 1979, when it fruited by the dozens under 
tanoak and madrone. Five distinctive hedgehog mushrooms are described here and 
several others are keyed out. 
Key to Hydnum, Dentinum, & Allies 
I. Fruiting body (including spines) white to pale orange to dull orange, the cap sometimes slightly 
darker; spore print white; spores smooth ......................................... 2 
I. Not as above; some part of fruiting body usually darker (gray, brown. etc.) ............. 3 
2. Cap convex to plane or depressed, 2-15 cm broad or more; stalk usually at least I cm thick 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D. repandum & others, p. 618 
2. Cap usually umbilicate (with a navel-like central depression) and typically less than 5 cm 
broad; stalk usually less than I cm thick ....... D. umbilicatum (see D. repandum. p. 618) 
3. Spore print white; spines usually pale gray or grayish in age; found under conifers (usually pine) 
in eastern North America, but rare in the West ................................... 15 
3. Spore print brown; spines variously colored but often dark in age; widespread and common 4 
4. Flesh showing distinct violet tints (deep violet to lilac-gray) .......................... 5 
4. Not as above; flesh white to brownish, vinaceous-buff, etc. (but may stain purple when cut) 6 
5. Entire fruiting body (including spines!) violet to deep violet or blackish-violet ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H. juscoindicum, p. 622 
5. Not as above; spines brownish to cinnamon-brown with paler tips. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H. cyanellum& H.juligineo-violaceum (see H.fuscoindicum. p. 622) 
6. Base (tip) of stalk and flesh within it black to olive-black, olive-gray, or bluish-green; taste very 
bitter or bitter-farinaceous (chew on a piece of the cap) ............................. 7 
6. Not as above; taste mild or bitter ....................................... . . . . . . . . .. 8 
7. Flesh becoming pinkish or lilac-tinted when cut; spines whitish or pallid until old age ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. subincarnatum (see H. scabrosum group, p. 620) 
7. Not as above ........................................... H. scabrosum group. p. 620 
8. Scales on cap brown to blackish, usually large and conspicuous even when young and often 
raised or upturned; spines usually brownish' at maturity; common .. H. imbricatum, p. 619 
8. Not as above; cap usually developing scales only in age and/ or differently colored ....... 9 
9. Cap white and plushlike when young, yellowish or tan in age; spines dull yellowish or brown 
becoming almost blackish in old age; growing under hardwoods in eastern North America 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. cristatum 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Base of stalk usually white from coating of mycelium; fruiting body often large, thick-fleshed, 
buff to tan to yellow-brown, orange-brown, or cinnamon; cap usually with small flattened 
scales .......................................... H. calvatum group & others, p. 621 
10. Notasabove ................................................................ II 
618 HYDNACEAE 
11. Fruiting body developing greenish-olive tones in old age or when dried; flesh often becoming 
greenish also; not common ............................................ H.fumosum 
11. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Flesh staining lilac, purplish, purple-gray, pinkish, or vinaceous when cut (quickly or quite 
slowly) and/ or fruiting body often with vinaceous or purplish tints; widely distributed but 
especially common in the West ................... '.' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. .. 13 
12. Not as above; cap pale to dull brown or dark reddish-brown, quite hard and woody when dried; 
fairly common under conifers in eastern North America, also reported from the Pacific 
Northwest and California. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . H. stereosarcinon 
13. Cap smooth to felty or conspicuously cracked but not truly scaly, reddish-brown to grayish- 
brown, vinaceous, grayish, or darker; taste mild to somewhat farinaceous or occasionally 
bitter ...................................................................... 14 
13. Cap usually with scales, brownish-orange to dark brown, grayish-brown, or pinkish-brown; 
taste usually bitter ................. H. subincarnatum (see H. scabrosum group, p. 620) 
14. Cap and stalk often with vinaceous or purplish tints; cap often conspicuously cracked (areolate) 
in age; common in western North America .. H. rimosum (see H. scabrosum group, p. 620) 
14. Cap grayish to grayish-brown or reddish-brown, smooth to minutely areolate( cracked) in age; 
widespread but not common (at least in West) H. laevigatum (see H. scabrosum group, p.620) 
15. Cap some shade of brown at maturity (the margin often paler), not normally scaly but usually 
with needles and other debris adhering to the surface; found under conifers (usually pine) in 
eastern North America, but rare in West ....................... Bankerafuligineo-alba 
15. Not as above; cap more or less grayish-brown, often cracked or scaly in age; widespread but 
not common ..................................... Bankera carnosa (=B. violescens?) 
Dentinum repandum Color Plates 161, 162 
(Hedgehog Mushroom; Pig 7 s Trotter) 
CAP 2-17 (25) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed, the margin often wavy or 
deeply indented and at first inrolled; surface dry, more or less smooth, but sometimes 
cracking into scales in age; pale flesh-color to pale or dull orange, orange-tan, salmon, tan, 
or pale cinnamon to reddish-tawny (but white to creamy in vaT. album); bruised areas often 
darker orange. Flesh thick, occasionally zoned concentrically, firm, brittle, white, usually 
discoloring yellow to yellow-ochre or orange-brown when bruised; odor mild, taste mild to 
somewhat bitter or peppery. SPINES 2-7 mm long, whitish to yellowish, salmon-buff, or 
pale orange, bruising dark orange to ochraceous; slender, brittle but soft, usually 
decurrent. STALK 3-10 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 (5» cm thick, central or off-center, equal or 
enlarged below or occasionally tapered downward, firm, white or colored like cap but 
usually paler; bruising ochre to dark orange-brown; smooth or downy at base. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6.5-9)( 5.5-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or in troops on ground under both hard- 
woods and conifers; widely distributed throughout the north temperate zone and probably 
the most common of all the teeth fungi. In California it fruits throughout the mushroom 
season but develops slowly and normally does not peak until the late winter or early spring, 
when the wild irises are in bloom (see Color Plate 161) and most other fungi have long 
since rotted away. In our area it favors fern, bramble, and poison oak thickets under pine; 
in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains it grows under a wide range of conifers, 
and in eastern North America it is often common under oaks in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice! It is comparable to the chanterelle in color, texture, and 
flavor, and like that species is usually maggot-free. It is easier to clean, however, and is also 
easier to recognize.The peppery taste (if present) disappears in cooking. It's superb in 
casseroles, tomato sauces, or sauteed with sour cream, but should be cooked slowly and 
lengthily to make it tender. Be careful to keep the spines clean while picking them! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Hydnum repandum, this late bloomer resembles a dull- 
DENTINUM 
619 
colored chanterelle when first spotted amongst the needles and humus. However, the 
white to pale orange spines on the underside of the cap immediately distinguish it, making it 
one of the safest of all edible mushrooms. The cap color, though variable, is typically some 
shade of pale orange to pinkish-orange to reddish-tan, with wounded areas darker orange. 
The white form (var. album) does not seem to occur in our area, but is common farther 
north under conifers, especially Sitka spruce. Other species: Var. macrosporum has larger 
spores but is otherwise similar; D. umbilicatum is a closely related, equally edible conifer- 
lover with a smaller (usually less than 5 cm) umbilicate cap, a slimmer stalk (typically less 
than I cm), and larger spores. It is similar in color and widely distributed. and sometimes 
mingles with D. repandum. Two edible white or whitish southern species should also be 
mentioned: D. albomagnum and D. albidum. The first has a mild taste and non-staining 
flesh, while the latter has an acrid taste and smaller spores. 
Hydnum imbricatum 
(Shingled Hedgehog) 
Color Plate 159 
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, buff to pale brown 
or dull reddish-brown, but covered with large, coarse, broad, raised or shingle-like, 
darker brown to nearly black scales that are often upturned in age; becoming darker 
brown throughout in age and sometimes cracking, with the scales sometimes wearing off 
except at the center. Flesh thick, firm but brittle; pallid to grayish, tan, or brownish; odor 
mild or when dry somewhat smoky or chocolate-like; taste mild to bitter. SPINES pale 
brown or grayish or pallid becoming dark brown in age, 2-15 mm long; soft, brittle, often 
slightly decurrent. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1.5-3.5 (5) cm thick, central or off-center, often 
enlarged below; some shade of brown, often hollow toward the top in age; usually more or 
less smooth. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 6-8 x 5-7 microns, nearly round but promi- 
nently warted (angular-nodulose or shaped like a Maltese cross). 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed-it is pro bably 
the most common Hydnum in North America. In many regions it is abundant under 
conifers in the late spring, summer, and fall. In our area it occurs under hardwoods in 
the late fall and winter, but is rare. I have seen enormous fruitings under spruce and fir. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but of poor quality. Many collections have a bitter taste and par- 
boiling does not necessarily help, plus it causes indigestion in some people. The European 
version is apparently better because it is often sold in markets there. 
Hydnum imbricatum is easily told by the large brown to blackish scales on the cap, which make it look 
like a charred macaroon. See color plate for close-up of spines, which range from grayish to brown. 
., o. 
. 
,L 
, 
" .. ;. ,;., 
-:-. - 
=: -'" 
:... 
'to 
......... 
.' 
\., ., 
'Y' 
 
f 
'\ 
""" t. 
.- 
;.;. ""', 
. '1' 
.....:.;...:-'" 
 . . 
..- 
 
,,-. 
" 
J. 
'..t" \ . \ 
."  . t' 
 
\r. 
-t' " 
-'fl- 
, \. 
;, . 
. : 
....,.: 
. .... 
."" 
'4 
620 
HYDNACEAE 
COMMENTS: Also known as Sarcodon imbricatum, this arresting hedgehog is easily 
identified by the prominent brown to blackish scales on its cap. The stalk base is not olive- 
black as in the H. scabrosum group, and the cap is scalier-even when young. In old age the 
central depression of the cap may become perforated, i.e., join up with the hollow in the 
upper portion of the stalk. For similar species, see the H. scabrosum group. 
Hydnum scabrosum group 
(Bitter Hedgehog) 
Color Plate 165 
CAP4-14 (20) cm broad. convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, at first smooth 
but soon becoming cracked and scaly, the scales cinnamon-brown to reddish-brown 
becoming dark chocolate-brown to vinaceous-brown at maturity and the background 
dingy yellowish-brown or darker. Flesh thick, brittle, firm, white or buff, but olive-gray 
to olive-black in base of stalk; odor farinaceous or smoky; tastestronglybitterand/ oracrid 
to farinaceous. SPINES often unequal in length, 2-10 mm long, pallid or buff, darken- 
ing to tan with paler tips, then darker brown in old age; usually slightly decurrent. STALK 
2.5-10 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, usually tapered below, central or off-center, often curved, 
flesh-color becoming brown or dark brown in age, the base blackish-oliveto grayish-olive, 
olive, or dark bluish-green; firm, solid. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 6-7.5 )( 4-5.5 
microns, elliptical to round, prominently warted. Cap tissue staining blue-green in KOH. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under conifers or sometimes 
hardwoods; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the late summer and fall in the 
Pacific Northwest and northern California, but rare in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally and indisputably inedible due to the awful taste. 
COMMENTS: The scaly reddish-brown to brown cap, blackish-olive to blue-green stem 
base, and bitter taste distinguish this species from most other Hydnums. The scales are 
usually quite conspicuous, but not as large as those of H. imbricatum. H.fennicum is a 
very similar species with a scaly reddish-brown to brown cap and blackish stem base. 
However, it does not stain blue-green in potassium hydroxide (KOH) and it has an even 
more intensely bitter taste. It grows under both hardwoods and conifers and is wide- 
spread. Three other somewhat similar species are quite common in the West: H. sub. 
incarnatum is usually bitter-tasting and similarly colored or more vinaceous, but its flesh 
usually stains pinkish or lilac when cut, its spines are pallid or whitish becoming buff or pale 
brown only in old age, and its stalk base mayor may not be olive-tinted. In California it 
grows under both hardwoods and conifers, sometimes in the company of H. scabrosum. 
H. rimosum (see photo below) is also similar, but has a more or less mild (or rarely slightly 
Hydnum rimosum (see comments under H. scabrosum group) is not nearly as scaly as H. imbricawm, 
but the surface of its cap often cracks in age. 
" 
" 
'\. 
-10 
HYDNUM 
621 
acrid) taste, is not normally olive at the stem base, and has a vinaceous- or purple-tinged 
cap that usually develops cracks in age but is not scaly when young. It is fairly common 
under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, and I have found it in our area in the winter and 
in the Sierra Nevada in the spring. Finally, there is H. laevigatum, a widespread but 
infrequently-encountered species that has a smooth to minutely cracked cap and, like 
H. rimosum. often stains purplish when cut open. None ofthese are worth eating. 
Hydnurn calvaturn group (Robust Hedgehog) 
CAP (5) 10-25 (35) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, 
soon breaking up into small, flattened scales and usually cracking in age; creamy-buff to 
yellowish-tan or pale cinnamon-brown, the scales slightly darker and becoming brownish 
where bruised; margin often lobed. Flesh very thick, firm, pallid to pinkish-buff or pale 
brownish, or grayer near the spines; odor and taste variable: mild to spicy-fragrant to 
farinaceous. SPINES pallid, soon darkening to brown or grayish-brown, the tips usually 
paler; 2-12 (15) mm long, usually very uneven in length or many aborted or fused together 
or forked or with small swellings; sometimes decurrent. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-4 (6) cm 
thick, central or off-center, usually narrowed at the base and sometimes rooting; solid, 
firm, colored like cap or slightly paler, the base often whitish from mycelium. SPORE 
PRINT brown; spores 4-5.5 x 3-5 microns, nearly round to elliptical but prominently 
warted (angular-nodulose). Cap surface staining blue-green to olive-black in KOH. 
HABIT A T: In groups or dumps, often with small or aborted fruiting bodies present, on 
ground in mixed woods and under conifers; known only from western North America. 
I've found it in August under spruce in New Mexico; it is also fairly common in Oregon. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-but fleshy enough to warrant cautious experimentation. 
COMMENTS: The large size, thick flesh, tendency to grow in groups or dumps, whitish 
stalk base, and presence of small appressed (flattened) scales on the cap distinguish this 
species from most other Hydnums. The color is never asdarkas that of H. imbricatum. nor 
the cap as coarsely scaly; the stalk is not olive or blue at the base as in the H. scabrosum 
group. A similar species, H. crassum, is slightly brighter in color, has larger spores, and 
its flesh may stain yellow-green when cut. Its cap surface stains brownish in KOH and 
it also occurs under conifers. A somewhat similar and widespread species, H. mar- 
tioflavum, has bright cinnamon-orange spines when young and a cinnamon to tawny cap. 
Left: Hydnum ca/vatum group. Note small flattened scales on cap. Right: Underside of Hydnum 
fuscoindicum (see description on p. 622). Entire fruiting body is deep purple to black in this beautiful 
and unmistakable hedgehog mushroom. 
. 
'" .t 
.\ 
.... 
" 
..J' 
.. 
" 
. '- t 
";:1.'"  
.... . 
.... 
. 
II!! . " ... 
... 
{ 
.:;-. , 
, 1'. "- 
 ,'t"\ 
....' 
.. .\ 
"..  
... 
I, . . 
'\ 
",. 
,,,I If. 
.. 
f.- 
ie. 
." ... 
. . 't 
.- - , .... 
.. .. 't'- 
", '" 
.. 
 r 
." 
622 
HYDNACEAE 
Hydnumfuscoindicum (Violet Hedgehog) 
CAP 4-18 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, at first smooth 
but usually cracking to form scales in age; violet-black to bluish-black, black, or raisin- 
colored; margin often somewhat paler or purpler and wavy. Flesh thick, firm but brittle, 
deep slate-purple or violet; odorand taste mild to somewhat farinaceous or cinnamon-like. 
SPINES deep violet to deep bluish-violet to deep lavender, the tips usually paler or lilac; 
soft, brittle, 2-6 (15) mm long, usually decurrent. STALK 2-10 cm long, 1-2 (3.5) cm thick, 
equal or more often tapered below, central or off-center, firm, colored more or less likethe 
spines (deep purplish). SPORE PRINT brown; spores 5-7 x 4.5-6.5 microns, broadly 
elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; locally common but 
erratic in its fruiting behavior-absent some years and abundant others; known onlyfrom 
western North America. In our area it fruits in the fall and winter under tanoak and 
madrone at higher elevations in the coastal mountains; in the Pacific Northwest, however, 
it favors conifers, especially hemlock and pine. It is yet another example of a conifer-lover 
that crosses over to tanoak-madrone (others include Armillaria ponderosa, Cantharel/us 
subalbidus, Hygrophorus chrysodon, and Tricholoma aurantium). 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Although not exactly bitter-tasting, small pieces which 
I sampled caused a peculiar burning sensation in the back of my throat. It would be 
interesting to see what color it yields as a dye. 
COMMENTS: The striking deep violet color, which is reminiscent of Corlinarius vio- 
laceus, sets apart this attractive Hydnum (see photo at bottom ofp. 621 ).Itscolormakesit 
hard to pick out in the forest gloom, and even the most eagle-eyed Hydnum-hound is likely 
to miss it or else mistake it for an old, blackened Russula albonigra. Phel/odon alralus is 
somewhat similar, but is bluish-black and much smaller and tougher. Other purplish 
Hydnums include: H. cyanellum, with a similarly colored cap but paler("lilac-gray") flesh, 
a bitter taste, and cinnamon-brown spines with whitish tips (it was originally described 
from California, but I have not seen it); H.fulig;neo-v;olaceum, with a vinaceous-brown 
cap, brown or cinnamon-brown spines, an acrid taste, and gray flesh in the base of the 
stalk; and H. rimosum (see comments under the H. scabrosum group), which is vinaceous- 
brown to vinaceous-buff rather than deep purple. 
HYDNELLUM & PHELLODON 
Small to medium-large, terrestrial fungi with a cap and stalk (or sometimes several caps). CAP 
columnar to top-shaped becoming plane, depressed, or irregular; often spongy or felty when young 
and often lumpy, pitted, or ridged in age. Flesh tough; spongy to fibrous; pliant or woody. often 
duplex. SPINES typically short, often blunt; variously colored. STALK central or off-center, 
sometimes nearly absent; tough or woody, continuous with cap. SPORE PRINT brown (Hyd- 
ne//um) or white (Phe//odon). Spores roughened by warts or spines. 
THESE tough or woody, terrestrial teeth fungi occur primarily in coniferous forests. 
They have both a cap and stalk. but the latter is sometimes present onlyasa poorly-defined 
tapered base. Many species have the general aspect of a polypore, but a closer look reveals 
the presence of spines rather than pores on the underside of the cap, although the spines 
are sometimes so short and blunt that they look like minute warts. 
The fruiting body develops and decays over a long period oftime, frequently engulfing 
needles, twigs, and other debris in the growth process. If there is a dry spell, growth may 
cease, then begin anew around the margin of the cap when it is damp again. As a result the 
cap frequently has an irregular or somewhat misshapen appearance; several caps mayfuse 
HYDNELLUM & PHELLODON 
623 
together or arise in a rosette from a common stem, and their surfaces are often pitted, 
ridged, or lumpy. This indeterminate growth pattern plus the tough and pliant to fibrous 
or woody texture separate Hydnellum and Phellodon from the fleshier, more brittle 
hedgehog mushrooms (Hydnum and Dentinum). In many Hydnellums and some Phello- 
dons the cap is spongy or felty to the touch when young or actively growing, and is 
sometimes beaded with colored droplets. However, beneath or within the spongy-felty 
outer layer there is a tougher, corky or woody-fibrous core, particularly in the stalk. The 
flesh thus has two distinct layers of different textures, i.e., it is duplex. 
Hydnellum contains about 50 species in North America. They are medium-sized to 
fairly large and have brown spores. Phellodon includes only a handful of species, but some 
of them are quite common. They are distinguished from Hydnellum by their white spores 
and smaller size. Neither genus is common in our area but both are prominent farther 
north. Because of their indeterminate growth most species vary tremendously in their 
appearance according to environmental conditions. It is therefore imperative, when using 
the following key, to have several specimens in hand if at all possible. Seven species are 
described fully and others are keyed out. All are much too tough and/ or bitter to eat. 
Key to Hydnellum & Phellodon 
Flesh in the cap and/ or stalk black or tinted or zoned (lined) with blue or violet (purple-black, 
blue-gray, etc.) when fruiting body is cut in half lengthwise .......................... 2 
I. Not as above; flesh orange, cinnamon, brown, or shades thereof ...................... 9 
2. Flesh in lower half of stalk reddish-orange to bright rusty-brown or salmon; flesh in cap usually 
zoned with brown and blue or mauve (sometimes faintly) ... H. caeruleum & others, p. 625 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Spines bright blue to dark blue; stalk with a swollen buried base or "tuber"; found in eastern 
North America; rare ............................................. H. scleropod;um 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Flesh in lower half of stalk bluish-black to purple-black; cap whitish to yellowish to tan or 
violet-tinged when fresh; odor often fragrant. . . . . . . . . . . .. H. suaveolens& others, p. 624 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. 
l. 
Flesh black to grayish-black (not blue or violet-tinted) in both cap and stalk; spore print white 
(when obtainable); found mainly from the Rockies eastward P. n;ger(see P. atratus, p.629) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. 
Cap rather small (5 cm broad or less); stalk slender (averaging 3-5 mm thick); spore print 
white ....................................................................... 7 
6. Cap medium-sized to rather large (usually 4 cm broad or more); stalk usually thicker; spore 
print brown ................................................................. 8 
7. Flesh purple-gray to purple-black; cap typically dark brown to purplish-gray wi th a pale margin 
. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. melaleucus(see P. atratus, p. 629) 
7. Flesh purple-black to bluish-black; cap more or less same color .......... P. atratus, p. 629 
8. Found in eastern North America; fruiting body slate-gray to black ...................... 
............ . ... .. ...... ..... ... .... .... ... ... ... H. n;gellum(see P. atratus, p.629) 
Found mainly from the Rocky Mountains westward; flesh and/ or cap usually with some 
blue or violet tones ............ H. cyanopod;um & H. reg;um (see H. caeru/eum. p. 625) 
9. Spines bright yellow at least at the tips; cap usually with bright yellow to olive-yellow tones at 
least at the margin; found in eastern North America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. H. geogen;um 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Flesh yellow-orange to bright orange, rusty-orange, or reddish-orange, at least in the stalk; cap 
and/ or spines often showing same colors ........................................ II 
10. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
II. Flesh in cap and stalk orange to orange-red or rusty-cinnamon; cap surface with cinnamon, 
orange, or rusty-cinnamon tones, at least in age ......... H. aurant;acum & others, p. 626 
II. Flesh in cap duller (mauve, grayish, brownish, etc.); cap surface also typically duller ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H. caeruleum & others, p. 625 
8. 
624 
HYDNACEAE 
12. Odor sweet and/ or taste of flesh very acrid (peppery); cap beaded with bright red to dark red 
droplets in wet weather .................................... H. peck;; & others, p. 627 
12. Cap not beaded with red droplets, or if so then taste not typically acrid nor odor sweet. .. 13 
13. Cap usually small (6 cm or less); stalk often slender (less than 1 cm thick); spore print white 14 
13. Mature cap often more than 5 cm broad; stalk often thick; spore print brown or brownish 15 
14. Spines pale cinnamon to brown at maturity; cap usually zoned ...... P. tomentosus, p. 628 
14. Spines grayish at maturity ...................... P. confluens (see P. tomentosus, p. 628) 
15. Stalk exuding yellow juice when broken or crushed (iffresh); cap pale to dark brown, or some- 
times also with yellow-brown tones and exuding a brownish juice when fresh.. H. m;rab;le 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
16. Cap smooth or radially ridged but not lum py, warty, or spongy, often zoned concentrically (see 
Color Plate 157) with various shades of brown, cinnamon-brown, pinkish-brown, etc.; stalk 
not spongy or bulbous ..................... H. zonatum (see H. scrobicu/atum, p. 627) 
16. Not as above ....... _...... _. . . .. . . .... ... .... .................. . . _.. _ ..... .. 17 
17. Associated with hardwoods (mainly oak) in eastern "North America .................. 18 
17. Associated principally with conifers; widely distributed ............................. 19 
18. Stalk very spongy and swollen or bulbous; cap and stalk brown to rusty-brown or cinnamon- 
brown and finely hairy or velvety; common ........................... H. spong;os;pes 
18. Not as above; cap very dark brown to blackish in old age .................. H. piperatum 
19. Cap sometimes beaded with pinkish droplets in wet weather; odor typically mild or faint but 
not farinaceous; common under pines in northeastern North America .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. p;net;cola (see H. peckii, p. 627) 
19. Cap sometimes beaded with red to dark red droplets in wet weather; odor usually farinaceous; 
widely distributed under various conifers ............. H. scrob;culatum & others, p. 627 
Hydnellum suaveolens (Fragrant Hydnellum) 
CAP (3) 5-15 (30) cm broad when mature, top-shaped becoming plane to somewhat 
depressed, often with needles or other debris incorporated into it; surface white and thinly 
felty or velvety at first, often bumpy and/ or pitted in age, soon becoming yellowish to tan, 
brownish, olive-brown, or violet-gray from the center outward (margin often paler); 
usually staining brown where bruised. Flesh duplex, whitish to yellowish-buff zoned with 
blue lines in the cap, entirely deep blue to purple-black in the stalk; odor often strongly 
fragrant (like anise or peppermint). SPINES whitish to creamy when young, becoming 
grayish-brown with pallid tips in age; short (up to 3 mm long), irregularly decurrent. 
STALK 1-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central or slightly off-center, very tough, the base 
usually swollen, rooting; grayish-blue to bluish-black. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 
4-6 )( 34 microns, elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or in fused clusters under northern and montane 
conifers, late summer through early winter; widespread but especially common in the 
Rocky Mountains. I have seen large fruitings under spruce and fir in Idaho and New 
Mexico, but have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too fibrous to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: The blue-lined flesh in the cap and blue-black flesh in the stalk plus the 
flagrantly fragrant (fragrantly flagrant?) odor make this an easy species to identify. In 
some collections the fragrance is absent, but in others it is overpowering-I once had to 
remove two specimens from my car because their aroma was so heady! H. peck;; is often 
fragrant but much different in color, while H. caeru/eum shows orange-red flesh in the 
stalk. Other species: H. cruentum, described from Nova Scotia, has a menthol odor, 
but when young and fresh its cap has red droplets and it spines are lilac- or bluish-tinged. 
....... 
, 
J 
t..  
 
\: 
I"" 
\ 
 
t. 
,. 
.. 
.. 
... . 
.- 
) 
-. 
.) 
.. 
\. 
" 
00\,... . 
.. 
, JI. 
, 
" 
\.... to. .. 
.I ) 
Hydnellum caeruleum, Note the conspicuously zoned flesh in the sliced specimen at left. 
Hydnellum caeruleum (Blue-Gray Hydnellum) 
CAP 3-12 (17) cm broad, often with leaves or needles incorporated into it; top-shaped 
becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface felty or velvety at first, often bumpy and/ or 
pitted in age and with matted hairs; mauve to pale blue, whitish, or tan when young, 
becoming light to dull dark brown or even blackish from the center outward (often a 
mixture ofthese colors), the soft, felty growing margin white or pale blue to bluish-gray. 
Flesh duplex: upper or outer layer spongy, inner core tough and fibrous; zoned variously 
with bluish, blue-gray, mauve, and brown in the cap; bright rusty-colored to orange-red 
in stalk; odor and taste farinaceous. SPINES whitish when young or tinged blue, becoming 
brown to dark brown with pallid tips in age; rather short (1-5 mm long), often decurrent. 
STALK 2-9 (12) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central or off-center, very tough, often rooting 
deeply in humus; equal or thicker ateitherend, buff to brown or orange-brown, but usually 
covered with debris. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 4.5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, nearly round 
to elliptical and irregularly lobed or warted. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground in woods; widely dis- 
tributed. It is common in the Pacific Northwest under pines and other conifers, but in our 
area I find it under oak, tanoak. and madrone, usually early in the fall. 
EDIBILITY: Indisputably inedible. 
COMMENTS: Like most Hydnellums this species develops over a period of several weeks 
and undergoes a number of confusing color changes. Young specimens are more or less top- 
shaped, and have a thick, felty cap margin that shows white and/ or bluish tints. In age, 
however, or after being battered by rain, the cap becomes depressed (wouldn't you?), the 
margin thins out, and the color becomes darker or duller brown. However, the bluish lines 
in the flesh of the cap (though sometimes faint) and the bright rusty- to orange-red flesh 
in the stalk (which distinguishes it from H. suaveolens) are fairly constant characters. 
Other species: H. ferrug;pes of eastern North America has an orange-red stalk, but fa vors 
hardwoods. H. cyanopod;um has a vinaceous-blue cap shading toward lavender (or 
whitish at margin) that is often beaded with red droplets in wet weather, flesh that is 
zoned bluish-black, and spores shaped like jacks. H. reg;um often forms compound 
fruiting bodies (with several caps); its cap is violet-black with a paler margin and the flesh 
is brown to pale orange in the stalk and brownish to grayish with violet tones in the cap. 
The latter two species occur under conifers (mainly spruce and pine) in northern Cali- 
fornia, the Pacific Northwest, and the Rocky Mountain region. 
625 
..... 
.. 
, 
" , 
;,.'\, -\' 
". ... 
-1a 
, 
 
 
""" . 
t 
"\. 
.., 
Hydnellum aurantiacum looks like a terrestrial polypore, but has minute spines on underside of cap 
instead of pores. Lumpy specimen on right is young and actively growing. 
Hydnellum aurantiacum (Orange Hydnellum) 
CAP 3-15 cm broad, columnar or somewhat top-shaped becoming plane or depressed in 
age; often with pine needles and other debris incorporated into it; surface velvety and 
suedelike when fresh and often roughened by projecting knobs and lumps when mature, or 
in some forms with radiating ridges; white when young or on actively growing margin, 
otherwise orange to rusty-orange to rusty-cinnamon (or mixture of these colors), and 
eventually darker (brown) in old age. Flesh thick, tough and corky except for frequent 
presence of a spongier outer or upper layer; orange to rusty-cinnamon to orange-red in 
both the cap and stalk; odor mild, taste bitter to farinaceous. SPINES short and blunt 
(1-4 mm long), whitish to grayish or orange, becoming brown in age with the tips often 
paler. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually central, very tough or woody, equal or 
tapered downward or in one form enlarged at base; orange to bright rusty-cinnamon 
becoming dark brown in age, with a large mat of pine needles and debris usually stuck to 
the base. SPORE PRINT brown; spores 5.5-7.5 )( 5-6 microns, nearly round, promi- 
nently warted. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in grou ps on ground under pines and other conifers, sometimes also 
in fused clusters; widely distributed. It is one of the two most common Hydnellums in our 
area (from late fall through early spring), but does not often occur in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible. 
COMMENTS: The tough texture, knobby or lumpy cap surface, and bright orange to 
rusty-cinnamon colors of the cap and flesh are the fallible field marks of this species and its 
close relatives. It never exudes the red droplets characteristic of H. peck ii, but might be 
casually mistaken for a polypore such as Phaeo/us schweinitzii. However, a close look 
at its underside reveals the presence of small "teeth" instead of pores. Closely related 
species include: H. complectipes, usually with many caps fused to form large, complicated 
masses or rosettes, found in the Pacific Northwest under conifers;H. conigenum, with very 
thin flesh in the cap, also found under conifers; and H.Jerrugipes and H. earlianum, found 
under hardwoods in eastern North America, the latter with a nearly smooth cap. 
626 
HYDNELLUM 
627 
Hydnellum peckii Color Plate 160 
(Strawberries and Cream; Bleeding Hydnellum) 
CAP 2.5-15 cm broad, often with needles and other debris incorporated intoit; top-shaped 
becoming broadly convex to plane or finally depressed; surface felty or velvety and white 
to pink in young specimens or on actively-growing margin; in age becoming nearly hairless 
and lumpy or jagged with projecting nodules, and often ridged and/ or pitted; darkening 
to brown, dark brown, or vinaceous-brown from the center outward and almost entirely 
these colors in old age; beaded with or exuding bright ruby-red to dark red droplets when 
fresh and moist. Flesh in both cap and stalk tough and fibrous-corky, faintly zoned; 
pinkish-buff to cinnamon-brown, dark reddish-brown, or dingy brown; odor mild to 
fragrant or pungent; taste typically extremely acrid (peppery). SPINES rather short (1-6 
mm long), dull pinkish becoming brown or purplish-brown, often with paler tips; some- 
times decurrent. STALK 0.5-7.5 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, central or off-center, equal or 
tapered below and sometimes rooting, or occasionally swollen at base; felty or velvety 
and colored more or less like cap or darker; solid, tough or woody . SPORE PRINT brown; 
spores 4.5-5.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, round or nearly round, prominently warted. 
HABITAT: Solitary to scattered, gregarious, orin fused clusters on ground under conifers; 
widely distributed, but particularly common in the Pacific Northwest in the late summer 
and fall. I've recorded only one questionable collection from our area, but have seen it 
farther north under pine and fir. 
EDIBILITY: Indubitably inedible due to the burning-acrid taste and tough, corky texture. 
COMMENTS: The bright red droplets that cling to the surface of the cap in moist weather 
make this a striking and easily-identified mushroom (see color plate!). As in other Hyd- 
nellums, the cap varies considerably in color and texture according to age and environ- 
mental conditions. When young, white, and beaded with droplets it looks like a Danish 
pastry topped with strawberry jam. Older, battered specimens, on the other hand, are 
scarcely recognizable and easily confused with other species. Intermediate stages are 
typically brown or dark reddish-brown with a white to pink, beaded margin. Other species 
exuding red droplets in wet weather include: H. diabolum, very similar if not the same, 
with a hairier cap at maturity and stronger odor; and H. pineticola, common under pines 
in northeastern North America, with a rather unpleasant but not acrid taste and a cap that 
sometimes has pink droplets. See also H. scrobiculalum. 
Hydnellum scrobiculatum (Rough Hydnellum) 
CAP 3-10 cm broad, more or less top-shaped when young becoming plane to depressed in 
age, sometimes with smaller caps on top; surface usually roughened and irregular from 
numerous pits and projecting warts or blunt spikes, often also with radial ridges; pallid 
to pale salmon-buff or pinkish and plushlike or felty when young or on growing margin of 
older specimens; darkening in age from the center outward to buffy-brown, then dull 
cinnamon and finally darker brown, but lacking conspicuous concentric zones; sometimes 
beaded with dark red droplets when young and moist, and bruising reddish-black to black 
when rubbed, especially at margin. Flesh zoned, sometimes also with white dots; usually 
duplex, the upper layer spongy when fresh and colored like cap, the lower layer or core 
brown to dark reddish-brown; often exuding dark red juice when squeezed (if moist and 
fresh); odor and taste mild to farinaceous. SPINES short (1-5 mm long), usually decurrent, 
sometimes fused; pallid or colored like cap margin, becoming buffy-brown to cinnamon- 
brown and finally purple- or dark brown in old age. STALK 1-4 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, 
usually tapered downward but often with a swollen, buried, spongy base; central or off- 
center; tough; cinnamon-brown or colored more or less like cap. SPORE PRINT 
brownish; 4.5-5.5 (7) x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted. 
628 
HYDNACEAE 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters in woods, usually associated 
with conifers; widely distributed and sporadically common in some regions. It can be found 
nearly every fall in the Pacific Northwest and extends into northern California, but occurs 
very rarely if at all in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Incomparably inedible. 
COMMENTS: This species is rather hard to characterize, as evidenced by the lengthy 
description. It is best recognized by its irregularly roughened cap with pits, radial ridges, 
and spike like projections, plus the overall cinnamon to brown color with a pinkish growing 
margin that darkens when bruised. When beaded with red droplets it can be confused with 
H. peckii. but is not as peppery-tasting as that species and usually has a buried, swollen 
"tuber" on the stalk. When older it can be mistaken for various other brownish to reddish 
Hydnellums. H. zonatum (=H. scrobicu/atum var. zonatum, H. concrescens-COLOR 
PLATE 157) is a closely related, similarly colored species with a smooth or radially cor- 
rugated (but not lumpy) cap that is usually zoned concentrically (at least somewhat). It is 
quite common under hardwoods in eastern North America but also occurs on the west 
coast both in its normal form and a diminutive one whose cap is 4 cm broad or less. Both 
H. zona turn and H. scrobiculaturn are quite distinct in their typical forms, but appear to 
intergrade. Other similar species: H. subsuccosum resembles H. zona turn. but is more 
irregular in shape and juicier when fresh, and exudes a pinkish to reddish juice when 
squeezed; it also has yellowish-gray to yellow-green mycelium at the base of the stem and its 
cap is often flecked with yellowish spots or particles.H. cumulatum has many caps built on 
top of one another, and little or no stalk. Both of these occur under conifers. 
Phellodon tomentosus (Zoned Phellodon) 
CAP 1.5-4 (5.5) cm broad, often fused with others, plane to depressed or broadly funnel- 
shaped; surface dry, smooth to ridged or corrugated, minutely hairy (tomentose), white 
when very young, soon becoming concentrically zoned with yellow-brown, cinnamon- 
brown, darker brown, etc., the growing margin usually remaining white and felty to the 
touch, but bruising brownish. Flesh thin, leathery and fibrous, brownish (darker brown 
in stalk); odor usually fragrant (like fenugreek); taste mild or slightly bitter. SPINES short 
(1-3 (5) mm), crowded, delicate, whitish becoming pale cinnamon to brown with paler tips; 
slightly decurrent. STALK 1-5 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm thick, usually central, equal or tapering 
downward, colored more or less like cap, arising from spongy pad of brownish mycelium. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-4.5 microns, round or nearly round. minutely spiny. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered (several caps often fused together 
but the stalks usually separate) under conifers; widely distributed and fairly common. I 
have found it in Mendocino County, California, in the fall and early winter, and it is some- 
times abundant in the Pacific Northwest; just how far south it occurs is unclear. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too small and too tough to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The small size, beautifully zoned yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown to 
dark brown cap, brown flesh, slender stem, and frequently fragrant odor are good field- 
marks. It bears an uncanny resemblance to polypores of the genus Coltricia (see C. 
cinnarnornea), but the underside of the cap features minute spines or "teeth" instead of 
pores. Hydnellurn zonaturn (see comments under H. scrobiculaturn) is also somewhat 
similar, but has darker spines and brown spores. Other species: P. confluens is quite 
similar, but more common under hardwoods. It is more irregular in shape, with an often 
roughened or pitted, whitish cap that darkens to creamy or dark tan from the center 
outward, and spines which are grayish at maturity. 
PHELLODON 
629 
Phellodon atratus (Blue-Black Phellodon) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad but often fused with others; plane to depressed or irregular; surface dry, 
usually at least faintly zoned concentrically; bluish-black to purple-black or black, the 
margin often slightly paler or purpler. Flesh in both cap and stalk purple-black to bluish- 
black; thin, tough, fibrous, pliant, sometimes with a thin outer or upper spongy layer; odor 
mild or faintly fragrant; taste mild. SPINES very short (1-2 mm), irregularly decurrent; 
gray to dark purplish-gray-brown, darker where bruised. STALK 2-5 cm long, 3-5 mm 
thick, usually central, sometimes compound or branched; tapering downward but usually 
thickened at ground level by a feIty mycelial layer; rough, often flattened, colored more or 
less like cap. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4-5 )( 3-5 microns, round or nearly round, 
minutely spiny. Cap tissue staining blue-black in potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious, often forming compound or fused clusters, on 
ground under conifers (particularly Sitka spruce); apparently endemic to the Pacific 
Northwest and California and quite common in the fall and winter in second-growth 
forests. It has been found in Big Basin State Park, but is rare south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but like myself, too tough and too small to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The small size, tough texture, and bluish-black color distinguish this 
conifer-lover. Hydnum fuscoindicum is somewhat similar in color but larger and fleshy- 
brittle rather than pliant and tough. A closely related species, P. melaleucus, has purplish- 
black to purple-gray flesh, but its cap is dark brown to purplish-gray with a pallid margin, 
the spines are whitish to gray, and the stalk is very thin, dark brown to black, and sometimes 
deeply rooted. It also occurs under conifers but has a wider (albeit northern) distribution. 
In eastern North America a similar species, P. niger, is common. It is larger and thicker 
than P. atratus, with a white to brownish, gray, or black cap and black flesh (in both the 
cap and stem). Hydnellum nigellum, another eastern species, is small and slate-gray to 
black, but has brown spores. 
AURISCALPIUM 
THIS genus contains a single odd species with a worldwide distribution. It is not closely 
related to other stalked teeth fungi. In fact, microscopic characters suggest a possible 
relationship to the agaric genus Lentinellus. 
A uriscalpium vulgare (Ear Pick Fungus) 
CAP 1-2 (4) cm broad, more or less kidney-shaped in outline, broadly convex to plane or 
slightly depressed; surface dry, covered with dense fibrils or hairs, brown to dark brown, 
sometimes blackish in age; margin often fringed and paler. Flesh thin, tough, pliant, white 
to pale brown. SPINES whitish to flesh-colored, sometimes darkening to brown; very 
fine and crowded, short (1-3 mm long). ST ALK 2-10 cm long, 0.5-3 mm thick, very slender, 
equal or slightly enlarged below, usually attached to side of cap (lateral), densely hairy, 
especially toward base, rusty-brown to dark brown or blackish. SPORE PRINT white; 
spores 4.5-6)( 3-3.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely spiny, amyloid. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in twos and threes on rotting, often buried cones of conifers, or 
sometimes on thick mats of debris made up partly of decaying cones; widely distributed, 
but rare in our area (or else frequently overlooked). In my experience it favors Douglas- 
fir cones, at least on the west coast. 
EDIBILITY: Much too small and much too tough to be of value. 
'" 
J.. 
- 
.......... 
....... 
........ 
, 
- 
\ 
Auriscalpium vulgare. This dainty fungus grows on decaying cones (in this case, Douglas-fir). Note 
the slender stalk and layer of spines on underside of cap. 
COMMENTS: The small size and growth on decaying cones plus the thin, hairy, lateral 
stem and fine spines that line the underside of the cap are the forthright field marks of 
this unique, petite fungus. The stem, though lateral, may occasionally appear to be central 
when the cap is deeply indented. The stem is usually longer than the width of the cap and 
far thinner than that of any other fungus with spines. The dark color and small size make 
it very difficult to see unless you are specifically looking for it. 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
@ 
  ::- 
(I'I.. 
"C, 
spores  
Coral and Club Fungi 
THIS large and lovely group of fleshy fungi includes simple, unbranched, upright clubs 
and fleshy, intricately branched, coral-like forms. With the exception of Clavariadelphus 
the fruiting body is not differentiated into an upper sterile surface (cap) and fertile under- 
side. Instead the spore-bearing basidia line the smooth to occasionally wrinkled surfaces of 
the upright clubs or branches. A sterile base, stalk, or"trunk" is normally present, however. 
Coral fungi are a conspicuous and colorful component of our woodland fungi. They 
come in every imaginable color, and some of the larger branched forms (notably Sparassis) 
are edible. They are difficult from a taxonomic standpoint. Nearly all the coral fungi 
were originally lumped together in one unwieldy genus, Clavaria, but now more than 30 
genera are recognized. These are delimited largely on microscopic and chemical charac- 
teristics (e.g., whether or not the spore-bearing surface stains green in ferrous sulfate), so 
to facilitate identification the family has been divided into five groups, keyed below. The 
largest and most common group, Ramaria. is microscopically similar to Gomphus of the 
chanterelle family (Cantharellaceae), and some taxonomists place them together in the 
family Gomphaceae in the belief that they arose from a common ancestor. Another genus, 
Sparassis. is usually placed in a family of its own, but is traditionally grouped with the coral 
fungi because of its branched fruiting body. 
Key to the Cia variaceae 
I. Fruiting body unbranched or very sparsely branched (but often tufted or clustered) ... 2 
I. Fruiting body profusely branched from a stalk or common base ...................... 4 
630 
. 
'/ 
, 
, 
. ' 
-,- 
I 
f 
, 
. 
.. 
".. 
.., 
4# . 
 
.... 
...,. 
r.- 
........ 
'. 
Left: Clavaria vermicu/aris has unbranched but clustered fruiting bodies (it is also shown on p. 637). 
Right: Ramaria stricta, one of many species with a branched fruiting body. 
2. Fruiting body entirely brownish-black to black or blackish beneath a white powdery coating or 
entirely green to olive or blue-green or interior with large chambers or compartments or para- 
sitic on insects, spiders, or truffles; spores borne asexually or in asci (see Ascomycetes, p. 782) 
2. Not as above (may be white, but if so then not powdery); spores borne on basidia ........ 3 
3. Fruiting body tough, the flesh pithy, stringy, or punky; apex often enlarged; usually 7 mm thick 
or more .................................................. Clavar;adelphus, p. 632 
3. Fruiting body typically fragile or if tough then much smaller; mostly less than 7 mm thick; apex 
acute or blunt or occasionally enlarged ...................... Clavaria & Allies, p. 634 
4. Fruiting body small and tough with very thin,almost hairlike branches, brown to grayish-brown 
to dark brown or purple-brown; growing on twigs, needles, etc.; rare (mostly tropical) Pterula 
4. Not as above; common ......................................................... 5 
5. Fruiting body consisting of numerous flattened, wavy, ribbonlike, or leafy segments or lobes 
arising from a common base; rather tough; overall color white to creamy, yellowish, or tan; 
growing at or near the bases of trees and stumps ................................... 6 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
6. Found on hardwood stumps or roots in tropics" and along Gulf Coast; fertile surface usually 
developing pores, spines, or "teeth" in age ... (seePolyporus, Albatrellus, & Allies, p. 554) 
6. Not as above; common and widespread .............................. Sparassis, p. 657 
7. Fruiting body bright yellow to orange; spore print white, or if not then branches usually viscid; 
spores smooth; typically growing on wood ................... Clavar;a & Allies, p. 634 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Branch tips crownlike (in the form of small fringed cups); spore print white; growing on wood 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Clavulina & Allies, p. 640 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Fruiting body bright yellow to orange when fresh and small (typically 2-7 (10) cm high) .. 10 
9. Not as above ................................................................ II 
10. Stalk slender and not particularly fleshy; branches often hollow and/ or viscid; spore print 
white or yellowish; extensive mycelial mat typically absent ...... Clavaria & Allies, p. 634 
10. Not as above; stalk thick and fleshy or if not, then an extensive mat of mycelial threads usually 
present at base and in substrate; spore print buff to tan, yellowish, or ochre Ramar;a, p. 645 
II. Branches tough, usually flattened, grayish-brown to dark brown to purple-brown (but tips 
often pallid when growing); odor typically garliclike or fetid (see Thelephora palmata, p.609) 
11. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
631 
632 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
12. Spore print creamy to yellow, tan, yellow-orange, or ochraceous (rarely white); fruiting body 
medium-sized to fairly large, often brightly colored, or if dull colored then usually with a large 
fleshy base (stalk); fertile surfaces staining greenish to blue in ferrous sulfate RamaTia, p.645 
12. Spore print typically white; fruiting body rather small to medium-sized, white or dull-colored 
(grayish, brownish, tan, bluish-gray, or tinged purple); base typically not large and fleshy; fertile 
surfaces typically not staining green or blue in ferrous sulfate ... Clavulina & Allies, p. 640 
CLA V ARIADELPHUS (Club Corals) 
Medium-sized, terrestrial, woodland fungi. FRUITING BODY erect, unbranched or occasionally 
forked, more or less club-shaped or with a flattened top. usually at least 5 mm thick; surface smooth 
to wrinkled. Flesh rather tough and fibrous or pithy. SPORE PRINT white to pale yellow, buff, or 
ochre. Spores typically elliptical, smooth. Spore-bearing surface staining green in ferrous sulfate. 
THESE are rather tough, club-shaped fungi with a smooth or somewhat wrinkled spore- 
bearing surface. They are larger and thicker than most fairy clubs (Clavaria & Allies) 
and not nearly so fragile. In C. truncatus and its close relatives the apex of the club 
is flattened and sterile-in other words, a rudimentary cap---but in the other species it is 
typically rounded, pointed, or only slightly flattened. 
Club corals are harmless but rather tough, stringy, and/ or bitter-tasting. They grow 
only in the woods and in our area fruit mostly during cold weather. Three widespread 
species are described here. If your "club coral" is small and irregularly shaped, check the 
earth tongues (on p. 865) as well as Clavaria & Allies (p. 634). 
Key to Clavariadelphus 
I. Fruiting body with a consistently flattened (truncate) or depressed apex or even a rudimentary 
cap; associated with conifers ................................................... 2 
I. Not as above; apex of fruiting body rounded to obtuse or pointed, or if sometimes flattened 
then associated with hardwoods ................................................ 4 
2. Upper portion of fruiting body red to reddish-orange C. lovejoyae (see c. truncalUs. p. 634) 
2. Not as above; upper portion of fruiting body orange to yellow, ochre, etc. .............. 3 
3. Spore print pale ochre .......................................... C. tTuncatus, p. 634 
3. Spore print white. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . C. bOTealis(see C. truncatus, p. 634) 
4. Apex of fruiting body usually with a sharply defined point or "nipple"; associated with conifers 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. mucTonatus{see C. ligula, p. 633) 
4. Not as above; apex rounded to bluntly pointed or somewhat flattened ................. 5 
5. Associated mainly with hardwoods; mature fruiting body 1-3 cm thick and 6-20 cm or more 
high ................................................. C. pistillaTis & othe rs, below 
5. Associated with conifers; mature fruiting body up to 1.5 cm thick and typically 2-10 cm high 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. ligula & others, p. 633 
Clavariadelphus pistillaris (Common Club Coral) 
FRUITING BODY simple, erect, unbranched or sometimes forked; club-shaped or 
tapering downward, the apex rounded or somewhat flattened but not normally depressed' 
6-20 (30) cm high, 0.8-4 (6) cm broad; surface smooth or often longitudinally wrinkled or 
grooved in age; usually pallid at first, but soon dull pinkish-brown to reddish-brown, flesh- 
colored, or ochraceous-brown; staining brown to vinaceous-brown when handled or 
bruised; apex often yellowish at first but soon colored like the rest of the fruiting body; 
base usually pallid, with white hairs. Flesh tough, fibrous or pithy, whitish, bruising brown; 
taste mild or bitter SPORE PRINT white or tinged yellow; spores 9-16 x 5-10 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
IfII< 
:-:> 
'- 
.- 
'II 
" 
,\ 
'Z'-'- 
...... y 
...... 
Clavariadelphus pistil/aris is a common terrestrial club-shaped species. In our area it favors oak. 
Forked specimen at top is not unusual. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under hardwoods and in mixed 
woods; widely distributed. It is common in our area from the late fall through early spring, 
especially under live oak, tan oak, and madrone. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless. The taste and texture are reminiscent of stale rope. 
COMMENTS: The ochre-brown to flesh-colored, club-shaped fruiting body that stains 
brown when handled is characteristic of this cosmopolitan club coral. It is the commonest 
Clavariadelphus in our area and the only one found under hardwoods. Its apex is some- 
times quite broad, but not as flagrantly flattened as that of C. truncatus. Other species: 
C. subJastigiatus is a brownish-orange species found under conifers in northern California 
and elsewhere; it does not discolor as much when handled and turns bright green in 
potassium hydroxide (KOH). 
Clavariadelphus ligula (Strap Coral) Color Plate 171 
FRUITING BODY simple, erect, unbranched or rarely forked, cylindrical to flattened- 
cylindrical or club-shaped, the apex usually rounded or bluntly pointed; 2-10 cm high and 
0.3-1 (1.5) cm broad at apex. Surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, dull-colored (buff to 
dull yellowish, ochre-buff, pale reddish-brown, orvinaceous-buff); base whitish and hairy, 
often with white mycelial threads penetrating the surrounding humus. Flesh white, pithy 
but tough; taste mild or bitter. SPORE PRINT white to pale yellowish; spores 8-18 x 3-6 
microns, elongated-elliptical. smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or tufted in humus under conifers; widely 
distributed. It is common throughout much of the West in the summer and fall, but 
absent or very rare in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Worthless. 
COMMENTS: This species is smaller and slimmer than C. pistil/aris and typically occurs 
under conifers rather than hardwoods-often in large troops (see color plate). The apex of 
the club is not noticeably flattened or depressed as in C. truncatus. and is not brightly 
colored. Other species: C. sachalinensis is a macroscopically identical species with larger, 
buff to ochraceous spores; it also grows gregariously in humus under conifers. Another 
conifer-lover, C. mucronatus, differs in its whitish, sharply nip pled apex. Still another, 
C. subJastigiatus, is somewhat thicker and stains green when touched with potassium 
hydroxide (KOH). None of these are worth eating. 
634 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
Clavariadelphus truncatus (Truncate Club Coral) Color Plate 166 
FRUITING BODY simple, erect, unbranched or occasionally forked; club-shaped or 
more often with a broadly flattened or depressed apex (a rudimentary cap); 5-15 (I8) em 
high and 2.5-8 em broad at apex. Surface smooth or often wrinkled or veined (especially 
near apex), more or less pinkish-brown to ochre or brownish-orange, the apex usually 
brighter (yellow to golden-yellow or yellow-orange), at least when young; base often pallid, 
with white hairs. Flesh rather tough or pithy, white to ochre; taste mild to sweetish or 
bittersweet. SPORE PRINT pale ochre; spores 9-13 )( 5-8 microns, elliptical. smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious in duff under conifers; widely distributed, but not 
nearly as common in our area as C. pistillaris. I have seen large fruitings ofthis species and 
its look-alike, C. borealis (see comments), in the fall and winter in northern California and 
in the summer in the Rocky Mountains. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious when sweet. It can be sauteed by itself and served for 
dessert! 
COMMENTS: The broad, golden, flattened top distinguishes this species from its cousins 
C. pistillaris and C. ligula. The color ofthe fruiting body actually varies considerably from 
dull pinkish-brown to bright golden-orange, and the apex can be quite inflated so as to 
resemble a chanterelle (Gomphus or Cantharellus). Other species: C. borealis is a white- 
spored version of C. truncatus that sometimes shows a lilac tinge to the fruiting body; it is 
common and widespread under conifers. C. lovejoyae of the Rocky Mountains is also 
similar, but red to reddish-orange in color. 
CLA V ARIA & Allies (Fairy Clubs) 
Small, mostly fragile fungi found on ground,leaves, or occasionally on wood. FRUITING BODY 
erect, usually unbranched or sparingly branched andfinger-shapedor c/ublike. slender. oftentufted 
or clustered. Flesh usually fragile. SPO RE PRINT while. Spores typically smooth. Basidia typically 
4-spored. Clamp connections typically absent (C/avaria). present (Clavulinopsis). Fertile surface 
often staining green in ferrous sulfate (Clavulinopsis). or not greening (C/avaria & others). 
THESE are primitive fungi with an erect, relatively unspecialized fruiting body. The most 
common forms are unbranched and smaller, slimmer, and frailer than the club corals 
(Clavariadelphus). They are sometimes confused with earth tongues-which are tougher, 
often flattened and velvety, and capitate (with a cap distinct from the stalk)-and which 
belong to an entirely different group of fungi, the Ascomycetes. Fairy clubs often grow in 
clumps, but the individual clubs do not usually arise from a fleshy base as in the branched 
corals (Clavulina, Ramaria, etc.). The few branched species are not as fleshy as Ramarias 
and usually more vividly colored than Clavulina, Ramariopsis, and Clavicorona. 
Clavaria and Clavulinopsis are the two most common genera of fairy clubs, but their 
defining features are esoteric, involving the presence or absence of carotenoid pigments, 
clamp connections, and the behavior of nuclei in the basidia. For the sake of convenience 
they are treated together here, along with several other small, miscellaneous genera( M ulti- 
clavula, M acrotyphula, and Typhula). 
Fairy clubs are too small and fragile to have any food value, but they are an attractive 
addition to ourwoodland decor. They are saprophytic on humus, soil, or occasionally grass 
and decaying wood. In our area they fruit-as do most of the Clavariaceae- from late fall 
through early spring. Seven species are described here. 
CLA V ARIA & ALLIES 
635 
Key to Clavaria & Allies 
I. Growing on algae-covered wood or soil; fruiting body minute (up to 1.5 cm high and 1-3 'mm 
thick) .......,....,........................... M ult;clavula muc;da & others, p. 636 
I. Not as above (if growing on algae, then larger) .....................................2 
2. Fresh fruiting body yellow to orange, red, salmon, or pink ........................... 3 
2. Not as above (fruiting body white, yellow-brown, grayish, purple, etc.) ................ 10 
3. Fresh fruiting body yellow to orange ............................................. 4 
3. Fresh fruiting body rose-pink to red or orange-red .................................. 9 
4. Fruiting body branched ........................................................ 5 
4. Fruiting body unbranched or occasionally forked (but often clustered) ................. 6 
5. Usually growing on or near wooo, the base often deeply rooted; branches rather tough and 
usually somewhat viscid ,.......,....................... (see Calocera v;scosa, p. 674) 
5. Not as above; growing on ground or wood; not viscid _... Clavul;nops;s corn;culata, p. 639 
6. Fruiting body with a wide, often flattened head and/ or fruiting body often irregular in shape; 
texture rather tough; spores borne inside asci ................... (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
6. Not as above; fruiting body typically clublike to spindle-shaped or fingerlike or rarely forked; 
usually rather fragile; spores borne on basidia ..................................... 7 
7. Fruiting bodies 5-15 cm tall, usually growing in bundles orlarge clusters, yellow ........... 
. .. . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Clavul;nops;sfusiform;s(see C. /aetic%r, p.638) 
7. Fruiting bodies up to 6.5 (10) cm high, solitary to gregarious or tufted; yellow to orange " 8 
8. Fruiting body less than 15 mm high, usually somewhat viscid; typically growing on or near 
wood ................................. (see Calocera cornea under C. viscosa, p.674) 
8. Not as above; usually growing on ground ........ Clavulinops;s laeticolor & others, p. 638 
9. Fruiting body pink to rose-colored when fresh; found mainly in eastern North Ameica; rare . 
. . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . Clavar;a rosea(see C/avu/inopsis /aetic%r, p. 638) 
9. Fruiting body orange to orange-red or red; widespread but rare ......................... 
...... ...... ... .... Clavul;nops;saurantio-c;nnabar;na & others (see C. /aetic%r, p.638) 
10. Fruiting body very thin, arising from a small bead like body (sclerotium) ................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Typhula spp. (see M acrotyphu/a juncea, p. 636) 
10. Not as above; fruiting body not very thin. or if so then not attached to a beadlike body .. II 
II. Fruiting body very thin (up t02 mm), 3-10 cm tall; pallid to yellowish or brown ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M acrotyphula juncea, p. 636 
II. Notasabove ................................................................ 12 
12. Fruiting body lavender to purple, deep purple, or grayish-purple, at least when fresh .... 13 
12. Fruiting body differently colored ....... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 15 
13. Fruiting bodies unbranched but often clustered; brittle or fragile; found mostly under northern 
and mountain conifers ................................... Clavaria purpurea, p.637 
13. Not as above ...,.................................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 14 
14. Fruiting body sparingly or much-branched (the branching often dichotomous); basidia 4- 
spored; found in eastern North America ..... Clavar;a zollinger; (see C. purpurea, p. 637) 
14. Fruiting body much-branched; basidia 2-spored; widespread (see Clavulina & Allies, p. 640) 
15. Fruiting body branched ..... Clavul;nops;s umbrinella & others (see C. cornicu/ata, p.639) 
15. Fruiting body unbranched or occasionally branched very sparingly (but often growing in 
tufts or clusters) ............................................................. 16 
16. Fruiting body small (up to 2 cm tall), white, the apex broadly enlarged; growing on needles, 
twigs, etc. .................... Clav;corona taxoph;la(see Mu/ticlavu/a mucida, p.636) 
16. Not as above ..............,................................................. 17 
17. Fruiting bodies very fragile, crumbling easily, pure white to translucent white or yellow-stained, 
not prominently wrinkled; tip acute or sometimes blunt but not broadly enlarged; often 
growing in tufts or clusters; very common ................. Clavar;a verm;cular;s, p. 637 
17. Not with above features ....................................................... 18 
18. Fruiting body very long (tall) and narrow (7-30 cm high; 2-8 mm thick); yellowish to brown; 
not normally growing in clusters .......... M acrotyphula f;stulosa (see M. juncea, p. 636) 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 19 
636 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
19. Growing on wood; fruiting body more or less clublike, the surface often roughened, 1-4 cm high 
and 0.5-1 cm thick; spores borne inside asci .......... (seePodostroma alutaceum, p. 879) 
19. Not as above; usually growing on ground ........................................ 20 
20. Fruiting body 0.3-1.5 cm thick, texture tough; flesh white and pithy or stringy; color variable: 
buff to yellowish or some shade of brown, but not white or gray; typically growinginduffunder 
conifers, often in troops ................................ (see Clavariadelphus, p.632) 
20. Fruiting body usually 2-7 mm thick and/ or differently colored, usually fragile .......... 21 
21. Fruiting body white and sparingly branched; branches thick, hollow, blunt, somewhat gelati- 
nous; found under hardwoods in eastern North America .. (see Tremellales & Allies, p. 669) 
21. Not as above ................................................................ 22 
22. Fuiting body fragile, usually tufted or clustered, grayish to yellowish-gray to pinkish-gray 
or dingy flesh-colored; basidia typically 4-spored ....... Clavariafumosa & others, p. 638 
22. Not as above; fruiting body tough, or if fragile then differently colored (white or tinged gray or 
bufO; basidia typically 2-spored ....................... (see Clavulina& Allies, p. 640) 
Multiclavula mucida (Scum-Lover) 
FRUITING BODY simple, unbranched or sometimes forked, erect; small (only 0.5-1.5 
cm high and 1-2 mm thick); cylindrical or tapered; surface smooth, white to creamy, buff, 
or yellowish, but often aging salmon to brick-red. Flesh rather waxy and tough, pliant, 
white. SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-7.5 x 2-3 microns, oblong to elliptical, smooth. 
Cystidia absent. 
HABIT A T: In groups-but not clusters-on wet algae-covered wood or occasionally on 
soil; northern in distribution. I have seen it in our area in the fall and winter, but it is in- 
conspicuous because of its small size. 
EDIBILITY: Utterly inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: The small size and association with green algae typify the genus Mu/ti- 
clavu/a, and the whitish color of the fresh fruiting bod y and tendency to grow on wood are 
characteristic of this species. C/avaria mucida is an older name for it. Other species: 
M. verna/is (=C/avaria phycophi/a) is similar but pale orange, has cystidia, and grows on 
algae-covered soil; C/avicorona taxophi/ais small and whitishbuthasa widened,flattened 
apex and grows on twigs, needles, and other debris rather than with scum. All of these are 
smaller than C/avaria vermicu/aris and shorter than Macrotyphu/ajuncea. 
Macrotyphula juncea (Fairy Hair) 
FRUITING BODY simple, unbranched or rarely forked, erect, very thin (up to 2 mm 
thick), 3-10 cm high when mature; cylindrical or tapering upward; leather-colored to 
yellowish-buff or pallid, smooth; tip acute or in age sometimes blunt; base somewhat 
fibrillose and often creeping horizontally, often with large whitish mycelial threads (rhizo- 
morphs) attached. Flesh very thin; taste sometimes acrid. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
6-12 x 3.5-5.5 microns, elliptical or almond-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in humus and leaf litter, on rotting twigs, etc.; widely 
distributed. It occurs in our area on oak and tanoakleavesand redwood needles, butiseasy 
to overlook. It is fairly common in the fall and winter, especially along streams and in other 
dank places. 
EDIBILITY: Utterly irrelevant-a couple hundred would be needed for a mouthful! 
COMMENTS: This species is so thin that it can be mistaken for the bare stem of anherba- 
ceous plant or a small agaric that has lost its cap. Its slimness alone separates it from our 
other common coral and club fungi. Its generic disposition is problematic-some authors 
place it in Typhu/a (other Typhu/a species are similar in size and shape but arise from a 
\ 
.\ \ 
,. 
, _1 
1 
. . 
. " 
, 
" 
 t I 
\ ,. ; 
.'. 
.' '" 
l\ 
1 . 
.. 
1 
" 
Left Macrotyphu/ajuncea, a very thin species. Right Fragile white clusters of C/avaria vermicu/aris 
look like bunches of bean sprouts. See p. 631 for a photo of younger specimens. 
small beadlike body or sclerotium); it has also been placed in Clavariaand Clavariadelphus 
and may eventually merit a genus of its own. Other species: M. j;stulosa (=Clava,;a- 
delphus f;stulosus) has a very long (7-30 cm), slender (2-8 mm), hollow fruiting body 
that is yellowish to brownish; it grows on dead sticks and debris, especially of alder. 
Clavaria vermicularis (Fairy Fingers) 
FRUITING BODY simple, unbranched (but usually clustered) or rarely forked at the tip, 
erect or often curved, slender, soon withering; 3-12 (15) cm tall, 3-5 mm thick; surface pure 
white to translucent white or often stained yellow and yellowing in age from the tip down- 
ward; cylindrical or flattened somewhat, smooth or sometimes grooved, usually tapered 
toward the tip, which is acute or sometimes blunt and often discolored. Flesh thin, white, 
very brittle or fragile. SPORE PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3-4 microns, elliptical to nearly 
round, smooth. 
HABIT AT: In tufts, clusters, or groups, often with solitary fruiting bodies interspersed, on 
ground in woods or grassy places; widely distributed. Common in our area throughout the 
mushroom season, but most prevalent in December and January, especially in dank 
wooded areas. 
EDIBILITY: Edible but insubstantial; the fragile watery flesh has little or no flavor and 
dissolves when chewed. 
COMMENTS: The distinctive clumps of slender white "fingers" make this species most 
attractive. It is by far our most common Clavaria. growing wherever moisture is sufficient. 
It is not as deeply wrinkled as C. fumosa or Clavu/ina rugosa (see comments under the 
Clavu/ina cristata group), and it crumbles seemingly without provocation. 
Cia varia purpurea (Purple Fairy Club) Color Plate 167 
FRUITING BODY simple, unbranched but often clustered, erect, 2.5-12 cm tall, 2-6 mm 
thick; gra yish- purple to deep purple or purple when fresh, fading as it ages to la vender-gray, 
lavender-buff, purple-brown. smoky-brown, etc.; cylindrical or tapered; tip acute or blunt; 
base usually paler and/ or with white hairs. Flesh white or purplish, brittle. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 5.5-9 x 3-5 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Cystidia inter- 
mingled with basidia. 
637 
638 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious (often in tufts or clusters) on ground in wet 
areas, usually under or near conifers; common during the summer under spruce and fir 
in the Rocky Mountains, also found in the Pacific Northwest and California (but not in 
our area). I have seen large fruitings in New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but thin-fleshed and fragile. 
COMMENTS: The purple color immediately distinguishes this beautiful species from 
other fairy clubs. Clavaria (=Clavulina) zollingeri is a sparingly to profusely branched 
purple species occasionally found in eastern North America. For other branched purple 
coral fungi, see Clavulina cinerea. C. amethystina. and Ramariopsis pulchella (under 
C. cinerea) and Ramaria fumigata. 
C/avariafumosa (Grayish Fairy Club) 
FRUITING BODY simple, unbranched (but usually clustered), erect, 3-10 (14) cm tall, 
2-7 mm thick; surface grayish to yellowish-gray (color variable), usually grooved or 
wrinkled longitudinally, often somewhat flattened or twisted and/ or hollow in age; tip 
usually blunt, sometimes brownish; base often paler or whitish. Flesh brittle, whitish. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 5 )( 34 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: In tufts or clusters on ground in woods or grassy areas; widely distributed but 
not common. I ha ve found it several times under oak and madrone in the winter and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless, fleshless, flavorless. 
COMMENTS: The gray to yellowish-gray (or occasionally brownish-gray) color, fre- 
quently wrinkled surface, and clustered but unbranched fruiting bodies typify this forget- 
table fairy club. Other species: C. rubicundula is just as forgettable but more fragile, and 
usually slightly pinker (dingy flesh-colored to pinkish-gray to vinaceous-buff). 
C/avu/inopsis /aetic%r (Golden Fairy Club) 
FRUITING BODY simple (unbranched or occasionally forked once) but often tufted; 
erect, small, cylindrical or often somewhat flattened, grooved, and/ or twisted; 1.5-6.5(10) 
cm tall but usually about 34 cm, 1-5 (10) mm thick; surface bright orangetoyellow(some- 
times yellower below) to yellow-ochre or in some forms orange-red, often duller(yellow- 
ish-buff) as it dries or fades; extreme base whitish; tip usually acute, often brownish in age 
or when dry. Flesh thin, somewhat pliant, pallid or yellowish; odor and taste mild. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores 4.5-7 (9) )( 3.5-5.5 (6.5) microns, broadly elliptical to nearly 
round to triangular or pear-shaped, smooth, prominently apiculate. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, tufted, or in groups on mossy banks, wet soil, and wood- 
land humus; widespread and common, fruiting in our area in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Clavariapulchra, this dainty fairy club can be distinguished 
from all but a few close relatives (see below) by its bright yellow to orange or sometimes 
reddish-orange 'color. It is not viscid like the coral-like jelly fungi (Calocera). and does 
not usually grow on wood. Certain earth tongues (e.g., Microglossum rufum and Neo- 
lecta irregularis) are similarly colored, but have more enlarged fertile "heads" and bear 
their spores in asci rather than on basidia. There are a number of closely related, brightly 
colored fairy clubs, including: Clavulinopsis helvola, with anguar-warty spores; C.Jusi- 
Jormis, taller (5-15 cm) and bright yellow with round spores, usually found in bundles in 
grass or humus (common in eastern North American, also found in California); C. 
gracillima (=c. luteoalba), with a well-defined sterile base or "stalk"; C. appalachiensis, 
creamy to creamy-yellow with a deep ochre "stalk"; C. miniata, pale pinkish-orange or 
'" 
. 
Two bright yellow to orange club fungi: Clavulina laeticolor (left) grows singly or in small tufts; 
Clavulinafusiformis (right) is usually taller, slimmer, and clustered. 
apricot-colored; C. aurantio-cinnabarina, a rare but widely distributed striking blood- 
red to orange or pinkish-orange species with only slightly apiculate spores; and C. sub- 
australis, with a delicate pink fertile portion and dark yellow to orange "stalk." Finally, 
there is Clavaria rosea, a beautiful rose-pink species that occurs occasionally in eastern 
North America but hasn't yet been found in California. None of these are worth eating. 
C lavulinopsis corniculata 
FRUITING BODY branched {sometimes sparingly)fromacommon base or stalk, usually 
small and delicate-looking; 2-9 cm high and broad (but usually 2-5 cm). BRANCHES 
smooth, mostly hollow, bright yellow to yellow-orange or egg-yellow to deep ochraceous, 
sometimes fading when dry or in age to creamy-buff; tips acute. STALK 24 mm thick, 
colored like branches or duller, often with a coating of downy mycelium at base. Flesh 
rather tough, thin, whitish; odor mild or farinaceous; taste mild or bitter. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 4.5-7.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth, apiculate. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or dead wood in forests and at 
their edges, in grassy areas, etc.; widely distributed. I have found it locally under cypress 
and oak in December and January, accompanied by C. /aetic%r and numerous waxy 
caps (Hygrocybe and Camarophyllus species). 
EDIBILITY: Probably edible, but too small to be of value. 
C/avu/inopsis cornicu/ata is a small brightly colored branched species. Both specimens shown here 
are elaborately branched, but some specimens have a well-developed"stalk" with onlyafew branches. 
" 
.. 
. 
( " . 
'o' 
.\ 
640 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
COMMENTS: The bright yellow to ochre color and modest size make this branched coral 
fungus fairly easy to recognize. Other yellow to orange coral and club fungi are either 
unbranched (see C. laeticolor) or much larger and fleshier(see Ramaria). The jelly fungus 
genus Calocera is somewhat similar, but usually has a viscid fruiting body. Other small 
branched species include: C. umbrine//a (=C/avaria cineroides), a dingy buff to grayish 
or brownish species with round spores and several primary branches that arise from a 
common base or "trunk," occasional in our area in the fall and winter(usually in forests), 
but more widely distributed; C. ho/mskjo/dii, which resembles C. umbrinella but has 
purplish branch tips and an aniselike odor when fresh; C. dichotoma and C. subti/is, which 
are both white to faintly yellowish; and C/avu/ina (=C/avaria) ornatipes, with pallid to 
pinkish-gray to brownish branches and a hairy brown stalk or "trunk." 
CLAVULINA& Allies 
Small to medium-sized. coral-like fungi found on ground (Clavulina. Ramariopsis. Tremelloden- 
dropsis) or wood (Clavicorona). FRUITING BODY usually branched. sometimes with a fleshy 
base. BRANCHES mostly erect, usually pale or dull-colored (while 10 gray. Ian. brownish. dingy 
yellowish. or somelimes linged pinkish or purple). SPORE PRINT while (or in Clavulina some- 
times yellowish after prolonged storage). Spores smooth or spiny. Basidia typically 2-spored 
(Clavulina) or4-spored (others). Spore-bearing surface typically nol greening in ferrous sulfate. 
THIS is a motley, artificial grouping of mostly white or dingy colored, branched coral 
fungi. Their overall aspect is intermediate between that of the fairy clubs (Clavaria & 
Allies) and the Ramarias. The pale or dingy color, white spores, and moderate size dis- 
tinguish them from most Ramarias, while the branched fruiting body separates them 
from most fairy clubs. 
The most common of the genera treated here is Clavulina, which has smooth spores and 
2-spored basidia. In Ramariopsis, also common, the spores are minutely ornamented and 
the basidia are4-spored. In Clavicorona the fruiting body grows on wood and typically has 
crownlike branch tips and amyloid spores, while Tremellodendropsis has tough, usually 
flattened branches and basidia which appear partially partitioned. 
The species treated here are probably edible, but are not as fleshy or desirable as the 
Ramarias. I n addition, some are quite tough while others are exceedingly fragile. They fruit 
primarily in the woods. Five species are described and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Clavulina & Allies 
I. Growing on wood; branch tips usually crownlike .... Clavicorona pyxidata & others, p. 642 
I. Not as above; usually growing on ground ......................................... 2 
2. Fruiting body tough and pliant, not white, typically with a mat of copious white mycelial 
threads at base or in surrounding humus ........................ (seeRamaria, p. 645) 
2. Not as above; mycelial mat absent and/ or fruiting body brittle ........................ 3 
3. Fruiting body lavender to purple. . . . Clavulina amethystina& others (see C. cinerea, p.641) 
3. Not as above (but branches way have a purple tinge) ................................ 4 
4. Texture very tough or cartilaginous to slightly gelatinous; branches usually flattened; overall 
color white or pallid (or sometimes greenish from algae); found mainly under hardwoods in 
eastern North America (see photo at bottom of p. 644) ................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . .... .... Tremellodendronpallidum& others (see Tremellodendropsis tuberosa. p.643) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Texture tough; "stalk" usually comprising at least one half the height of fruiting body; branches 
often flattened, pallid to brownisl::-gray or tinged dull purplish; base often with whitish down; 
basidia appearing partially septate under microscope . Tremellodendropsis tuberosa, p.643 
5. Texture brittle to fragile, or if tough then not as above ............................... 6 
CLAVULINA& ALLIES 
641 
6. Fruiting body branched, but stalk usually at least half the total height; color of brownish; taste 
often bitter and/ or stalk with brown hairs; basidia 4-spored . (see Clavaria & Allies, p. 634) 
6. Not as above ........................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
7. Fruiting body white or pallid (or tinged buff, gray, or pinkish) ........................ 8 
7. Fruiting body darker (gray to brownish-gray, bluish-gray, purplish-gray, etc.) ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Clavulina cinerea, below 
8. Fruiting body unbranched or sparingly so .. Clavu/ina rugosa (see C. cr;stata group, below) 
8. Fruiting body branched ........................................................ 9 
9. Fruiting body profusely branched, fragile; branch tips typically neither toothed nor enlarged 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . _ . . . . _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R amariopsis kunzei, p. 643 
9. Fruiting body branched (but at times rather sparingly so), fragile to rather tough; branch tips 
often toothed and/ or enlarged ........................ Clavu/ina cristata group, below 
Clavulina cinerea (Ashy Coral Mushroom) Color Plate 169 
FRUITING BODY erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched, 2-11 cm tall and 
broad. BRANCHES often irregular in shape, often resulting in a somewhat tangled ap- 
pearance; pallid soon becoming grayish to ashy-gray, purple-gray, bluish-gray, dark gray, 
or even brownish-gray; smooth or wrinkled to somewhat flattened; tips acute or blunt, 
often forked. STALK present as a short, fleshy sterile base or "trunk"; colored like the 
branches, or often whitish at the very base. Flesh white, brittle; taste usually mild. SPORE 
PRINT white; spores 6.5-11 x 5.5-10 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth. 
Basidia 2-spored. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in mixed woods and under 
conifers; widely distributed but mainly northern. In California I have seen it in the fall and 
winter, but have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly rated by some authorities, but rather fragile and insipid 
in my experience. 
COMMENTS: The ash-gray to dark gray or purple-tinged fruiting body separates this 
conifer-lover from other branched coral fungi. Microscopically it is distinct by virtue 
ofits2-spored basidia withcurvedsporestalks(sterigmata). Thee. crislalagroup is closely 
related but paler in color. C. (=Clavaria) amethystina is a beautiful purple branched 
species; it is found occasionally in easternN orth America and I have found it( or something 
very similar) near Aptos, California, under redwood and tanoak. R amariopsis pulchella 
is a very small, sparingly branched, lavender species. Clavaria zollingeri (see comments 
under C. purpurea) is also small and purple, but has 4-spored basidia. 
Clavulina cristata group (Crested Coral; Wrinkled Coral) 
FRUITING BODY erect but extremely variable in shape and form, 2-7 (l2)cmhigh, upto 
5 cm broad; "typical" form branched, but other forms sparsely or irregularly branched and 
still others unbranched. BRAN CHES smooth in typical form, uneven or knobby or longi- 
tudinally wrinkled or flattened in other forms; tip(s) acute and often finely toothed in 
"typical" form, but blunt and often enlarged in others; color usually white, but some- 
times tinged gray, buff, yellowish, or pinkish; tip(s) often darkening in age or dry weather. 
ST ALK present as a sterile base; slender, white or darkened by a paraite. Flesh white, 
brittle to rather tough. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-11 (14) x 6.5-10 (12) microns, 
nearly round, smooth. Basidia 2-spored. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious on ground in woods and grassy 
areas; widely distributed and common from sea level up to timberline. In our area this 
group fruits throughout the mushroom season and is especially prevalent under pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. Some rate it highly, others do not. 
',:, , 
\ 
,\ 
, 
r 
": . 
Clavu/ina crislala. a cosmopolitan white to grayish coral fungus. Note how the branch tips are 
"crested:' In our area it is especially common under pine. 
COMMENTS: This species "complex" is extremely polymorphic (variable in shape and 
form), and as a result is likely to confound the beginner. The"typical"formisdistinguished 
from Ramariopsis kunzei (which is also white and branched) by its frequently crested 
(finely toothed) branch tips, smooth spores, and tendency ofthe stalk to darken in age when 
attacked by a fungal parasite. The unbranched to sparingly branched, wrinkled or knobby 
form, which is often called C. rugosa, is also common in our area (see photo at top of next 
page). It is likely to be confused with species of Clavaria. which are differently colored 
and/ or smooth and more regular in appearance. It also seems to intergrade with "typical" 
C. cristata. Another closely related species, C. cinerea. is usually darker (see description 
on p. 641). Also see Clavulinopsis dichotoma and C. subti/is (under C. corniculata). 
Clavicorona pyxidata (Crown Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a common base or "stalk"; 5-12.5 cm high 
and 2-8 cm wide. BRANCHES usually arising in tiers from the enlarged tips of lower 
branches; whitish to pale yellow when young, becoming dull ochre to tan or tinged pinkish, 
but lower portion often darkening to brownish or grayish-brown in age; tips usually 
enlarged and pyxidate(i.e., crownlike or terminating in fringed cups). ST ALK presentasa 
slender, short sterile base or "trunk"; colored like lower branches. Flesh white, tough and 
rather pliant; taste often somewhat acrid (peppery). SPORE PRINT white; spores3.5)( 
2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods, especially aspen, willow, and 
cottonwood; very widely distributed and common in some regions. I have seen it often in 
the southern Rocky Mountains. It also occurs in northern California, but I have yet to 
find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but rather stringy and tough. 
COMMENTS: The crownlike branch ti ps, pale color, and growth on wood distinguish this 
widespread coral mushroom. Several Ramaria and Lentaria species grow on wood (see 
R. stricta), but do not have crownlike branch tips. Other species: C. avellanea is grayish- 
brown with paler crownlike tips; it grows on rotting conifers. 
642 
.. , 
" 
/ 
\' 
.' I ( 
, '., ' , 
\f\ 
;  
. .  
\ " 
, . 
Left: Clavulina rugosa (see comments under the C. criSlala group) is a wrinkled c1ublike or sparingly 
branched whitish species. Right: Ramariopsis kunzei is an elaborately branched whitish coral 
fungus that is especially common under conifers. 
Ramariopsis kunzei (White Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched, 2.5-10 cm tall and 
3-8 cm wide. BRANCHES white to creamy-white, often tinged pinkish in age; smooth, 
not usually compact; tips blunt or acute. STALK absent or present only as a short, fragile, 
sometimes hairy base. Flesh white, fragile; taste mild. SPORE PRINT white; spores 3-5.5 
)( 2.54.5 microns, broadly elliptical to round, minutely spiny. Basidia 4-spored. 
HABIT AT: Scattered todensely gregarious on ground in mixed woods and under conifers, 
frequently hidden in the duff; widely distributed. Itiscommonin our redwood forests from 
late fall through early spring, but is not restricted to that habitat. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless, fleshless, flavorless. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Clavaria kunzei, this ubiquitous branched coral 
fungus is best recognized in the field by its white color and marked fragility. It is more 
profusely branched than typical Clavu/ina cristata and lacks the toothed branch tips 
often found in that species, and has ornamented spores. Other species: R. californica is 
a rare, smooth-spored, branched, white to yellowish species. 
Tremellodendropsis tuberosa 
FRUITING BODY rather sparsely branched from a tough base (stalk) or sometimes 
scarcely branched; 2-7 (10) cm high, 0.54 cm broad. BRANCHES usually somewhat 
flattened (especially the lower ones), erect, tough, whitish to buff, brownish, or grayish, 
sometimes with a purple or pinkish tinge (caused by a parasite?); tips often paler and 
brighter (whiter) when actively growing. ST ALK well-developed, usually one-third to one- 
half the height of fruiting body; colored like branches or paler, often with a coating of 
white mycelial down. Flesh white, tough, not staining. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
13-20 )( 4.5-6.5 microns, elongated-elliptical or spindle-shaped, smooth. Many or all of 
the basidia appearing partially septate (partitioned) longitudinally at their apices. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups on ground in woods or clearings; widely distributed. It is 
fairly common in coastal California in the late fall and winter, especially with bracken fern, 
redwood, or cypress, but is easily overlooked because of its humble appearance. 
643 
t.' ' 
\ \\ \ 
\tl\ 
\ 
\ 
" 
'} 
.,' ., 
Tremel/odendropsis tuberosa is best recognized by its tough texture, pale color, and upright branches. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: This rather nondescript coral fungus is included here because it represents 
a possible "bridge" between the coral fungi, which have" normal" club-shaped basidia, and 
the jelly fungi, some of which are coral-like and have longitudinally septate (partitioned) 
basidia. In the field it can be told by its rather long stalk or trunk, pale or dingy color, 
tough texture, and growth on the ground. Lentaria. byssiseda (see comments under 
Ramaria strict a) is a rather similar whitish to pinkish-tan species that often grows on wood, 
has less flattened branches, "normal" basidia, and white mycelial threads at the base of the 
stalk. It is widely distributed, but in California is more common in the Sierra Nevada than 
on the coast. Other species: T remellodendron pallidum (= T. schweinitzii) of eastern North 
America is a beautiful whitish branched species that is classified as a jelly fungus because 
it has longitudinally partitioned basidia. It is common under hardwoods along with a 
smaller relative, T. candidum, and can be distinguished from other whitish coral fungi by its 
tough or tenacious texture and flattened branches (see photograph). Another eastern 
hardwood-lover, Tremella reticulata, has very blunt, hollow, somewhat gelatinous, 
white branches. 
Tremel/odendron pal/idum of eastern North America is a coral-like jelly fungus. It may be related to 
Tremel/odenropsis tuberosa (see comments under that species for more details). 
,\ ... 
" 
, 
" 
645 
RAMARIA (Coral Fungi) 
Medium-sized to large, coral-like fungi found on wood or ground. FRUITING BODY profusely 
branchedfrom a common, oftenj1eshy base or stalk. BRANCHES mostly erect, smooth, never 
ribbonlike; often brightly colored. SPORE PRINT typica//yye//owish totan orochraceous. Spores 
usually ornamented (warted or spiny), produced on the surfaces of the branches. Spore-beanng 
surface staining green or bluish in ferrous sulfate. 
THESE are brittle or pliant fungi with elaborately branched fruiting bodies. They repre- 
sent an evolutionary advancement over the simpler coral fungi or fairy clubs (Clavaria 
& Allies) insofar as branching greatly increases the available surface area on which to 
produce spores. (The same can be said for the teeth fungi (Hydnaceae), except that their 
"branches" hang downward and are called spines.) 
Ramaria can be distinguished from other branched coral fungi (see Clavulina & Allies) 
by its tan to ochraceous or orange-yellow spores (which are usually ornamented with 
minute warts, spines, or ridges) and frequently colorful fruiting body. Virtually every hue 
is represented, with yellow, orange, red, pink, and tan predominating. It is easily the most 
attractive and prominent group of coral fungi, and never fails to attract the attention of 
collectors. However, it is also the largest and most complex group, with over 35 species 
in California, many more in the Pacific Northwest, and at least 100 in North America. 
To facilitate identification, Ramaria can be crudely divided into two groups: medium- 
sized to large, terrestrial species with a fleshy, gelatinous, or brittle fruiting body (e.g., 
R. botrytis); and wood- or duff-inhabiting species with a fairly small, slender, pliant-tough 
fruiting body (such as R. stricta, and the small, smooth-spored "satellite" genus Lentaria, 
which intergrades with Ramaria). However, pinpointing the exact identity of a species 
within either group is a difficult task, even for a specialist. In part this is because of 
the nature of the fruiting body-aside from color and texture, there are few criteria by 
which to separate species in the field. As a result, certain names have been applied indis- 
criminately to a slew of similar-but autonomous-species. Any attempt to correct this 
trend short of an exhaustive study of Ramaria would only contribute to the confusion. 
Therefore, the descriptions offered here are rather broad in scope. This may not satisfy 
Ramaria-researchers, but it will enable collectors to refer most ofthe Ramarias they find to 
a species group or ..complex" without resorting to detailed microscopic study and special 
chemical tests. Besides, it is not necessary to know the exact identities ofthese coral fungi 
to appreciate their beauty. The manner in which they arise from the murky depths ofthe 
forest floor is indeed reminiscent of corals. 
Ramarias are a popular group for the table, probably because they are so distinctive 
and none are known to be dangerously poisonous. Only the large, fleshy species are worth 
collecting, but some are bitter or prone to attack by fungal parasites such as Hypomyces 
transformans, and all are apt to be riddled with maggots and are difficult to clean. A few 
(notably R. gelatinosa and the R. formosa group) are mildly poisonous, and even the 
so-called ..edible" species have a laxative effect on some individuals. Therefore it is best 
to sample each type cautiously (if at all) and not to overindulge. 
Ramarias are woodland fungi. The slender, pliant forms are saprophytic on humus and 
wood and are especially common under conifers. The large fleshy types are usually terres- 
trial and may or may not be mycorrhizal. In the Pacific Northwest they are partial to 
hemlock and other conifers, in our area they favor tanoak, and in the Rocky Mountains 
they gravitate toward spruce, but are by no means restricted to these habitats. Only eleven 
species are described here but a number of others are keyed out. Most of them occur in the 
Pacific Northwest because that region is particularly rich in Ramarias. (The key is based 
on my own field experience plus information in The Ramarias of Western Washington by 
Currie Marr and Daniel Stuntz, and Trial Key to the Species of Ramaria in the Pacific 
Northwest, by Kit Scates.) 
646 
CLA V ARIACEAE 
Key to Ramaria 
I. Growing on wood ............................................................. 2 
I. Growing on ground (or occasionally on very rotten wood) ........................... 5 
2. Branches pale yellow to tawny-buff, orangish, or pinkish-tan, the tips yellow at first; spores 
warty .......................................................... R. stricta, p. 648 
2. Not as above; fruiting body pallid to buffy-tan, pinkish-tan, reddish-brown, brown, or darker, 
(occasionally yellowish but then spores smooth); branch tips not usually yellow when fresh 3 
3. Taste acrid (peppery); branches usually with a pinkish tinge, becoming darker (reddish-brown) 
in age .............................................. R. acris(see R. stricta. p. 648) 
3. Not as above; branches pallid to pinkish-tan, buffy-tan, brown, greenish-tinged, etc. ..... 4 
4. Fruiting body creamy to yellowish or pinkish-tan (branch tips sometimes greenish); spore print 
whitish and spores smooth ... Lentaria byssiseda & L. pinicola (see Ramaria stricta. p. 648) 
4. Fruiting body buffy-tan to pinkish-tan to brown or darker (sometimes greenish-tinged); spore 
print yellowish to ochraceous and spores ornamented .. R. apiculata (see R. str;cta. p. 648) 
5. Fruiting body pliant and rather tough, small or medium-sized (rarely taller than 10 cm); stalk 
or "trunk" slender to practically absent, with a mat of conspicuous white mycelial threads 
attached to the base and/ or permeating the substrate (see photo on p. 650) ............ 6 
5. Fruiting body medium-sized to large; mycelial mat absent, or if present then not as above 
(sometimes tough and pliant but usually fleshier) .................................. 8 
6. Spore print whitish; fruiting body creamy to pinkish-tan or yellowish, sometimes with greenish 
tips; often found near wood or in lignin-rich humus .................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lentaria byssiseda & L. pinicola (see Ramaria stricta. p.648) 
6. Spore print yellowish to ochraceous; fruiting body pallid to yellowish, ochraceous, cinnamon- 
tan, etc., sometimes with greenish stains; found in duff ............................. 7 
7. Fruiting body (or at least the lower branches) bruising or aging blue-green to olive-green, 
especially in cold weather ........................................ R. abietina, p. 650 
7. Not as above ......................................... R. myceliosa& others, p. 649 
8. Flesh in base of stalk rusty to rusty-brown when cut open lengthwise (i.e., vertically) ..... 9 
8. Not as above ................................................................ II 
9. Branches orange to pinkish or pinkish-red ............................... R. amyloidea 
9. Branches creamy to yellow or yellow-orange ...................................... 10 
10. Branches whitish to pale yellow with whitish tips ...................... R. velocimutans 
10. Branches yellowish to yellow-orange with yellow tips .................. R. celerivuescens 
II. Branches white to creamy when fresh; tips similarly colored or pinkish to purplish, brick-red, 
orangish, brownish, or yellowish-buff (but not yellow); fruiting body often (but not always) 
compact when young; flesh in base not gelatinous or semi-gelatinous ................ 40 
II. Not as above; branches darker or more brightly colored when young and fresh or tips yellow or 
flesh gelatinous to semi-gelatinous ............................................. 12 
12. Odor fragrant, like cocoa butter; branches pinkish-lavender to vinaceous or duller; found in 
eastern North America .................................................. R. cacao 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Branches dingy-colored (yellow-brown to olive-brown or olive-gray, etc.) with a distinct violet 
tinge to lowermost ones (when fresh) and/ or upper stalk; base (stalk) usually well-developed 
and fleshy (see photo on p. 651) ................................... R.Jennica, p. 650 
13. Not as above (but branches may be entirely violet or have violet to vinaceous stains) .... 14 
14. Branches entirely violet to lavender when fresh (but may fade or discolor in age) ........ 15 
14. Branches differently colored (but may have some vinaceous or purplish stains) ......... 16 
15. S pore print white; base not particularly fleshy ............. (see Clavulina & Allies, p. 640) 
15. S pore print yellowish to ochre; base usually fleshy ........... R. Jumigata & others, p. 651 
16. Branches red to coral-red, rose-pink, scarlet, or magenta when fresh; branch tips not yellow, 
of if yellow then branches red ............... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 17 
16. Branches differently colored (pink to orange, salmon, yellow, brown, etc.); tips yellow or not 
yellow ..................................................................... 18 
RAM ARIA 
647 
17. Branches usually red to coral-pink when fresh; flesh in base of stalk not amyloid ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. araiospora & others, p. 655 
17. Not as above ........................... R. stuntzii & others (see R. ara;ospora. p. 655) 
18. Branch tips blunt and conspicuously swollen (like the fruiting body ofa Clavar;adelphus) 19 
18. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
19. Branches white to yellowish or becoming tan; widespread but not common .. R. obtusissima 
19. Branches tan to dull grayish-orange; taste often bitter; found in the Pacific Northwest ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . R. claviramulata 
20. Base or lower branches covered with a cottony white tomentum (fuzz), or if not then branches 
or stalk often hollow ......................................................... 21 
20. Not as above ................................................................ 23 
21. Fruiting body consisting of a dense bundle of upright, slender, sparsely or densely branched 
"stems" arising from a common base; branches ("'stems") salmon to yellow-orange to peachy 
with yellow tips when fresh (sometimes with purplish stains), pliant to somewhat waxy and 
often hollow; widely distributed under both hardwoods and conifers. . . . . . R. conjunctipes 
21. Not as above ..................... _ . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 22 
22. Branches yellow or pale yellow; odor often fragrant or pungent-sweet .................... 
.................... R. cystidiophora&R. synaptopoda(see R. sangu;nea group, p. 653) 
22. Not as above; differently colored or soon becoming so _............................ - 23 
23. Flesh in base (stalk) gelatinous or showing gelatinous streaks or pockets when sliced open or 
if not gelatinous then cartilaginous (tough and brittle) ............................ _ 46 
23. Flesh in base firm or fibrous or with watery areas, but not gelatinous or cartilaginous ... 24 
24. Branches brown to dark brown with white or pallid tips when fresh; found in eastern North 
America ............................................................ R. grand is 
24. Not as above ................................................................ 25 
25. Base or stalk (and sometimes the branches) stining brown to reddish-brown to wine-red, 
violet, or blackish when bruised (often already with vinaceous to reddish-brown stains) . 26 
25. Not as above; fruiting body not staining appreciably when bruised ................... 30 
26. Branches becoming yellow-brown to reddish-brown in age; branches and base staining reddish- 
brown to brown when bruised; found under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ..... - . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R. testaceoflava (see R.formosa group, p. 654) 
26. Not as above; branches usually lighter or brighter in color, at least when fresh; common . 27 
27. Branches and tips yellow to creamy ........................ R. sanguinea group. p. 653 
27. Branches pinkish to orangish or yellow-orange, the tips sometimes yellow ............. 28 
28. Fruiting body with a yellow zone or band near gJ:ound level (on lower branches or just below), 
at least when young and fresh ................ R. sandaracina (see R. gelat;nosa. p. 655) 
28. Not as above .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 29 
29. Fruiting body staining brown to blackish, at least at base ........ R. formosa group. p. 654 
29. Fruiting body staining wine-red to burgundy, at least at base ........................... 
................... R. rubribrunnescens&R. maculatipes(see R.formosa group, p. 654) 
30. Fresh branches and branch tips bright orange to yellow-orange with a distinct yellow zone or 
band just below them (near ground level) .. R. aurantiisiccescens (see R. rasilispora. p. 652) 
30. Not with above features (but may have some ofthem) .............................. 31 
31. Branches and branch tips bright orange to deep orange to yellow-orange or pinkish-orange 32 
31. Not as above (but branches may be pinkish or orangish with yellow tips) .............. 34 
32. Branches yellow-orange when young and fresh, becoming pale or dull orange in age ..... 37 
32. Branches bright orange to deep orange or pinkish-orange when fresh but not yellow-orange 33 
33. Branches bright orange to deep orange in all stages R. /argentii (see R.formosa group, p. 654) 
33. Branches usually scarlet to pinkish or pinkish-orange, at least when young and fresh ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. stuntzii, R. subbotrytis, & R. cyaneigranosa (see R. ara;ospora. p. 655) 
34. Odor usually fragrant; branches yellow becoming yellow-brown in age; fruiting mainly in the 
fall under conifers ..................... R.flavobrunnescens (see R. ras;/ispora. p. 652) 
34. Not as above ................................................................ 35 
648 CLA V ARIACEAE 
35. Branches orange to pinkish or pinkish-tan, the tips usually yellow or yellowish when fresh 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. formosa group & others, p. 654 
35. Not as above ................................................................ 36 
36. Branches yellow to yellow-orange or whitish with yellow tips (when fresh) ............. 37 
36. Branches differently colored (usually dull) ........................................ 39 
37. Found under hardwoods in eastern North America .... R. aurea(see R. rasi/ispora, p. 652) 
37. Found under both hardwoods and conifers; common in western North America..... ... 38 
38. Fruiting body with a large, broad, conical or steeply tapered, rooting base; upper branches 
never orange when fresh; found under northern and mountain conifers in the spring or 
summer ..................................... R. magnipes (see R. rasi/ispora, p. 652) 
38. Not as above; fruiting body with a large or small base and with yellow to orangish branches; 
found in above habitat and season as well as many others ........... R. ras;lispora, p. 652 
39. Branches yellow-brown to orangish-brown or duller even when fresh (sometimes with a purplish 
tinge); branches typically erect and slender; taste usually bitter when cooked; common under 
conifers in the Pacific Northwest....... ... ..... R. acr;s;ccescens(see R.fennica, p. 650) 
39. Not as above ................................................................ 40 
40. Fruiting body compact, creamy to tan, dingy yellow-brown, or cinnamon-buff; taste mild; 
spores nOI striate; found in eastern North America .................. R. caulifloriformis 
40. Not with above features; widespread and common ................................. 41 
41. Branch tips typically pinkish when young but soon fading so that the mature fruiting body is 
entirely white or creamy; spores striate; found under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. rubr;evanescens (see R. bOlrylis, p. 656) 
41. Tips never pinkish, or if pinkish when young then retaining their color longer; spores striate 
or not striate ............................................................... 42 
42. Base with reddish-brown or vinaceous stains or staining these colors when bruised; branch 
tips whitish to yellow; spores nOI striate R. vinos;maculans(see R. sanguinea group, p. 653) 
42. Not as above ................................................................ 43 
43. Odor usually pungently sweet; branch tips dull orange to brownish, yellowish-buff, or whitish 
when fresh; spores striate .................. R. strasser; & others (see R. bOlrylis, p. 656) 
43. Odor mild, or if sweetish then branch tips differently colored; spores striate or not ...... 44 
44. Fruiting body whitish with yellow to creamy-yellow tips, at least while under the duff (often 
yellower or brighter in color when exposed); spores nOI striate R. ras;lispora & others, p. 652 
44. Not as above; branch tips usually pinkish to reddish or purplish, at least when young .... 45 
45. Taste typically mild (occasionally bitter or acrid); spores striate; very common ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. R. botryt;s & others, p. 656 
45. Taste typically bitter to very bitter; spores not striate or only obscurely so; widespread but not 
particularly common .......................... R. botryto;des(see R. bOlrylis, p. 656) 
46. Fruiting body brownish-yellow to tan or yellowish-tan; flesh cartilaginous ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R. cart;lag;nea (see R. gelalinosa, p. 655) 
46. Not as above; differently colored and/ or flesh in base gelatinous or semi-gelatinous ..... 47 
47. Branches usually yellow or yellow-orange ..... R.f/av;gelat;nosa (see R. gelalinosa, p. 655) 
47. Branches creamy to pinkish, orangish, brownish, etc., but not yellow (but fruiting body may 
have a yellow zone just below branches) ......................................... 48 
48. Fruiting body usually with a yellow zone or band near ground level (near bases of branches), 
at least when young ....... R. gelat;n;aurant;a& R. sandaracina (see R. gelalinosa, p. 655) 
48. Fruiting body lacking marked yellow zone ........................ R. gelat;nosa, p. 655 
Ramaria stricta (Strict Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a poorly developed base or stalk; 4-12 cm 
high and 3-10 cm broad. BRANCHES erect, slender, mostly parallel, usually compact 
but sometimes openly branched, sometimes grooved or flattened slightly; pale yellow 
becoming pinkish-tan to tawny-buff, orangish, or sometimes light brown, usually 
RAM ARIA 
649 
staining slowly brown or vinaceous-brown when bruised; branch tips fine, pale yellow to 
pale greenish-yellow when fresh. STALK rudimentary or practically absent, not well- 
developed. Flesh tough, pliant; odor often faintly sweetish; taste often somewhat metallic 
or bitter. SPORE PRINT cinnamon-buff to yellowish; spores 7-10 )( 3.5-5.5 microns, 
elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or tufts on rotting logs and branches (mostly of hard- 
woods but also conifers); widely distributed. It is common in our area in the late fall and 
winter, but seldom fruits in large numbers. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible-there is very little flesh and the flavor is not pleasing. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several Ramarias that grow on wood, though it may form 
"log lines" (i.e., grow in rows originating from buried or extremely decomposed logs). The 
upright, parallel orientation of the branches (see photo on p. 631) plus the yellowish branch 
tips are distinctive. The form that grows on conifers is often rather bushy and yellowish 
when young, while the one that grows on hardwoods is usually oranger. Other wood- 
inhabiting species: R. apiculata favors conifers but is dull buffy-tan to dull orange-brown 
or vinaceous-cinnamon (often with whitish tips when young). It is widespread and 
common, also bruises brown, and in one form exhibits green to blue-green tints on the 
branch tips and/ or stalk base. R. acris (=R. rubella) is usually acrid-tasting and pinkish- 
tinged when young with paler tips but becomes reddish-brown or darker throughout 
in age. Lentaria pinicola and L. byssiseda (both placed in Ramar;a by some authorities) 
grow on logs (mostly coniferous) or lignin-rich humus and have smooth whitish spores. 
The former is tan to yellowish with spores shorter than 10 microns, while the latter is 
pallid to pinkish-tan, sometimes has greenish branch tips, and has longer spores. Both 
species have white mycelial threads or cottony material at the base; L. byss;seda is espe- 
cially common in the Sierra Nevada (but is widespread). None of these are worth eating. 
R amaria myceliosa 
FRUITING BODY abruptly and profusely branched from a slender base (stalk); 2-6 (10) 
cm high and broad. BRANCHES slender, spreading, pliant, yellowish to tan, ochraceous, 
olive-ochre, cinnamon-buff, or dull orange, etc.; tips same color. ST ALK slender, pliant, 
not very fleshy; same color as branches or paler, with abundant white mycelial threads 
(rhizomorphs) attached to base and/ or permeating the surrounding humus. Flesh thin, 
whitish, pliant; taste usually bitter. SPORE PRINT yellowish or pale ochraceous; spores 
3.5-6)( 2-4 microns, elliptical to nearly round, minutely spiny. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious in duff under conifers; known only from the 
west coast, but similar species (see comments) are more widely distributed. In our area it 
is often abundant under redwood in the fall, winter, and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but hardly worth experimenting with because of its small size 
and bitterish taste. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several small (usually less than 10 cm high), dull, pliant, 
terrestrial Ramarias with a conspicuous white mycelial mat and minutely spiny spores. 
Other members of the club include: R. pusilla, an eastern version of R. myceliosa; R. 
invalii, with golden to dull yellowish-orange branches and spores 6-8.5)( 4-6 microns; R. 
flaccida, pale creamy-ochre with paler tips and spores 5-8 microns long; R. suecica, pallid 
to pinkish-tan with spores 8-10 microns long; R. gracilis, with minutely roughened rather 
than spiny spores and a frequent licorice-like odor; andR. murrillii, with cinnamon-brown 
to dark reddish-brown branches and a whitish base plus spiny spores, found in south- 
eastern North America. None of these grow on wood like R. str;cta and relatives, nor 
do they develop the greenish or blue-green stains typical of R. ab;et;na. 
... , 
. , ') 
\ 
I 
.... 
,  '-- 
j' - 
f, f' 
., 
, "<. 
#" .".. 
..  
 
\ ' ,. . 
..', 
w... 
\ 
\, 
'" 
! 
,. ...... 
,. 
Ramar;a ab;et;na (=R. ochraceov;rens) is an ochraceous species that develops greenish stains in age 
or cold weather. Note the extensive mat of white mycelial threads at base of fruiting body. 
Ramaria abietina (Green-Staining Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a slender base (stalk); 2-10 cm high and 
broad. BRANCHES slender, pliant, ochraceous to pale cinnamon becoming olive-brown 
to dingy brown in age, slowly staining greenish or blue-green when bruised or as it matures, 
especially the lower branches. STALK up to 2.5 cm long, slender, white to ochraceous or 
colored like branches, with white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at base and/ or in 
surrounding humus. Flesh pliant, often discoloring slightly vinaceous-brown; taste usually 
bitter. SPO RE PRINT pale yellowish-tan; spores 5.5-8 x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, minutely 
spiny. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious in duff under conifers (less commonly hard- 
woods); widely distributed. It is common in our area from the fall through early spring, 
especially under redwood. 
EDIBILITY: Too small, tough, and/ or bitter to bother with. 
COMMENTS: The tendency of the lower branches to develop greenish stains distinguishes 
this species, which is also known as R. ochraceov;rens, from the throngs of other small, 
pliant, buff to dingy ochraceous, terrestrial Ramarias (see R. myceliosa). The green- 
staining is especially evident in cold weather, and can be enhanced-if there is any doubt- 
by placing the fruiting body in a freezer. R. apiculata (see comments under R. stricta) 
may stain greenish, but normally grows on wood. 
Ramariafennica (Bitter Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY typically with two to four large primary branches arising from a 
common base (stalk), and many smaller secondary branches arising from the primary ones; 
6-18 cm high and 5-12 cm broad. BRANCHES smooth, mostly erect, olive-gray to olive- 
umber to smoky-yellow, grayish-tan, Or yellow-brown, the basal (primary) branches 
dark olive-brown with a violet tinge when fresh; tips olive-yellow to dingy buff. STALK 
large, fleshy, white below, upper portion colored like the branches and usually tinged 
violet when fresh. Flesh white, firm but brittle; taste often bitterish. SPORE PRINT pale 
ochraceous; spores 8.5-12 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus under both hard woodsand conifers; 
widely distributed. In our area it is usually associated, like other fleshy Ramarias, with 
tanoak. It is not normally a common species, but occasionally fruits in great abundance 
in the fall and early winter. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown; the bitterish taste (when present) is a deterrent. 
650 
 
 
, . 
'( 
1'1 
t . 
) . ",' JI 
l i  
\ I JJ 
, 
\ I;I ; I:) 
.\\\ 
I 
, . \ 
, 
, 
t\ 't\' 
. I'" I) 
,\\\ \. \' 
t '\ 
., .. 
\ 
,I 
.. 
t 
'\"'1 \ 
/ItII 
'" 
\\ 
\ 
\ 
. 
 
 t 
A 
" 
':..1 
p 
.... 
 t,' 
"" 
 
.: 
Ramaria fennica is a handsome upright coral fungus. Note the well-developed fleshy base or "trunk." 
Fresh specimens are usually tinged purple at base of branches. 
COMMENTS: One of our most lovely coral fungi, this species is easily told by its overall 
shape (see photograph) and dull color, plus the subtle violet tinge to the lower branches and 
top of the trunk (when fresh). In contrast to many of the larger Ramarias, it is typically taller 
than it is wide. R.fennn;ca var. v;olaceibrunnea is a more precise name for the west coast 
variant. Other species: R.Jumos;avellanea is a rare similarly-colored species with a much 
smaller base. R. acr;s;ccescens, called the "Blah Ramaria" by Kit Scates in her extensive 
key to Ramarias of the Pacific Northwest, is a common dull-colored species with slender, 
erect branches and a slim, tapered base plus an acrid or bitter taste, at least when cooked. 
It is common under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but I have not seen it in our area. 
Ramariafumigata (Violet Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY typically with two to four large primary branches arising from a 
common base (stalk), and many smaller secondary branches arising from the primary ones; 
5-12 cm high and 8-12 cm broad. BRANCHES smooth, violet or lilac, slowly discoloring 
dingy yellowish-brown or smoky-yellow in old age; tips also violet. STALK distinct as 
a white fleshy base or "trunk" below the main branches. Flesh white, firm; taste slightly 
bitter or acrid. SPORE PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8.5-11 x 34 microns, elliptical, 
roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on ground in woods; widely distributed, but 
apparently very rare in California. I have found it only once in our area, near Boulder 
Creek, under tanoak and Douglas-fir, in December. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The violet branches and branch tips make this beautiful Ramaria un- 
mistakable. It is closely allied to R. jennica. but is somewhat smaller in my experience, 
and more vividly colored. Other distinctly purple coral fungi are more sparsely branched 
and/ or have white spores (see comments under Cia varia purpurea and Clavu/ina cinerea). 
Other species: R. cedretorum, reported by Kit Scates from northern Idaho, is another rare 
amethyst-colored species. It does not discolor as much in age and has slightly larger spores. 
651 
'.. 
.10 
<' " 
'" , 
t 1 
t 
\ 
. 
. . 
' 
.,  
.... ",Ie: ' 
,,:  . 
...... "( .f,. 
-,: 
I 
. 
,  
, . 
-." 
" 
- 
," 
'. 
a' 
."J ' ' 
l. 
-to 
...... 
Ramaria rasilispora is the most common of several yellow to pale orange coral fungi. Note that the 
flesh in sliced specimen is solid and white, not gelatinous. 
Ramaria rasilispora (Yellow Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY abundantly branched from a fleshy base or stalk, 540 cm high and 
broad. BRANCHES smooth, mostly erect, creamy to pale yellow (var. scatesiana) Or 
yellow to yellow-orange Or pale orange (var. rasilispora), but the lower branches often 
whitish when very young and branches in both varieties often pale Or dull orange to ochra- 
ceous in old age; tips yellow or same color as branches, sometimes brownish in age. STALK 
fleshy, tapering to a point or rooting; white or whitish. Flesh brittle or fibrous, often with 
watery areas, white; taste mild. SPORE PRINT pale orange-yellow or ochraceous; spores 
8-12)( 34.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth Or slightly roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered Or in groups or rings on ground in woods; common in 
the West and probably more widely distributed. In Our area it fruits in the fall and winter 
under tanoak Or less commonly live oak, but in other regions it is common under conifers, 
especially fir. In mountain ranges such as the Sierra Nevada it usually fruits in the spring 
and early summer, as does R. magnipes (see comments), which is common from the Siski- 
you Mountains northward under hemlock, fir, and other conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite popular, but difficult to clean and sometimes lacking in 
flavor. Coral fungus connoisseur Herb Saylor says it's good raw in salads or candied like 
grapefruit rinds. Some people, however, are adversely affected by it, and R. magnipes 
(see comments) is sometimes bitter when cooked. 
COMMENTS: The fleshy, terrestrial, yellowish Ramarias do not lend themselves to glib 
categorization. As a group, however, they are easily recognized by their shape and color, 
and none appear to be dangerously poisonous. The names R. flava and R. aurea have 
traditionally been applied indiscriminately to practically all yellow coral fungi, but are 
inadequate for the many variants in the group. R. rasilispora is probably the most com- 
mon yellow species in California. R. magnipes is a very similar, characteristic feature 
of the springtime mushroom flora of western mountains. It differs in having a larger 
(7-14 )( 4-6 cm), rooting, steeply tapered Or broadly conical stalk, yellow (never orange) 
branches, and slightly longer spores. Other fleshy, terrestrial. yellow Ramarias include: 
R. flavobrunnescens, which usually has a sweet odor, yellow branches that become 
brownish-yellow (or brownish-tipped) in age, and is very common at times in the Pacific 
Northwest under western hemlock; R.flavigelatinosa(see comments under R. gelatinosa), 
with watery-gelatinous or sometimes cartilaginous flesh; R. aurantiisiccescens, with 
yellow-orange to orange branches and a yellow zone near ground level; and R. aurea, 
a pale orange to yellow species that is said to be common under hardwoods in eastern 
North America. None of these bruise wine-red at the base as in the R. sanguinea group 
(or the "true" R. flava), and none are choice edibles. 
652 
. 
J 
. ; \ 
 , .. 
:  ." "\ , .. 
, , \ . I 
'. ". . 
, \ ) \ 
!' 
"- .. 
\ \ '\. 
.. " 
,' 
'"  
"! ... , .....  & . 
& 
Y 
Ramaria sanguinea group. Branches are yellow to nearly white and the base stains reddish or bur- 
gundy when bruised. 
Ramaria sanguinea group (Bleeding Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or"stalk";4-25 cmormore high 
and broad. BRAN CHES smooth, mostly erect; pale or clear yellow, the ti ps usually slightly 
brighter yellow; lower (primary) branches turning dark red or vinaceous to reddish- or 
vinaceous-brown when bruised. STALK fleshy, tapered below, often very short; white or 
whitish, typically staining dark red or wine-red to vinaceous-brown when bruised or 
already with such stains. Flesh white or yellowish, rather brittle; taste mild. SPORE 
PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8.5-12 )( 3.54 microns, oblong or elongated-elliptical, 
roughened or smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under both hardwoods and coni- 
fers; widely distributed. In our area this species "complex" fruits in the late fall and winter 
under tanoak. but is not as numerous as R. rasilispora. In the Pacific Northwest and 
northern California several similar species (see comments) are common under conifers in 
the fall, and I have also seen large fruitings near Lake Tahoe in October. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably consumable; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: The yellow branches and tendency to stain vinaceous or reddish-brown 
plus the mild taste and non-gelatinous flesh are the telltale traits of this lovely coral mush- 
room and its close relatives. R.Jlava is a very similar, longer-spored species that has not 
yet been reported from the west coast. Actually, there is considerable doubt as to whether 
the "true" R. sanguinea occurs in the West, but there are a number of similar vinaceous- 
staining species, including: R. v;nos;maculans, with creamy to light yellow branch tips 
and vinaceous stains at the base (and sometimes on the branches), and R. rub;g;nosa, a 
fleshy species with darker yellow tips and prominent vinaceous or purplish-brown stains at 
the base. Both of these species are common under conifers in California and the Pacific 
Northwest, particularly in the fall. Two other yellow, vinaceous-staining species. R. 
cyst;d;ophora and R. synaptopoda, differ in possessing a coating of cottony white fuzz 
at the base. The former is often fragrant while the latter resembles a bundle of strings with 
"ox-blood red" spots at the base and usually has a pungent-sweet odor. For vinaceous- 
staining species with oranger or pinker branches, see comments under the R. formosa 
group, and also check R. conjunctipes (couplet #21 of the key to Ramaria) and the species 
discussed under R. ge/atinosa. 
653 
.' \ ."\ ,\   . . '\' 
\ \. \ . \ \\ 
, \ \t' ." 
. ,\, 
.F\ 
'" 
.... 
'.. 
. 
\, 
"\ ,it.' \ 
4. ,. ,-' 
\ \, ' 
" 
,=' 
., 
 
.,"\ \ 
J 
" 
 
\ 
\ . 
... . 
.. . : 
.. ., . 
.. 
 
 
. l' 
, 
Ramariaformosa group. Branches are pinkish to orangish and tips are usually yellow when fresh. 
Ramariaformosa group (Pinkish Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base (stalk); 5-20 cm high and wide. 
BRANCHES smooth or grooved, mostly erect; pinkish to pinkish-orange, salmon, 
pinkish-tan, or even reddish, fading to pinkish-buff, tan, Or dingy ochraceous in age; tips 
yellow or colored like branches when fresh, also fading. STALK fleshy, usually tapering 
downward; white at base, otherwise colored like branches (or paler). Flesh brittle to 
fibrous, whitish or becoming pinkish to orange in age, not gelatinous; taste usually mild 
but often astringent or bitter when cooked. SPORE PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 
9-12.5 )( 3.5-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or rings on ground in woods, widely 
distributed. In the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains it is one of the most common 
Ramarias, fruiting mainly under conifers, but also hardwoods. In our area it favors tanoak 
(like just about every other fleshy Ramaria) and is fairly common in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Said to have cathartic effects on some (or many) individuals. Until the 
identity of our variety (or varieties) is definitely established, it is best left alone. 
COMMENTS: The above description encompasses several forms that pose great dif- 
ficulties to the avid coral-categorizer but have collectively passed under the name R. 
formosa in North America. The pinkish to pinkish-orange to pinkish-tan branches and 
non-gelatinous flesh are the main field marks, but older specimens are easily confused with 
other species. The European R. formosa is said to stain cinnamon to vinaceous-brown or 
blackish when bruised (at least at the base). Several forms in the Pacific Northwest do, 
whereas the one in our area does not. Which is the "true" R.formosa is for the Ramaria- 
researchers to decide! Similar species which stain include: R. rubr;brunnescens and R. 
maculat;pes, both bruising vinaceous or burgundy (the former often fragrant); the R 
formosa of the Pacific Northwest already alluded to, which bruises brown; and R. testa- 
ceoflava var. brunnea (=R. brunnea), a handsome, bitter-tasting conifer-lover of the 
Pacific Northwest with "apricot-buff' to golden-yellow branches that soon become 
brownish and quickly stain reddish-brown, plus a brown-staining base. Similarly-colored 
western species that do not stain include: R. leptoformosa and R. rubr;carnata, common 
in the Pacific Northwest under conifers, the latter with a stout, chunky fruiting body and 
salmon-tinged flesh inside the branches; R. long;spora, with a yellow zone or band near 
or at ground-level when young; R. cyane;granosa, whose fruiting body is often flattened 
(somewhat fanlike); and R. largent;;, a beautiful species that is orange to deep orange 
throughout (never pinkish and not yellow-tipped). 
RAMARIA 
655 
Ramaria gelatinosa (Gelatinous Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or "stalk"; 5-15 cm high and 
wide. BRANCHES mostly smooth and erect, orange to pinkish-orange to orange-buff, 
pinkish-brown, or occasionally yellow-orange, sometimes developing a faint purple-gray 
tinge in age. STALK or main trunk whitish, rather tough. Flesh colored like branches or 
paler and showing translucent, often gelatinous pockets or streaks when stalk is sectioned 
lengthwise; taste often bitter. SPORE PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 7-10 )( 4.5-6 
microns, elliptical, roughened (warted). 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in duff under conifers (hemlock, fir, etc.); 
common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and northern California, but more widely 
distributed. I have yet to find it south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous to some people (causing diarrhea and digestive upset); apparently 
edible for others, but hardly worth the risk. 
COMMENTS: The gelatinous interior of the base and overall dingy pinkish to dull orange 
color are the forthright features of this fungus. It is most likely to be mistaken for the 
R. formosa group, which does not have gelatinous flesh. The above description is for 
R. gelat;nosa var. oregonens;s. The typical variety, which was originally collected under 
hardwoods in the southeastern states, is similar but paler (creamy) when young. Other 
western species with gelatinous or semi-gelatinous flesh include: R .flav;gelat;nosa, which 
is yellower in color and quite common on the west coast; R. gelat;n;aurant;a and R. san- 
darac;na, both with orange to deep orange branches and orange to yellow tips, and a band 
of yellow just above ground level (near the bases of the branches); and R. cartilag;nea, 
a yellowish-tan to tan or brownish-yellow species with cartilaginous to very slightly 
gelatinous flesh. N one of these are worth eating. - 
Ramaria araiospora (Red Coral Mushroom) Color Plate 168 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base (stalk); 4-13 cm high, 3-10 cm 
broad or more. BRAN CHES smooth. brilliant coral-red to red, crimson, or even magenta, 
but often fading to coral-pink, light red, orange, or even paler in old age; tips red to 
yellowish, fading slightly in age. STALK usually rather short, white or whitish (or dis- 
colored) at base, colored like branches (or paler) above. Flesh brittle; taste mild or slightly 
krautlike. SPORE PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8-13 )( 3-5 microns, elliptical to 
cylindrical, roughened. Flesh in base of stalk not amyloid. 
HABITAT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups on ground in woods; known 
only from the west coast. I find it every year in the fall and winter under tanoak, but it is 
not as common in our area as some of the other fleshy Ramarias. Farther north it fre- 
quently occurs with hemlock and other conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible, but not as fleshy as R. botrytis and R. rasilispora. Be sure 
not to confuse faded specimens with the R.formosa group! 
COMMENTS: The brilliant red color of fresh specimens makes this gorgeous coral 
mushroom unmistakable. It used to pass under the name R. subbotrytis. but that species 
is apparently eastern in distribution. There are at least two distinct varieties of R. araio- 
spora: var. ara;ospora, with yellowish branch tips in age, and var. rubella, with red tips. 
As in other Ramarias, the color tends to fade with age, and old specimens barely hint at 
their former splendor. R. cyane;granosa is a somewhat similar species that has broader 
spores and is usually more peach-colored when fresh. R. stuntz;;, common in northern 
California and the Pacific Northwest, is similar to R. araiospora in color or can show 
more yellow below, deep red or magenta near the tips, and orange in between, but it has 
amyloid flesh in the stalk. R. subbotryt;s is an eastern species with salmon-orange to pink 
branches and branch tips when fresh, but it becomes duller or slightly yellower in age. 
 
. 
'" 
.,: 
 . , 
., II 
" 
 
s:t 
...., 
)1L. 
Ramar;a bOlryl;s, young specimens. Note how compact the fruiting body is-it looks more like a 
cauliflower than the cauliflower mushroom (Sparass;s). Older specimens are not necessarily com- 
pact, however. Branch tips are purple-red to pinkish when young, but the color may fade with age. 
Ramaria botrytis (Pink-Tipped Coral Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or stalk; sometimes massive, 
7 -20 cm high and 6-30 cm broad or more when mature; usually very compact when young, 
but less so in age. BRANCHES often crowded, white or pallid when young, gradually 
becoming buff to dull ochraceous or tan in age; tips typically short, clef ted, blunt, pink to 
purple, vinaceous, or red when fresh (but orange to brownish-orange in var. aurant;;- 
ramosa), fading in age. STALK thick (1.5-6 cm), fleshy, the base often rounded and 
swollen at or above ground level; white or whitish when fresh, tan to ochraceousin old age. 
Flesh firm, solid, white; taste mild in some forms, somewhat bitter in others. SPORE 
PRINT pale ochraceous to ochre-buff; spores 11-16 (20) x 4-6 microns, oblong-elliptical to 
nearly cylindrical, longitudinally lined (striate). 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or rings on ground in woods, often partially 
buried in the humus; very widely distributed. Along with R. strasseri (see comments) it is 
common in the Pacific Northwest and Sierra Nevada under conifers in the summer, fall, 
and spring (but is less common in the spring than R. rubripermanens-see comments). In 
our area it favors tanoak and other hardwoods and fruits in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, according to some. However, it has laxative effects on 
some individuals and bitter look-alikes (see comments) occur. It is one of the largest and 
fleshiest of all the Ramarias, so it is definitely worth trying. 
COMMENTS: This handsome, compact coral mushroom is reminiscent of a cauliflower 
-more so, in fact, than the cauliflower mushroom (Sparassis). Young specimens with 
stubby pink- or purple-tipped branches are the most readily recognized of all the Ramarias 
(see photo). In age, however, the fruiting body discolors and ofte loses its compact form, 
and it is then easily confused with other Ramarias. The longitudinally striate spores, 
however, are distinctive. There are several closely related species with longitudinally striate 
spores. One,R. strasser;, is quitecommon(at least in western North America), but typically 
has a tapered, rooting stalk and a frequently fragrant or spicy-sweet odor; it is whitish to 
ochraceous or tan with whitish to ochre, tan, dull orange, or brownish tips. A second,R. 
secunda, closely resembles R. strasseri, but has shorter spores. A third,R. rubr;permanens, 
is colored like typical R. botrytis, but has shorter spores (less than 13 microns long). A 
fourth, R. rubr;evanescens, also has short spores, but shows pink on the branch tips only 
when very young and is often entirely white or creamy at maturity. All ofthese occur in 
western North America, mainly (but not exclusively) with conifers. Finally, there is R. 
botryto;des, a widespread species that mimics R. botrytis in color (whitish with pink 
to purplish branch tips) but has an exceedingly acrid taste that can linger in one's mouth 
for up to twelve hours after tasting it! This species, which occurs occasionally in our area, 
also differs in having non-striate (or only very faintly striate) spores, suggesting a closer 
kinship to R. araiospora than to R. botrytis. 
656 
657 
SP ARASSIS (Cauliflower Mushrooms) 
Medium-sized to large fungi parasitic on the roots of trees (especially conifers). FRUITING BODY 
typicallJ' a compact mass of flat tened. wavJ'. ribbonlike branches or leafy lobes, often with a tough 
rooting base; white to buff or tan. SPORE PRINT white. Spores smooth, elliptical. 
THE branched fruiting body with wavy, flattened, leafy or ribbonlike lobes is unique to 
Sparassis, and most mycologists now sequester it in a family of its own. Despite the 
common name, our species looks more like a giant brain than a cauliflower. It fruits at the 
bases oftrees (another distinctive feature), appearing year after year in the same spots. 
From a size and edibility standpoint, Sparassis is indisputably the king (or queen) of 
the coral fungi. It is highly esteemed for its fragrance, flavor, and keeping quality, and I 
found it to be a staple item in the monsoon diet of many Himalayan villagers. Only two 
species occur in North America, one western and one eastern; a key hardly seems necessary. 
Sparass;s cr;spa (Cauliflower Mushroom) Color Plate 172 
FRUITING BODY a compactly branched mass of flattened, leafy lobes arising from a 
tough, rooting base or "stalk"; 12-60 cm or more high and broad. BRANCHES (lobes) 
flattened, thin, usually leafy in appearance; wavy, crisped, or crimped, pliant; surfaces of 
lobes smooth, whitish to creamy or yellowish, often becoming cinnamon-buff or tan in age 
or dry weather, sometimes with darker brown stains on the edges. ST ALK 5-13 cm long,2-5 
cm thick, usually tapered downward, fleshy but very tough, buried deep in ground (or 
wood). Flesh firm, white, fairly tough or elastic; odor spicy-fragrant. SPORE PRINT 
white; spores 5-7 )( 3-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Parasitic on the roots of conifers, usually growing solitary at or near the bases 
of trunks or stumps; found in the coniferous forests of western North America. It is not 
uncommon in our coastal pine forests, fruiting in the same spot year after year (or some- 
times twice a year), usually in the late fall or winter. It also grows on Douglas-fir and other 
members of the pine family. It produces a brown or yellow carbonizing rot in its host, and 
is economically significant in some regions. The best place to look for it is in older forests 
where there are plenty of mature trees. S. spathu/ata (see below) can grow on hardwoods. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and exceptional. The perfect mushroom for a special occasion, it is as 
elegant as it looks intelligent. Thorough cooking is necessary, however, to render it tender, 
and it is a royal pain-in-the-posterior to clean! Gentle sauteeing or parboiling followed by 
baking or stewing is best. Fresh specimens can be stored for a week or two in a cool dry 
place, but be sure to check first for maggots! 
COMMENTS: Better known as S. radicata, this fantastic fungus looks more like a 
sea sponge or "bouquet of egg noodles" (Alexander Smith) than a cauliflower. The 
flattened, ribbonlike lobes or "branches", plus the overall white to yellowish color and 
tough, rooting base distinguish it from other coral fungi. The spicy odor is also distinctive, 
but difficult to characterize. In the Pacific Northwest, 20-30( oreven50!) pound specimens 
are not unheard of, but in our area the size range is generally 1-5 pounds-orabout the size 
of a human head (a cross-section, coincidentally, reveals brainlike convolutions or 
"canals"). Certain cup fungi (e.g., Peziza proteana form sparassoides and Wynnea sparas- 
soides) sometimes mimic it, but are brown or lilac-tinted and/ or smaller and bear their 
spores in asci rather than on basidia (a microscopic distinction). The name S. crispa has 
also been applied to the equally edible cauliflower mushroom of eastern North America, 
which favors oak and pine, has thicker, more erect, rigid-looking branches or lobes, and 
lacks a rooting base. However, recent studies indicate that its "correct" name isS. spathu- 
lata or S. herbstii, and that the western species, which has been called S. radicata, is the 
""true" -So crispa. (I'm tempted to say that mushroom taxonomy is as intricately twisted 
and convoluted as a cauliflower mushroom, but I won't!) 
658 
Chanterelles 
(@ 
 spores 
CANTHARELLACEAE 
Fairly small to medium-large. mostly terrestrial woodland fungi. FRUITING BODY with a cap 
and stalk. CAP typically depressed to vase-shaped or trumpet-shaped at maturity. surface not 
typically viscid. UNDERSIDE smooth. wrinkled. veined. or with primitive foldlike. forking. 
shallow. blunt. decurrent gills. STALK fleshy or hollow. continuous with cap. VEIL and VOLV A 
absent. SPORE PRINT white to buff. yellowish. pinkish. salmon-tinged. or tan. Spores smooth 
or roughened. not amyloid. Basidia long and narrow. 
THESE are colorful and conspicuous mushrooms with a more or less vase-shaped to 
funnel-shaped fruiting body differentiated into an upper or inner sterile surface (the cap) 
and lower or outer spore-bearing surface (the hymenium). The latter may be smooth, 
wrinkled, veined, or gilled, but the gills when present are fold like (thick, shallow, blunt, 
and usually joined by connecting veins) rather than bladelike and/ or thin-edged as in the 
true agarics. The long, narrow basidia and relatively unspecialized hymenium suggest a 
kinship between the chanterelles and coral fungi. In fact, if the flattened apex of a club coral 
(Clavariadelphus) were broadened into a cap and the wrinkles on its sides amplified, you 
would essentially have a chanterelle! 
The three principal genera in the Cantharellaceae are treated together here. In 
Craterel/us the fruiting body is more or less trumpet-shaped and dark brown to gray or 
black, and the spores are smooth; in Cantharel/us it is broadly convex to plane or vase- 
shaped and often brightly colored, gills are usually present, and the spores are smooth; and 
in Gomphus the fruiting body is cylindrical to vase-shaped with a veined or wrinkled 
hymenium, and the spores are warted or wrinkled. A fourth genus, Polyozel/us, is also 
included here though it is usually relegated to a family of its own. 
The chanterelles are great favorites with fungophiles. With the exception of the G. 
floccosus group, all are apparently edible and many are excellent. The best (and most 
plentiful!) of the local species are the renowned chanterelle (Cantharel/uscibarius )and the 
unheralded but far tastier horn of plenty (Craterel/us cornucopioides). Both refrigerate 
well and are usually maggot-free, and since large crops are commonplace, they can be 
preserved for later use. The horn of plenty is excellent dried. Chanterelles, on the other 
hand, dry miserably (they become as tough as leather), but can be pickled, canned, or 
sauteed and frozen. (Enormous quantities of chanterelles are gathered in the Pacific 
Northwest and shipped in brine to Germany-five million pounds annually according to 
one estimate!) 
The chanterelles are strictly woodland fungi and are saprophytic or mycorrhizal with a 
broad range of tree hosts. They are not a particularly large group, but are quite conspi- 
cuous, easy to identify, and have an interesting distribution pattern. Many species are 
characteristic components of cold northern and montane coniferous forests-e.g., Gom- 
phus clavatus, G. floccosus, and Cantharel/us infundibuliformis. A slew of others fa vor 
the warm hardwood forests of eastern North America-e.g., Cantharel/us cinnabarinus, 
C. ignicolor, and C. lateritius. But there is a puzzling paucity of species in our area, with 
only a few of the truly cosmopolitan ones (like the chanterelle) represented. Nine species 
are depicted here (most of them with color plates) and several others are keyed out. 
Key to the Cantharellaceae 
l. Fruiting body gelatinous or rubbery and pliant ........... (see Tremellales & Allies, p. 669) 
I. Fruiting body fleshy to rather tough and pliant, but not rubbery-pliant or gelatinous ..... 2 
-, 
, 
...,-- 
, 
,. " 
.'\, 
/. ,.' 
.' 
, 
\ 
 ,-. 
--\ 
 
- I 
/ -'"1" 
't....-. 
a  
,. 
.. 
" 
, :1':.- 
?<-.:. 
;:;:- 
-. 
,. 
.. 
 
The chanterelle, Cantharel/us cibarius, is a prized edible mushroom. Note shallow, blunt, veined gills. 
Cap is depressed or funnel-shaped in these mature specimens, but can be convex when very young (see 
description on p. 662). 
2. Fruiting body small or minute (usually less than 2 cm broad), typically white to grayish- or 
brownish-tinged; stalk absent, or if present often short and off-center to lateral; fertile surface 
(underside of cap) with meandering veins or shallow gills; growing on sticks, moss, etc. 
(not often terrestrial); especially common in northern regions (see Pleurotus& Allies, p.132) 
2. Fruiting body medium-sized to large, or if small then not as above .................... 3 
3. Fruiting body a gilled mushroom (usually Lactarius or Russula) covered bya layer of minutely 
pimpled tissue that completely engulfs the gills or makes them look blunt and chanterelle-like; 
flesh crisp, brittle, usually white; spores borne.inside asci ..... (see Pyrenomycetes, p. 878) 
3. Not as above; surface not finely pimpled; spores borne on basidia ..................... 4 
4. Cap dark when fresh (dark gray to dark brown, black, violet-black, or bluish-black) ..... 5 
4. Cap brighter or lighter than above (including olive-buff, tan, light brown, etc.) ......... II 
5. Entire fruiting body deep blue to blue-black or violet-black, usually compound (a cluster of 
spoon- or fan-shaped caps); found under northern and montane conifers (especially spruce 
and fir) .............................................. Polyozellus multiplex, p. 668 
5. Not as above (but fruiting body may be black or bluish-gray or more or less funnel-to trumpet- 
shaped, and may occur in clusters) .............................................. 6 
6. Underside of cap (fertile surface) with distinct gills, the gills often forked ............... 7 
6. Underside of cap smooth to wrinkled or with sinuous (squiggly) veins, but lacking gills ... 8 
7. Entire fruiting body dark when fresh (colored more or less like cap or the fertile surface some- 
times paler) ................................... Craterel/us c;nereus & others, p. 665 
7. Not as above; either the stalk or gills (or both) yellowish to orange (or stalk with a yellowish to 
orange undersurface and darker fibrils) ......................................... 17 
8. Underside of cap (fertile surface) with prominent veins (at least at maturity); odor sickeningly 
sweet in age, or if not then fertile surface usually developing a strong yellowish tinge as spores 
mature; not common ......... CraterellusJoet;dus& C. s;nuosus(see C. cinereus, p. 665) 
8. Not as above; underside of cap smooth to slightly wrinkled; common .................. 9 
9. Fruiting body typically 4 cm or more high when mature, trumpet-shaped to petunia-shaped 
or tubular (i.e., hollow nearly to base) ....... Craterellus cornucop;o;des & others, p. 666 
9. Fruiting body smaller and/ or differently shaped (not hollow); cap margin sometimes white or 
pale when actively growing ................................................... 10 
10. Cap typically less than 2 cm broad and stalk 1-3 mm thick; fruiting body grayish to brown or 
blackish but not chocolate-brown or purple-brown; spores smooth; found in eastern North 
America (especially the Southeast) ... Craterellus calyculus (see C. cornucopioides, p.666) 
10. Not as above; cap up to 5 cm broad (orlarger if compound), usually purple-brown to chocolate- 
brown (but sometimes grayish-brown) and/ or compound (with more than one cap); cap 
margin often fringed; spores often angular or warty ...... (see Stereaceae & Allies, p. 604) 
659 
660 CANTHARELLACEAE 
II. Fruiting body more or less vaselike and coarsely scaly at the center (or throughout), at least 
in age (see Color Plate 174) ........ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 
II. Not as above; cap smooth or breaking up to form small scales, but not coarsely scaly .... 13 
12. Cap reddish to bright orange to orange-buff, at least when fresh (may fade to tan or paler) .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gomphusfloccosus group, p. 661 
12. Cap with tan to brown scales, never brightly colored .................................. 
.... . ... .......... . . ..... . .. ... .. Gomphus kauffmanii(see G.floccosus group, p. 661) 
13. Flesh and gills (or underside of cap) white or whitish, but staining purplish to purple-brown 
when bruised; cap usually salmon-colored to orange; known only from the Southeast, not 
common............................ Cantharellus(=Gloeocantharellus)purpurascens 
13. Not as above (but gills or fertile surface may be purple or purple-tinged) ............... 14 
14. Fertile surface and/ or upper stalk purple or with a purplish tinge whenfresh; cap tan to olive- 
buff, olive-brown, yellow-brown, or purplish; stalk thick and solid, firm, continuous with cap 
(i.e., fruiting body resembling a chopped-off, often lopsided club, at least when young); 
found under conifers, often (but not always) in fused clusters ... Gomphus clavatus, p. 661 
14. Not with above features (differently colored or stalk slender and hollow in age, etc.) ..... 15 
15. Fertile surface (underside of cap) with gills (or lacking them only in the button stage), the gills 
often forked or with connecting veins ........................................... 16 
15. Fertile surface (underside of cap) smooth to slightly wrinkled or at times developing shallow 
veins at maturity, but lacking gills :............................................. 22 
16. Fresh fruiting body bright red to pink to orange-red ..... Cantharellus cinnabarinus, p. 664 
16. Fruiting body differently colored (white, yellow, orange, salmon-orange, brown, etc.) ... 17 
17. Either growing on wood (or lignin-rich humus) and stalk absent or rudimentary or gills orange 
to deep orange and usually dichotomously forked and fairly thin inage and cap often brownish, 
at least at the center ........................................ (see Paxillaceae, p. 476) 
17. Not as above; gills usually blunt and thick (at least when young) and often forked irregularly 
(rather than dichotomously), orange to yellow-orange, white, or differently colored .... 18 
18. Cap grayish to brown or yellow-brown when young (but may break up into scales or fibrils, 
revealing the yellowish to orangish undersurface); stalk often hollow, at least in age .... 19 
18. Not as above; cap white, yellow, or orange when fresh (unless faded); stalk hollow or solid 20 
19. Stalk brown or with brownish fibrils when young; gills yellowish to orangish; found in eastern 
North America ....................................... Cantharellus appalachiensis 
19. Stalk usually yellowish to orange when young and fresh; gills often with a grayish, brownish, or 
purplish tinge; widespread ................ Cantharellus infundibuliJormis group, p. 665 
20. Cap white or whitish, sometimes with orange or yellow stains Cantharellus subalbidus, p. 662 
20. Cap orange-buff to salmon-buff to ochre-tawny to bright yellow or orange, at least when fresh 
(may fade to whitish in sunlight) ............................................... 21 
21. S talk slender (usually less than I em thick)and usually hollowinage; flesh very thin; cap smallish; 
common in eastern North America ................................................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cantharellus ignicolor & c. minor (see C. infundibuliformis group, p. 665) 
21. Stalk slender to very thick (0.5-2 em or more), solid (unless maggot-eaten); cap medium-sized to 
very large or sometimes small; flesh thick; common, widespread Cantharellus cibarius, p. 662 
22. Mature fruiting body with a flattened top, but without a true cap (i.e., cap margin blunt or non- 
existent-see Color Plate 166); flesh often punky or stringy .. (see Clavariadelphus, p. 632) 
22. Not as above; fruiting body normally with a cap that has a well-defined, acute edge (margin) 23 
23. Fruiting body whitish or dull-colored; stalk thin (1-3 mm); cap usually small, often rosette-like 
(with petal-like lobes) in age; flesh very thin and tough ... (see Stereaceae& Allies, p. 604) 
23. Not as above; fruiting body fleshy though sometimes thin-fleshed, usually brightly colored 
at least in part .............................................................. 24 
24. Cap brown to ochre-brown or yellow-brown, or sometimes more brightly colored; flesh very 
thin; odor typically mild . _ Cantharellus xanthopus (see C. infundibuliformis group, p. 665) 
24. Cap brightly colored (usually yellow to orange or pinkish-orange); flesh fairly thick (at least 
at center of cap); odor often fruity or fragrant ......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 25 
25. Fruiting body more or less trumpet-shaped, usually clustered and fragrant ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Cantharellus odoratus (see C. cibarius, p. 662) 
25. Not as above .............. Cantharellus lateritius & C. confluens (see C. cibarius, p. 662) 
GOMPHUS 
661 
Gomphus clavatus (Pig's Ears) Color Plate 176 
FRUITIN G BODY 6-20 cm or more high, nearly cylindrical to more or less club-shaped 
but with a flattened top; often growing in fused or compound clusters. CAP(s) 2-10 (15) 
cm broad, plane or depressed with an uplifted, often wavy or lobed margin that is often 
more highly developed on one side than the other; surface moist or dry but not viscid, 
smooth or breaking up into minute scales, light purplish to purplish-tan to olive-brown, 
olive-buff, tan, or yellowish-buff. Flesh thick, firm, white or buff; odor mild. UNDER- 
SIDE (fertile surface) with numerous shallow, blunt, deeply decurrent, forking veins 
or wrinkles which occasionally give it a poroid appearance; color variable but usually dull 
purple to purplish-tan or showing at least some purple tints below (near the stalk), slowly 
fading to dull ochre, tan, or buff. ST ALK(s)3-5(IO)cmlong, 1-3 cm thick, continuous with 
cap, central or off-center, often fused together below, equal or narrowed at base (if soli- 
tary), often curved; solid, firm, buff to pale purple. SPORE PRINT pale tan to pale ochre; 
spores 10-13 x 4-6.5 microns, elliptical, slightly wrinkled or warted. 
HABITAT: Scattered to gregarious, often in fused pairs or clusters, on ground under 
conifers; widely distributed in northern North America, fruiting mainly in the late summer 
and fall. It is common in the Pacific Northwest and northern California, but I have not 
seen it south of San Francisco. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and considered choice by some, but I am not particularly fond of it. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Cantharellus clavatus, this northern conifer-lover is easily 
distinguished by its overall shape (like a chopped-off, frequently lopsided club), dull 
purplish veined spore-producing surface, and growth habit in fused clusters. It is aptly 
characterized in one book as "that funny looking thing which is purplish underneath. "The 
common name, ..pig's ears," is also applied to an Ascomycete, Discina per/ata. Other 
species: G. (=PseudoCTaterellus) pseudoclavatus is said to be similar, but has smooth 
spores and favors hardwoods. It is apparently quite rare; I have not seen it. 
Gomphus floccosus group Color Plate 174 
(Scaly Chanterelle; Woolly Chanterelle) 
FRUITING BODY nearly cylindrical, soon becoming more or less trumpet- or vase- 
shaped, 5-20 cm high. CAP 3-15 cm broad, depressed and soon hollow in the center; surface 
reddish to bright orange, buffy-, oryellow-orange(but often fading! ), with large cottony or 
woolly scales, the ones at the center often recurved in age; margin often wavy or lobed. 
Flesh rather fibrous, whitish; taste mild to sour. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) milky 
white to creamy, buff, dingy yellowish, or pale ochre; with blunt, shallow, frequently 
forking, deeply decurrent veins or ridges, sometimes with a somewhat poroid appearance 
in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, continuous with cap, central or off-center, 
tapering downward, solid becoming hollow in age, white to orange or yellowish. SPORE 
PRINT ochraceous; spores 10-16 x 5-8 microns, elliptical, slightly wrinkled or warted. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or sometimes clustered on ground under conifers; 
widely distributed in northern and montane North America. Along with G. bonari (see 
comments), it is common in northern California and the Sierra Nevada in the summer, 
fall, and even spring, but like G. clavatus, it does not seem to occur on the coast south of 
San Francisco. It is also common in the Southwest, Pacific Northwest, and Rockies. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some people pronounce it delicious, but others are 
adversely affected by it (they suffer gastric upsets) and the specimens I've sampled had 
an unpleasant sour taste. Its only asset is its distinctiveness-it would be very difficult 
to confuse it with anything other than its close relatives (see comments). 
662 
CANTHARELLACEAE 
COMMENTS: Also known as Cantharellusfloccosus, this striking mushroom and its 
close relatives are easily told by their vase-shaped fruiting body with a reddish-orange to 
orange-buff scaly ca p and pallid veined exterior. The name G. bonar; has been given to the 
western variety with milky white exterior, smaller spores, tendency to grow in clusters, and 
duller, paler, or more cinnamon-colored cap; it is often common under mountain conifers. 
Another western conifer-lover, G. kauffman;;, is similar but has a tan to brown or ochre- 
tawny cap up to 35 cm broad with very prominent, brittle scales. It is sometimes common 
in northern California and the Sierra Nevada as well as in the Pacific Northwest and 
Southwest. Like G.floccosus and G. bonari, it should be eaten very cautiously if at all. 
Cantharellus subalbidus 
(White Chanterelle) 
Color Plate 179 
CAP 4-15 cm broad, plane to broadly depressed with an often wavy or irregularly lobed 
margin; surface smooth or breaking up into small scales in age, moist to dry but not viscid; 
dull white or whitish, bruising yellowish-orange to orange-brown. Flesh thick, firm, white; 
odor mild or faintly fragrant. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced, 
shallow, blunt, deeply decurrent, foldlike gills which are usually forked orveined between; 
dull white or pinkish-tinged, often staining yellowish to orange in age or where bruised. 
ST ALK2-7 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, central oroff-center, solid, 
firm, smooth, dull whitish, discoloring yellowish-orange to orange-brown in age or where 
bruised. SPORE PRINT white; spores 7-9 x 5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; known only from 
the Pacific Northwest and California. It is quite abundant under second-growth conifers 
in the late summer, fall, and winter in Washington, Oregon, and northern California, and 
I have also seen large fruitings in Idaho. In our area it fruits in the fall and early winter, but 
is only occasionally common. The best places to look for it are on the high, exposed ridges 
of our coastal mountains under tanoak and madrone or in manzanita thickets mixed with 
knobcone pine. It often grows with Armillaria ponderosa, another choice edible. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-as good as C. cibarius or even better, and like that 
species, rarely attacked by maggots. In the Pacific Northwest the buttons are firm, meaty, 
and very compact-ideal for marinating or prolonged refrigeration. Unfortunately, it is 
not nearly so common in our area and the fruiting bodies, when found, are often water- 
logged and overripe. 
COMMENTS: The white chanterellecan be mistaken fora Clilocybeor Hygrophorus, but 
the gills are distinctly "chanterellesque"-thick, shallow, blunt, and usually veined. It 
differs from the common chanterelle (c. cibarius) in itsdull whitishcolorand white spores, 
but in size and shape the two are quite similar and can even be found growing together. 
Cantharellus cibarius 
(Chanterelle) 
Color Plates 175, 177, 178 
CAP (2) 3-15 (25) cm broad, broadly convex when young, becoming plane to depressed or 
vase-shaped in age; surface smooth or occasionally cracked, not viscid; orange to bright 
golden-orange, egg-yellow, or yellow (but in dry weather or direct sunlight often bleached 
out and cracked or even greenish from algae); margin usually lobed or wavy, at first in- 
curved. Flesh thick, firm, whitish or tinged yellow to orange under the cuticle; odor mild or 
faintly fruity (like pumpkins or apricots); taste mild to somewhat peppery or occasionally 
bitter. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced to close, shallow (narrow), 
blunt, foldlike, deeply decurrent gills which are often forked or cross-veined; colored like 
cap or more often paler (but brighter if cap has faded); not fading, but sometimes 
developing dingy orange-brown stains in old age. STALK 2-10 cm long, 0 .5-3 (5) cm thick, 
 
A 
>. {'f'e 
I. 
. 
....... 
. 
.:\ '. 
'I( 
-, .. . e. 
e . 
, 
{ 
\ 
 
" 
t\ 
, 
Canthare/lus cibarius. Note the white flesh in sliced specimen (upper left) and shallow, decurrent, 
veined gills. I t varies greatly in stature and color( see color plates) and favors oak as well as conifers. 
equal or tapered downward orsometimesenlargedat base, solid, dry, firm, colored like cap 
or paler, often staining ochraceous to orange-brown. SPORE PRINT creamy or yellow in 
most forms, but pinkish in one variety; spores 7-11 )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, occurring throughout the 
north temperate zone and very common on the west coast in the fall, winter, and spring. 
In northern California and the Pacific Northwest it grows mainly with conifers, but in our 
area it favors live oaks, especially those at the edges of pastures. It hasa long growing season 
and is ajoy to find-brilliant splashes of gold against the subdued backdrop of decaying 
leaves. If you see one, probe around and you'll probably uncover more-they often hide 
under the humus. If rainfall is sufficient, successive crops are prod uced over a long period 
of time, so check your patches regularly (but don't check mine!). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-the best known wild mushroom in California, if not in 
North America. It is so plentiful and popular on the west coast that it is now being harvested 
commercially and shipped abroad or sold to restaurants and markets. A few tips for the 
uninitiated: Chanterelles should always be cooked as they are somewhat fibrous raw. Pick 
selectively-firm specimens will keep in the refrigerator for a week, whereas waterlogged 
individuals will rot rapidly and cook up slimy. Even firm ones have a high water content 
and should be sauteed slowly and thoroughly in an open pan. You waste them if you can't 
taste them, so don't just mix them in with a bunch of other vegetables. They are best in 
simple dishes that highlight their delica te fla vor and fruity fragrance-cream of chanterelle 
soup is a traditional favorite. On the west coast chanterelles are virtually free of maggots, 
an asset keenly appreciated by those who hunt them- but they're often full of dirt, a quality 
deeply detested by those who have to clean them! (If your "chanterelles" are pristine and 
wormy, they may not be chanterelles!). Curiously, it's just the opposite in the eastern 
United States, where they are usually quite spotless, but often lunched on by maggots! 
Imported chanterelles can be purchased in small tins at delicatessens-for an outrageous 
price, of course. They are low in protein but high in vitamin A. Attempts to cultivate 
them commercially have not been successfuL 
COMMENTS: Cantharellus cibarius is the proud possessor of a plethora of popular 
names-more than any other mushroom with the possible exception of Boletusedulis. The 
best known are chanterelle and girolle (both French) and Pfifferling (German). From 
region to region the chanterelle varies considerably in size, stature, color, and fruiting 
habits (several forms have been described), but is easily identified by its yellow-orange cap 
663 
664 
CANTHARELLACEAE 
and "primitive" gills (blunt, thick, shallow, veined or forking, and fold like rather than 
bladelike). The firm whitish flesh and wavy cap margin are also characteristic. On the west 
coast it fruits in cool weather and is often very large and thick-stemmed (one pound 
specimens are not uncommon), with an orange cap, faintly fruity odor, and pale, copiously 
veined gills (although a smaller. slimmer, cleaner form grows under Sitka spruce). In 
eastern North America it is commonest in the summer and is usually much smaller (caps 
average 3-6 cm broad) and often yellower, with a slender, well-developed stalk and little 
or no odor (see Color Plate 175). Also, the gills may be less "primitive" (deeper, with 
thinner edges and few if any cross-veins, as shown in Color Plate 177), and are sometimes 
brightly colored. In the southern Rocky Mountains, on the other hand, the fruiting bodies 
are often packed closely together and are small and stubby, with bleached-out caps 
(if growing in sunlight) and brilliant yellow to yellow-orange gills. 
Mushrooms most likely to be mistaken for the chanterelle include the false chanterelle 
(Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca), various waxy caps (Camarophyllus pratensis, Hygrocybe 
flavescens, etc.). Lactarius alnicola, Leucopaxillus albissimus, the Gymnopilus 
spectabilis group, Hypomyces lactifluorum, and the jack-o-Iantern mushrooms 
(Omphalotus species). The latter are poisonous, but have brightly colored flesh and thin, 
crowded, unforked, bladelike ("true") gills, and usually grow in clusters on or near wood. 
Except for the Hypomyces, which is a parasitized gilled mushroom, the others also have 
bladelike gills. (It is sometimes said that true chanterelles have "false" gills, while false 
chanterelles have "true" gills.) Aside from the many variations within C. cibarius, there is 
C. Jormosus, a northern conifer-lover with a convex, yellow to brownish cap and pinkish- 
tinged gills, and three similar edible species with a smooth to only slightly wrinkled 
fertile surface. These are common in eastern North American and are often mistaken for 
C. cibarius. The most common and widespread of the three, C. later;t;us (=Craterellus 
cantharellus) has a yellow-orange to pinkish-orange fruiting body; C. confluens has a 
yellower, often compound fruiting body and a tropical-subtropical distribution; C. 
odoratus (=Craterellus odoratus) is a gorgeous trumpet-shaped, yellow-orange-capped 
southern species that is usually strongly fragrant and cespitose (clustered). C. lateritius 
has also been reported (but not verified) from the Pacific N orthwes.t. 
Cantharellus c;nnabar;nus (Red Chanterelle) Color Plate 181 
CAP 1-4 (7) cm broad, convex to nearly plane at first, plane to shallowly funnel-shaped 
in age, the margin often lobed or wavy and often remaining incurved for a long time; 
surface more or less smooth, dry, bright red to red-orange to flamingo-pink when fresh, 
often paler (or even whitish) in age or sunlight. Flesh thin, whitish below, usually tinged 
cap color above; odor typically mild, taste mild to peppery. UNDERSIDE(fertilesurface) 
with thick, shallow, blunt, decurrent gills which are fairly close to well-spaced, usually 
forked or veined, and colored like the fresh cap or slightly paler (or pinker). STALK 
1-4 (6) cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, often curved, solid, firm, dull 
red or colored like fresh cap (or pinker), the base sometimes whitish. SPORE PRINT 
usually pinkish-tinged (pinkish-cream); spores 6-9 (II) )( 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or clustered on ground in woods or at their edges, open 
areas, in beds of moss, etc.; fairly common in eastern North America (especially south- 
ward) in the summer and early fall. I have seen large fruitings under oak and pine in Michi- 
gan, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina. It apparently does not occur in the West, but is 
to be looked for in Arizona (one unverified report places it in the Pacific Northwest). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good, though delicate in flavor. It sometimes grows with 
C. cibarius, and the two species make colorful companions in the same dish. 
COMMENTS: The modest size and bright pinkish-red to orange-red color make this 
chanterelle practically unmistakable. It is vaguely reminiscent of a waxy cap (Hygrocybe), 
but the blunt, veined or forked gills distinguish it. 
CANTHARELLUS 
665 
Cantharellus ;nfund;buliform;s group Color Plate 180 
(Funnel Chanterelle; Winter Chanterelle) 
CAP 1-6 (11» cm broad, convex to plane with a depressed center or becoming broadly 
depressed to funnel-shaped (often with a perforated or hollow center) in age; surface 
smooth to slightly wrinkled or finely fibrillose-scaly, not viscid, dark brown to brown to 
dingy yellow-brown, sometimes fading to paler brown or the yellowish background color 
becoming dominant as it dries or ages; margin usually wavy or irregularly lobed. -Flesh 
thin, rather tough and pliant, colored like ca p or paler; odor mild or slightly fragrant; taste 
mild or bitterish. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with shallow (narrow), thick, blunt, well- 
spaced, decurrent, forked or veined gills; pale yellow or pale orange-yellow becoming 
grayish, brownish, or violet-tinted in age. ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 0.3-1 (2) cm thick, equal or 
tapered at either end, smooth, often grooved and/ or flattened, becoming hollow; orange- 
yellow to yellow, duller in age (dingy yellow or yellow-brown to grayish-orange). SPORE 
PRINT creamy-buff to yellowish (or white in one form); spores 9-12 x 6.5-8 microns, 
elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious in moss and humus and on rotting wood in cold, damp 
coniferous forests and bogs throughout northern North America; fruiting from late 
summer through the winter, common. The farthest south I've seen it is in Mendocino 
County, California, in December, January, and February. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but small and thin-fleshed. Some people relish it nevertheless, 
and in Finland it is harvested commercially. 
COMMENTS: This characteristic feature of northern bogs and cold coniferous forests 
can be recognized by its modest size, dark brown to dingy yellow-brown cap, yellowish to 
gray or purple-tinged gills, and slender, hollow, yellow to yellow-orange stalk. The gills 
have a somewhat waxy look (leading to possible confusion with Hygrocybe and Camaro- 
phyllus), but are characteristically "chanterellesque": thick, blunt, shallow, and con- 
spicuously forked or veined and/ or wavy. The name C. tubaeformis has been used for 
the white-spored variety, but many cantharellologists treat it as a synonym for C. infun- 
dibuliformis. In eastern North America there are numerous other small, edible, hollow- 
stemmed chanterelles, including: C. ignicolor, very similar but with a brighter cap when 
fresh ( orange to yellow-orange to ochraceous-ta wny or salmon-buff), growing under both 
hardwoods and conifers; C. minor, small and entirely yellow to orange ( including the gills), 
favoring hardwoods; and C. xanthopus (also called C. lutescens), widely distributed 
(also found in the West), similar to C. infundibuliformis in cap color or brighter, but with 
a smooth to slightly veined (rather than gilled) orangish to yellowish underside. 
Craterellus c;nereus (Black Chanterelle) 
FRUITING BODY more or less funnel- or vase-shaped but not tubular; 3-12 cm high. 
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, shallowly to deeply depressed, surface smooth or minutely scaly- 
scurfy, not viscid; black when moist, becoming dark gra yish-brown inage or as it dries out; 
margin usually wavy, lobed, or torn. Flesh thin, tough, colored more or less like cap. 
UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced, shallow, blunt, foldlike gills which 
fork frequently near the cap margin and/ or have cross-veins; bluish-black becoming 
bluish-gray to gra y, or paler from spore dust. ST ALK 2-8 cm long, 0 .4-1.3 cm thick, nearly 
equal or tapering downward, central or off-center, tough, hollow except at base, colored 
like cap or underside. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, 
smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in groups or clusters in mixed woods and under oaks; 
widely distributed but not common. In our area it fruits in the winter and early spring, often 
in the company of C. cornucopioides, or a few days before it. 
": 1 '\ 
"tt 
, t. 
" 
--*"': 
,. 
. 
 
, 
, 
, ,. 
" 
" 
.. \ 
. ;.., ,. 
I 
{ c 
,. 
Craterel/us cinereus, a bluish-gray to black species with veins or shallow gills on underside of cap. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delectable-as good or even better than C. cornucopioides. It is 
delicious simply sauteed in butter. 
COMMENTS: This species, which has also passed under the name Cantharelluscinereus, 
closely mimics its commoner cousin, Craterel/us cornucopioides. but has primitive gills 
on the underside of the cap and is not as brown in dry weather. Other species: C. caeruleo- 
fuscus of eastern North America is similar, but has smaller spores; C. foetidus, also 
eastern, has a sickeningly sweet odor, veined fertile surface, and thicker stalk (1-3 
cm thick at apex); C. (=Pseudocraterellusj sinuosus has a gray to dark grayish-brown cap, 
slightly larger spores, and a veined or copiously wrinkled (but not gilled) underside that 
is grayish at first but acquires a distinct yellowish or ochre tinge as the spores mature; it 
is edible and widely distributed, but rather rare (Craig Mitchell has found it in mixed 
woods near Felton, California, in February). 
Craterellus cornucopioides 
(Horn of Plenty) 
Color Plate 182 
FRUITING BODY 3-14 cm high, tubular becoming trumpet- or funnel-shaped. CAP 
2-8 (10) cm broad, hollowat the center with the marginatfirst decurved (folded down), then 
spreading out and becoming wavy, split, orlacerated(sometimes witha lacy appearance or 
convoluted to form small "suction cups"); surface not viscid, usually minutely scaly or 
scurfy, grayish-black to very dark brown or black when moist, paler (brown to grayish- 
brown) when dry (but one form sometimes developing a yellowish margin or 
yellowish blotches). Flesh thin, brittle but tough, colored like cap Or paler; odor pleasant. 
UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) smooth to uneven or with slight, deeply decurrent wrinkles 
(but not gills); colored like cap but usually paler Or grayer, in age or dry weather with a 
whitish to yellowish or buff coating of spore dust. STALK 1-5 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, 
continuous with cap and tapering downward, central or offenter, hollow except at very 
base, tough, often twisted; colored like cap or underside. SPORE PRINT whitish to buff 
or pale yellow; spores 8-11 )( 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Scattered or in groups, clumps, Or lacy clusters in woods; widely distributed. 
It is common in our area in the winter and spring under hardwoods( live oak, tanoak, man- 
zanita, madrone, huckleberry), but farther north it fruits in the late fall under conifers. 
South of San Francisco it rarely appears before Christmas, usually peaks at the same time 
that the fetid adder's tongue blooms,andmayfruitonintoApril. IneasternNorthAmerica 
666 
1 
-: 
.,. 
\ 
'- 
-. 
Cratere//us cornucopioides. This delicious mushroom is easily recognized by its dark trumpetlike 
fruiting body. The undersides of these mature specimens are dusted white or buff by spores. Note 
complete absence of gills. 
it is largely replaced by C.fallax (see comments), which also occurs in our area. Though 
terrestrial, it often fruits near fallen branches or at the bases of trees or manzanita burls. 
EDIBILITY: One of my fifteen "five favorite flavorful fleshy fungalfructifications." Like 
myself, it is thin, tough, and dark, and like myself, it goes largely unappreciated. It is 
forever being passed up in favor of the larger, fleshier, more colorful and impressive types, 
yet its flavor is superb and its potential unlimited. It is partly to blame for this sad state of 
affairs, for its appearance is admittedly drab and rather somber, and it shuns attention, 
blending unobtrusively into the dark, secretive situations where it thrives. 
But though it takes an accomplished eye to detect its presence in the woods (from the top 
it looks like a hole in the ground), anyone can detect its presence in a dish-for it cooks up 
black, announcing itself with unmistakable earthy authenticity. It can play any culinary 
position with equal finesse, from first base to second fiddle, enhancing practically any dish, 
be it soup, souffle, or sauce. Like its more popular cousin the chanterelle, it is not often 
Cratere//us cornucopioides (right) often grows in clusters, blending into its surroundings so 
uncannily that you have to search for black holes in the ground, as shown on left (actually a photo of 
Cratere//us fal/ax. essentially the same but for its salmon-tinged spores). 
'* 
,   
). 
 
.... 
"" , 
IIa. 
-.. 
l, . 
.. 
.\ '? .... 
, ? 
. . i " 
 
668 
CANTHARELLACEAE 
inhabited by maggots. Dried and powdered it has a cheesy odor and is known, quite 
appropriately, as ..Poor People's Truffle." 
CO MMENTS: This cryptically-colored fungus usually occurs in large groups. It is hard to 
pick out in the forest gloom, but once you locate one, you're bound to find more. In France 
it is sometimes called trumpet de mort (trumpet of death)-a tribute to its somber ap- 
pearance, not its edibility. Actually, it is quite lovely when fresh-fully-grown specimens 
look more like black or brown petunias than anything else, and clusters often have a lacy 
look. The horn of plenty that is so common in the summer and fall in eastern North Amer- 
ica, C. fallax, looks and tastes identical but has a salmon- or yellow-tinted underside in 
age and longer, salmon or ochre-yellow spores; it also occurs in California. Otherwise, 
there is little that C. cornucopioides can be confused with-the dark trumpet-shaped 
fruiting body with smooth or slightly wrinkled exterior and hollow center is unique. C. 
cinereus (the black chanterelle) is somewhat similar but has primitive gills; Polyozellus 
multiplex is also similar but is dark blue or violet-tinted, while C. sinuosus (see comments 
under C. cinereus) has yellowish-ochre spores and a more copiously wrinkled or veined 
hymenium (underside). Several Ascomycetes are black, but not trumpet-shaped 
(Plectania species are cup-shaped; Urnula is urn-shaped). Thelephora terrestris is 
sometimes funnel-shaped but is thinner, smaller, and purple-brown rather than gray or 
black. Occasionally hollow, deformed, club like specimens of C. cornucopioides occur 
alongside normal ones. These are identical in color and edible. Other species: C. calyculus 
of eastern North America is one of several similar but much smaller and thinner( cap less 
than 2 cm broad, stalk 1-3 mm thick), solid-stemmed, mostly southern species. 
Polyozellus multiplex (Blue Chanterelle) Color Plate 183 
FRUITING BODY usually compound-in compact, clustered masses 5-15 cm high and 
up to I meter broad (but usually smaller). CAP(s) 2-10 cm broad, spoon-shaped to fan- 
shaped, often centrally depressed and lop-sided; surface dull purple to purple-gray to 
black, deep blue, or frosted blue; margin usually irregularly lobed or wavy. Flesh deep 
violet to bluish-black, soft and rather brittle; odor mild or fragrant. UNDERSIDE(fertile 
surface) nearly smooth or more often with shallow, crowded wrinkles or veins or at times 
nearly poroid (but lacking gills); colored more or less like cap or slightly paler. ST ALK(s) 
2-5 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, central to off-center or lateral, usually short and often fused at 
base; colored more or less like cap or underside, often grooved; solid or becoming hollow. 
SPORE PRINT white; spores (4) 6-8.5 x 5.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical, warted 
or appearing angular. Cap tissue staining olive-black in KOH. 
HABIT A T: Clustered on ground under conifers (usually spruce and fir) or aspen in late 
summer and fall; known only from northern and montane North America. It is usually 
listed as rare, but is locally common in the Rocky Mountains. I have seen it in the Oregon 
Cascades and it occurs very rarely in northern California. It was originally described 
from Maine, and the color photograph was taken near Santa Fe, New Mexico, in an 
aspen-spruce forest, in August. 
ED IBILITY: Edible, and according to some sources, delicious. I have tasted it only once- 
the texture was reminiscent of Craterellus, but the flavor was far inferior. 
COMMENTS: This strikingly beautiful mushroom is easily told by its unusual deep 
violet to bluish-black color and clustered growth habit. It might be mistaken at first glance 
for a Craterellus, but the caps are spoon- to fan-shaped rather than tubular or trumpetlike. 
The warty-angular spores suggest a closer relationship to the genus Thelephora (or per- 
haps to the teeth fungi) than to other chanterelles, but it has traditionally been treated 
as a chanterelle because of its superficial resemblance. 
Jelly Fungi 
669 
o 
c::J 
TREMELLALES & Allies 
spores 
Small to medium-sized fungi found mostly on wood. FRU ITING BODY typically gelatinous or 
rubbery when fresh; variously shaped, but most often lobed, convoluted, or bloblike. SPORE 
BEARING SU RF ACE smooth, warty, lobed, or with small spmes, covering the outer or lower 
surfaces of the fruiting body. SPORE PRINT white to yellowish, but difficult to obtain. Spores 
smooth, sometimes septate. Basidia septate or forked. 
JELL Y fungi differ fundamentally from other Basidiomycetes in the structure of their 
basidia, which are partitioned (septate) or forked rather than simple and clublike. The 
rust and smut fungi also have partitioned basidia, but are notconsidered to be mushrooms. 
Although the basidia are microscopic, jelly fungi can usually be told in the field by the 
gelatinous Uellylike) or rubbery texture that gives them their name. The most familiar 
types are collectively called "witch's butter." They have lobed to convoluted or rather 
amorphous (shapeless) fruiting bodies that look-at least to the hungry mushroom hunter 
staggering home under a basketful of boletes-like lumps of melting butter. Other jelly 
fungi have a cap and stalk, still others are cuplike, and a few are tough, branched, and coral- 
like. The spore-bearing surface ranges from smooth to veined, lobed, or in one case, 
toothed, and is always exposed (hence the jelly fungi are classed here as Hymenomycetes). 
The design of the basidium (see illustration) forms the basis for dividing the jelly fungi 
into three separate groups. The Tremellales, which are the most common, have obliquely 
or longitudinally septate basidia that look like hot cross buns when viewed from above, the 
Auriculariales have transversely septate basidia (i.e., with cross walls), and the Dacrymy- 
cetales have Y -shaped basidia that look like tuning forks. As these distinctions are micro- 
scopic, the three groups are treated as one unit in this book. 
Different types of basidia in the jelly fungi. 
Left to right: longitudinally septate 
(Tremellales); Y -shaped (Dacrymy- 
cetales); and transversely septate (Auri- 
culariales). 
Most of the jelly fungi grow on rotten wood. They thrive in cool wet weather, shrinking 
down to almost nothing when it dries out, then swelling up again as soon as it rains. None 
are known to be poisonous, but most are very watery and flavorless. Some species, 
however, can be marinated, candied, or even eaten raw, and in the Orient two types are 
very popular: a translucent white species called Treme/lafuciformis. and the brown to 
black "tree ears" or "cloud ears" (Auricularia). The latter can be purchased in dried form 
in many specialty stores. Eight jelly fungi are described here and several others are keyed 
out. Treme/la mesenterica is the most common of the lot, at least in our area. 
Key to the Tremellales & Allies 
I. Fruiting body brightlycolored (yellow, orange, pink, red, or greenish) when fresh, but sometimes 
losing its color in rainy weather or old age ........................................ 2 
I. Not as above; fruiting body white, grayish, black, reddish-purple, brown, yellow-brown, etc. 9 
2. Fruiting body spatula-shaped to funnel-shaped (but with one side usually incised or split), 
pink to orange or red; stalk usually present ............... Ph/ogiotis he/vel/oides, p.672 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
670 TREMELLALES & ALLIES 
3. Fruiting body erect, either simple and clublike (unbranched) or antlerlike or branched, orwitha 
cap and stalk ................................................................ 4 
3. Not as above; fruiting body cup-shaped to cone-shaped, cushion-shaped, irregularly lobed and 
contorted, or amorphous (bloblike) ............................................. 6 
4. Fruiting body with a yellow-orange to greenish "head" or cap ...... (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
4. Not as above; fruiting body simple and unbranched or antlerlike to coral-like . . . . . . . . .. 5 
5. Fruiting body branched, usually more than 15 mm high .......... Calocera viscosa, p. 674 
5. Fruiting body unbranched (but may be clustered), or if sparingly branched then typically less 
than 15 mm high ............................. Caloceracornea(see C. viscosa. p. 674) 
6. Fruiting body cup-shaped to cone-shaped (witha narrowed base or point of attachment); usually 
found in the spring (often near melting snow) ...... Guepiniopsis a/pinus & others, p. 674 
6. Not as above; fruiting body bloblike to cushion-shaped to irregularly lobed or brainlike .. 7 
7. Fruiting body 1-5 mm broad, drop-like, usually growing in large masses or rows ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Dacrymyces deliquescens (see Treme//a mesenterica. p. 673) 
7. Not as above; fruiting body usually larger ......................................... 8 
8. Typically growing on hardwoods; bone-hard when dry; basidia shaped like hot-cross buns in 
top view ............................................. Tremella mesenterica, p. 673 
8. Usually growing on conifers; collapsing when dry, but with a tough whitish basal point of 
attachment; basidia Y -shaped ... Dacrymyces palmatus (see Treme//a mesenterica. p. 673) 
9. Fruiting body translucent to whitish, grayish, or brownish, with a cap (and usually a stalk), 
the underside of the cap lined with tiny spines or "teeth" Pseudohydnum gelatinosum. p. 671 
9. Not as above; underside of cap lacking minute spines or "teeth" ...................... 10 
10. Fruiting body tough, erect, and usually branched (coral-like), white or pallid; found mainly on 
ground under hardwoods in eastern North America ............................... II 
10. Not as above; usually found on wood or plants .................................... 12 
II. Branches few and very thick, blunt, hollow, and somewhat gelatinous ... Tremella reticulata 
II. Not as above; texture very tough, branches often flattened ............................. 
...... Tremellodendronpallidum& T. candidum(see Treme//odendropsis tuberosa. p. 643) 
12. Fruiting body black (or nearly black) when fresh .................................. 13 
12. Not as above (but fruiting body may be dark brown and/ or may blacken as it dries out) . 14 
13. Fruiting body small and cushion-shaped, warty, or lobed, but often fusing to form large con- 
tinuous patches or sheets; growing on dead hardwoods ......... Exidia glandulosa, p. 672 
13. Not as above; fruiting body broadly top-shaped to cuplike and not fusing to form sheets .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Pezizacaceae& Allies. p. 817) 
14. Fruiting body a gelatinous mass of wavy or leafy lobes upt020 cm broad (or sometimes larger), 
some shade of brown; spores borne on basidia ................ TremellaJoliacea, p.673 
14. Not as above (if brown and leafy, then fruiting body thin and rubbery instead of gelatinous) 15 
15. Fruiting body reddish to brown or dark brown and bracketlike to cuplike, ear-shaped, broadly 
top-shaped, or occasionally forming a cluster of earlike lobes ....................... 16 
15. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
16. Fruiting body cup-shaped to broadly top-shaped, reddish to purplish to brown or dark brown; 
flesh thick or thin; usually on hardwoods; spores borne in asci ..... (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
16. Fruiting body bracketlike to earlike or cuplike (or with several earlike lobes); flesh thin; on 
hardwoods or conifers; spores borne on basidia ..... Auricularia auricula & others, p. 675 
17. Fruiting body containing whitish granules; overall color whitish becoming pinkish- to reddish- 
brown or vinaceous-brown ................. Exidia nucleata (see E. glandulosa. p. 672) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Fruiting body white or pallid when fresh (may be tinged tan in age) ................... 19 
18. Fruiting body not white or pallid ............................................... 21 
19. Fruiting body gelatinous ortough and usually hollow; growing on herbaceous stems and other 
vegetable matter in eastern North America ...................... Tremella concrescens 
19. Not as above; usually growing on wood; widespread ............................... 20 
TREMELLALES & ALLIES 
671 
20. Fruiting body lobed or convoluted, 1.5-7 cm broad (or merging to form larger patches up to 
12 cm or more); spores elliptical; found in the southern United States and warmer parts ofthe 
world (including the Orient) .................................... TremellaJucijormis 
20. Not as above; smaller and/ or spores sausage-shaped . Exidia alba (see E. g/andu/osa. p. 672) 
21. Fruiting body more or less brownish-yellow and top-shaped or cone-shaped .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. Exidia recisa (see Guepiniopsis a/pinus. p. 674) 
21. Fruiting body bloblike to lobed, convoluted, or brainlike and flesh-colored to brownish, 
yellowish, or buff. . . . . . . . . . . .. Tremella encephala & T.Jrondosa (see T.fo/iacea. p. 673) 
Pseudohydnum gelatinosum (T oothed Jelly Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY flexible and flabby, rubbery-gelatinous, more or less tongue-shaped 
to spoon-shaped or fan-shaped (with a cap and usually a stalk). CAP 1-6 (7.5) cm broad; 
surface minutely roughened or downy to nearly smooth, not viscid; translucent white to 
watery gray or bluish-gray, or sometimes dingy brownish (or spotted brown). Flesh 
rubbery-gelatinous. UNDERSIDE lined with small pallid spines or "teeth" that are 0.5-3 
(5) mm long. STALK up to 6 cm long, usually lateral, continuous with cap and similar in 
color and texture. SPORE PRINT white; spores borne on the ""teeth," 5-8.5 microns, 
round or nearly round, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate, elliptical to nearly round. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on rotting logs, twigs, and humus under 
conifers; widely distributed. It is sporadically common in our area in the late fall and winter, 
especially in dank, dark, damp situations under Douglas-fir. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It is said to be fairly good with honey and cream-but what isn't? It 
can also be marinated for use in salads. The texture is interesting, the flavor nonexistent. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Tremellodon gelatinosum, this denizen of dank places is 
one of my fifty "five favorite fleshy fungal fructifications." The rubbery or flabby tongue- 
shaped fruiting bodies with small "teeth" on the underside are as attractive as they are 
unique, and look funnier than they do fungal-in fact, it is hard to take them seriously! 
(They remind me of the "Creepy Crawlers" I used to buy at the dime store with my lunch 
money.) The small teeth resemble those of the teeth fungi (Hydnaceae), hence the name 
Pseudohydnum, which means "false tooth fungus." Specimens on the west coast tend to 
have a well-developed, often vertical stalk whereas those in eastern North America tend 
to have little or no stalk, especially when growing from the sides of logs. 
Pseudohydnum ge/at;nosum. Underside (left) is lined with tiny "teeth." Cap (right) is whitish to 
grayish or brown. Entire fruiting body is rubbery. 
" 
,, 
t' 
.; 
, 
 
. j 
".. j 
 
.. . 
'-# / 
-- 
t' 
..' '" 
':. 
. W ..J 
'.. 
r 
. 
"I 
" 
. 
';. « 
- . '- 
. 't ;.. '60, . 
1..;."" . ...- 
. 
. 
"- 
-,  
 
.... 
Left: A mature, flabby specimen of Phlogiotis helve/loides. Note how it is split down one side. Right: 
Exidia glandulosa. whose small fruiting bodies often fuse to form black rubbery or gelatinous sheets. 
Phlogiotis helvelloides (Apricot Jelly Mushroom) 
FRUITING BODY flabby or rubbery, with a cap and stalk; spatula-shaped to somewhat 
funnel-shaped, but usually indented or split down one side; 2-8 (18) cm high. CAP 1-7 (10) 
cm broad, pale to deep rosy-pink to reddish-orange, apricot ,or salmon-colored; surface 
more or less smooth, margin often wavy, Flesh rubbery to somewhat gelatinous. 
UNDERSIDE smooth to faintly veined or coarsely wrinkled, colored like cap or paler. 
ST ALK 1-6 cm long, off-center or lateral but usually vertical (upright); continuous with 
cap, with the same color and texture, or the base whitish. SPORE PRINT white; spores 
borne on underside of cap, 9-12 (16) x 4-6,5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth. Basidia 
longitudinally septate. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on ground, debris, and rotten wood under conifers; 
widely distributed, but uncommon in most regions. In California I have seen impressive 
fruitings in Yosemite National Park and the Trinity Alps, but have found it only once in 
our area, near Big Sur. The fruiting bodies do not decay readily and seem to like cool 
weather (either late in the season or in the spring). 
EDIBILITY: Highly prized by some people-presumably for its color and texture-for it 
has no flavor that I can detect. It can be eaten raw in salads, pickled, or candied , but should 
not be cooked because of its high water content. Larry Stickney says if it is sucked on a 
hot day it "cools you right down." 
COMMENTS: The pink to orange color, rubbery texture (similar to that of Pseudo- 
hydnum gelalinosum), and overall shape-which is sometimes reminiscent of a miniature 
calla lily-identify this fetching little fungus. Actually, the word "little" is not always 
appropriate, as specimens 7 inches (18 cm) high have been reported by Sam Ristich ofN ew 
York. These apparently developed over a period of two months and had smaller ones 
riding "piggy-back" on top of them! The normal size range, however, is 1-3 inches high. 
Exidia glandulosa (Black Witch's Butter; Black Jelly Roll) 
FRUITING BODY flabby or gelatinous, beginning as a pallid or translucent blister but 
soon becoming cushion-shaped to irregularly lobed; reddish-black to olive-black soon 
becoming jet-black (or black from beginning); 1-2 cm broad but often fusing with others 
to form rows or masses up to 50 cm long; upper surface smooth to minutely roughened or 
warty. Flesh gelatinous, black. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT whitish; spores borne on 
the lobes, warts, or wrinkles, 10-16 x 3-5 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth. Basidia longi- 
tudinally septate. 
672 
EXIDIA 
673 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious or in fused rows and masses on rotting hard- 
wood logs and branches; widely distri buted. It is fairly common in our area throughout the 
mushroom season, but is usually overlooked because of its dark color. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, and like most of us, likely to remain so. 
COMMENTS: This sinister-looking black jelly fungus can be confused with little else. 
Individual fruiting bodies are quite small but usually fuse to form rows or sheets that look 
like black gelatin or slime. The frequently roughened spore-bearing surface and sausage- 
shaped spores help distinguish the genus Exidia from Tremella. Other species: E. alba is 
small and whitish; E. nucleata varies from white or colorless to pinkish- or vinaceous- 
brown, but is sprinkled with small white granules or "nuclei." Both are widely distributed. 
Tremellafoliacea (Brown Witchs Butter) Color Plate 173 
FRUITING BODY flabby or gelatinous when moist, bone-hard when dry; 2.5-20 cm 
broad or more, typically consisting of a complicated mass of wavy or leaflike folds, lobes, 
and convolutions; reddish-cinnamon to brown, vinaceous-brown. or tinged purple; often 
paler when waterlogged. Flesh gelatinous. STALK absent. SPORE PRINT white to 
yellowish; spores produced on the upright lobes, 7-9 (13) )( 6-9 microns, round to broadly 
elliptical, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or several on hardwood stumps, logs, and fallen branches (occasion- 
ally on conifers as well); widely distributed. In our area it is not uncommon on oak in the late 
fall, winter, and early spring, but is not nearly as numerous as T. mesenterica. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless, but mostly water. As for the flavor-well, I once encountered an 
Asian-American gathering this species and T. mesenterica in a live oak woodland. "How 
do you prepare them?" I said. "With garlic and soy sauce," she said. "And how do they 
taste?" I said. Slight hesitation. "Like garlic and soy sauce," she said. 
COMMENTS: This brown version of T. mesenterica is our largest Tremella and is quite 
striking and seaweed-like when fresh. The fruiting body is never cuplike or earlike as in 
Auricularia auricula, and is much more gelatinous. T. jrondosa is a somewhat similar 
yellowish to buff species. T. encephala is also similar but smaller (1-6 cm) and flesh-colored 
to brownish. It is thought to be parasitic on Stereum, a wood-inhabiting bracket or parch- 
ment fungus. Most Tremellas, in fact, are frequently found withStereum, suggesting some 
kind of relationship between the two. The 10 bed, brainlike, or convoluted fruiting bodies of 
Tremellas are reflected in their names: foliacea means "leaflike"; mesenterica means 
"middle intestine"; and encephala means "brainlike." 
Tremella mesenterica 
(Witchs Butter) 
Color Plate 170 
FR UITIN G BO D Y flabby or gelatinous when fresh, bone-hard when dry; 1-10 cm broad, 
typically consisting of several to many convoluted or brainlike lobes or folds, but in wet 
weather or old age often bloblike or amorphous; clear yellow to golden-yellow to bright 
orange, paler (to nearly colorless) when old or waterlogged. Flesh gelatinous. STALK 
absent. SPORE PRINT pallid to yellow; spores produced on the upright lobes or folds, 
7-18)( 6-14 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups on hardwood sticks, logs, etc.; very common and wide- 
spread. In our area it favors dead oak and fruits throughout the mushroom season, often 
on the same branches as Stereum species. Shrivelled up specimens are inconspicuous, but 
usually revive in wet weather. In colder climates it may appear during winter thaws. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless but flavorless (see comments on edibility of T. foliacea)-it is 
mostly water. My one attempt at cooking it was a failure: most of it evaporated! 
674 
TREMELLALES & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: Also known as T. lutescens, this fungus and its look-alikes (see below) are 
a familiar sight in rainy weather across the continent. At first the fruiting body is lobed or 
brainlike and relatively firm, but as it swells with water it often loses its original shape and 
looks like a dollop of melting butter on a log. Also common is Dacrymyces palmatus, 
which closely mimics T. mesenter;ca but is slightly smaller (1-6 cm broad), tends to be 
oranger in color, favors conifers, and has a small, tough, whitish, basal point of attachment. 
The resemblance is only superficial, however, for Dacrymyces species have V-shaped 
basidia and long narrow spores that develop cross walls, while Tremella species have 
longitudinally septate basidia and simple (non-septate) spores. Other species: T.Jrondosa 
is buff to yellowish but larger and leafier (like T.foliacea); D. deliquescens is a small (1-5 
mm broad), yellow-orange to reddish species that grows on decaying wood, usually in 
large masses or rows. Like most jelly fungi, the above species are not worth eating. 
Guepiniopsis alpinus (Alpine Jelly Cone; Poor Man's Gumdrop) 
FRUITING BODY flabby or gelatinous; top- to cone-shaped or sometimes cup-shaped, 
0.3-2.5 cm broad; yellow to orange or occasionally reddish-orange; surface smooth. Flesh 
gelatinous. STALK present only as a small, narrowed point of attachment. SPORE 
PRINT yellowish; spores borne on the concave surface of the cone, 11-18 )( 4-6 microns, 
sausage-shaped, developing 34 cross walls. Basidia Y -shaped. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on coniferous logs, stumps, branches, twigs, etc.; 
fruiting in the spring (usually as or just after the snow melts) at higher elevations from the 
Rocky Mountains westward (rarely in the summer or fall); sometimes abundant. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably consumable, but of negligible value. 
COMMENTS: The golden cone-shaped fruiting body and fondness for dead conifers 
typify this omnipresent "snowbank" mushroom of western mountains. The gelatinous 
texture distinguishes it from the cup fungi, and the gumdrop-like fruiting body separates 
it from Tremella and Dacrymyces. The Y -shaped basidia place it in the Dacrymycetales, 
alongside Dacrymyces and Ca/ocera. G. chrysocomus is a closely related species with a 
yellow cup-shaped fruiting body, larger spores, and a preference for hardwoods. Exidia 
recisa resembles G. a/pinus in sha pe, but has longitudinally septate basidia and is brownish- 
yellow in color; it grows on hardwoods and is exceptionally abundant in some regions 
(especially the southern United States). 
Calocera viscosa (Staghorn Jelly Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY erect, branched (antler- or coral-like); 2-7 (10) cm high, 1-3 (5) cm 
wide. BRANCHES tough, pliant, usually somewhat viscid, the tips usually forked (with 
Left: Guepiniopsis a/pinus looks like a gumdrop. Right: Ca/ocera viscoa. (Herb Saylor) 
,... 
, 
" 
... 
\ - 
,\ 
CALOCERA 
675 
2-3 tips); bright yellow to deep yellow to orange. ST ALK presentasa yellow to whitish base 
or "trunk", often rooting. Flesh tough but often somewhat gelatinous. SPORE PRINT 
dingy yellowish to ochraceous; spores produced on the branches, 9-14 x 3-5 microns, 
elongated-elliptical to sausage-shaped, smooth, developing one cross wall at maturity. 
Basidia Y -shaped. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on or near coniferous logs, stumps, 
roots, and debris; widely distributed. I have found it several times in our coastal pine 
forests in the winter and spring, but never in quantity. 
EDIBILITY: Inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: This dainty little jelly fungus looks like a coral mushroom (especially 
Clavulinopsis corniculala) and is keyed out as one. However, it is usually viscid and has 
Y -shaped basidia, plus it typically grows on or near wood. Another widespread species, 
C. cornea, is smaller (up to 15 mm high), yellow, and club like or very sparingly branched; 
it grows in groups or clusters on twigs and branches of both hard woods and conifers. The 
forked basidia place Calocera in the Dacrymycetales. 
Auricularia auricula (Wood Ear; Tree Ear) 
FRUITING BODY rubbery to pliant or flabby to somewhat gelatinous when fresh, hard 
when dry; 2-15 cm broad; cup-shaped to ear-shaped or sometimes with several earlike 
lobes originating from a central point of attachment. Outer surface sterile, often 
veined or ribbed, minutely silky or with fine downy hairs, pale brown to brown to liver- 
brown, drying blackish. Inner (fertile) surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, somewhat 
gelatinous when wet, tan to yellow-brown, grayish-brown, brown, liver-brown, or tinged 
purple; blackish when dried. Flesh thin, rubbery. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPO RE 
PRINT white; spores borne on inner (usually the lower) surface, 12-18 x 4-8 microns, 
sausage-shaped, smooth. Basidia transversely septate (with 3 cross walls). 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clusters on logs, dead branches, stumps, etc. (attached 
centrally or laterally); very widely distributed on both hardwoods and conifers, and often 
common in cool weather. I have seen it in the springtime in the Cascades, but it seems to 
be rare in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but I haven't tried it. A similar but hamer speCIes, A. polytr;cha, IS 
prized in the Orient and can be purchased dried in many stores. Along with the shiitake 
(Lenrinus edodes) it is the mushroom most often served in Chinese restaurants, usually 
under the name Y ung N go or M uk N go. Dried specimens of A. auricula and A. polytricha 
are quite dark, hard, and unappetizing, but billow up like clouds when soaked in water, 
showing off their delicate curves and convolutions to great effect. 
COMMENTS: This species can be mistaken for a cup fungus, but has a more rubbery 
texture, bears its spores on basidia (a microscopic feature), and usually-but not always- 
grows with its fertile (concave) surface facing downward. Cup fungi, on the other hand, 
bear their spores in asci with the concave (fertile) surface facing upward, and usually have 
a brittle or fragile texture. Sometimes Auricularia is irregularly lobed rather than cuplike, 
and I have found old specimens which looked more like pieces of soggy seaweed than 
anything else. H;rneola aur;cula-judae is a sinister-sounding synonym. It also used to be 
called "Judas' Ear" because it was believed that when Judas' hanged himself on an elder 
tree, these ear-shaped "excrescences" were condemned to appear on elders thereafter. 
Auricularia is the most prominent genus in the Auriculariales.1t embraces several similar 
brownish species, including: A. mesenter;ca, which is more or less bracketlike with a 
hairy, concentrically zoned sterile surface and veined fertile surface; and A. del;cata, 
a striking gelatinous tropical species with large honeycomb-like pits or "pores." For a 
photo of Auricularia, see p. 958. 
676 
GASTEROMYCETES 
THIS large division ofthe Basidiomycetes includes those fungi better known as puffballs, 
earthstars, stink horns, bird's nest fungi, false truffles, and gastroid agarics. Gastero- 
(meaning "stomach") describes the manner in which the spores are produced-internally, 
rather than externally as in the Hymenomycetes (agarics, boletes, coral fungi, etc.). The 
Gasteromycetes are also unique in that their spores are not forcibly discharged. Instead 
the basidia disintegrate and the leftover spore mass is dispersed by wind, rain, and animals. 
The most familiar fungi in this group are the puffballs and earthstars. They bear spores 
in a round to oval "stomach" or spore case. The mature spore mass is powdery and easily 
dispersed. The false truffles are similar, but their spore mass remains intact and does 
not become powdery, while the gastroid agarics resemble gilled mushrooms that haven't 
opened. The stinkhorns strike a decidedly different pose-their slimy spore mass is 
initially enclosed by a membrane, but later it is elevated on a stalk, arms, or latticed ball, 
with the membrane forming a volva at the base. Last and least, there are the bird's nest 
fungi, which look like tiny nests with spore-containing eggs or peridioles. 
Gasteromycetes occur in a wide range of habitats. They are especially prominent in 
arid regions where there is a selective advantage to producing spores internally (it affords 
protection from moisture loss and heat). They are notable more for their size range (giant 
puffballs weigh up to 50 pounds each, bird's nest fungi are only a few millimeters broad) 
and different strategies for spore dispersal than for their colors. Only the puffballs are 
of importance to the mushroom-eater. Six major groups are keyed below.* 
Key to the Gasteromycetes 
Fruiting body minute (typically less than 15 mm high), consisting of a "nest" (cup, vase, or bowl) 
containing one or more "eggs" (peridioles); (older specimens, however, may lack peridioles 
and young ones often have a covering or "lid"' over the top of the "nest") Nidulariales, p. 778 
Fruiting body differently constructed and usually larger than above ................... 2 
Fruiting body at first enclosed in a membrane, then emerging as a cylindrical, phallic, branched, 
tentacled, or latticed structure with the membrane forming a volva or sack at the base; mature 
spore mass slimy or mucilaginous (never powdery) and usually foul-smelling, coating the 
head, branches, or latticework of the fruiting body .................... Phallales, p. 764 
2. Not as above (but fruiting bod y may be slimy or malodorous at some stage) ............. 3 
3. Fruiting body with a stalk below the spore case or "cap" ............................. 4 
3. Stalk absent or rudimentary .................................................... 7 
4. Stalk penetrating the spore case or ..cap" and usually percurrent (i.e., extending to top of 
fruiting body); stalk not normally branched inside spore case ... Podaxales & Allies, p. 724 
4. Not as above; stalk not percurrent, sometimes branched ............................. 5 
5. Spore mass slimy and greenish or olive, divided into several large chambers; fruiting body 
club-shaped to pear-shaped; usually found on rotten wood Hymenogastrales & Allies, p. 739 
5. Not with above features ........................................................ 6 
6. 
1. 
1. 
2. 
Stalk well-developed and clearly defined, almost always longer than diameter of spore case; 
stalk not composed of tough rootlike fibers, or if so then fruiting body usually brightly colored 
and/ or gelatinous .......................................... Tulostomatales, p. 715 
6. Not as above; stalk a tough mass of .'roots" or fibers (and sand or dirt) or stalk an elongated, 
narrowed sterile base which often shows minute chambers when sliced open lengthwise .. 7 
7. Spore case rupturing or disintegrating at maturity; spore mass firm and solid when young 
(chambers if present hardly discernible), powdery or cottony when mature and usually dis- 
persing fairly soon; columella (internal stalk) typically absent; mature fruiting body usually 
(but not always) above the ground; found in many habitats.. Lycoperdales& Allies, p. 677 
7. S pore case and spore mass remaining intact for a long time; spore mass often chambered( cham- 
bers large to minute), firm, rubbery, spongy, or slimy but not cottony or powdery at maturity; 
columella present or absent; usually growing underground in association with trees or shrubs, 
but sometimes surfacing at maturity .................. Hymenogastrales & Allies, p. 739 
.Some agarics, boletes, or other mushrooms superficially resemble puffballs, especially when young. Examples are 
Entoloma abort ivum. Amanita "eggs," parasitized Boletus spp., and Cryptoporus volvatus (a common polvpore). 
677 
Puffballs and Earthstars 
E-'0. f/f!J O . 
V spores 
LYCOPERDALES& Allies 
MANY people don't think of puffballs and earthstars as mushrooms, and indeed they 
have little in common with the cap-gill-and-stem commodity you buy at the grocery store. 
The fruiting body simply consists of a roundish to oval spore case, sometimes withasterile 
region beneath it called, quite appropriately, the sterile base. The skin (peridium) of 
the spore case is usually composed of an inner and outer layer (endo- and exoperidium). 
In the earthstars, the outer skin separates completely from the spore case and splits into 
several starlike rays; in the puffballs it does not. The sterile base, which is composed of 
minute compartments that give it a spongelike appearance, is best seen by slicing open the 
fruiting body lengthwise. In some species the sterile base is absent or inconspicuous; 
in others it is as large as the spore case and narrowed below so that it looks like a stem. 
However, only the stalked puffballs (discussed on p. 715) have a true stem. 
The interior of the spore case is called the spore mass (or gleba). It is usually white and 
firm when young, but turns yellow, greenish, brown, or purplish as the spores mature, 
first becoming mushy as moisture is released, then powdery or cottony as the moisture 
evaporates. The spore color corresponds to that of the mature spore mass, and is usually 
some shade of brown or purple. Once the spores have matured, the spore case either splits 
open or ruptures irregularly or disintegrates-thereby exposing the spore mass to the 
elements-or a mouth or slit (apical pore) forms at the top, so that the spore case looks and 
acts like a miniature volcano. It has been suggested that the word "puffball" is a derivative 
of "puck fist," which in turn was derived from "pixie fart." All of these names testify to the 
puffballs' distinctive method of spore dispersal. If a mature (ruptured) specimen is poked, 
tapped, squeezed, or kicked (thereby duplicating the action of a raindrop or gust of wind), 
a cloud or "puff' of spore dust will emerge. 
The true puffballs (Lycoperdales) also have several distinctive microscopic features. 
The spores are typically borne in a hymenium(palisade of basidia) and are usually round, 
sometimes with a pedicel ("tail") attached. They are often warted or spiny like sea urchins, 
and bounce around like furry bon-bons under the microscope. Usually intermingled with 
the mature spores are microscopic threadlike cells called capillitium. These are the 
remains of the hyphae on which the basidia form. Their shape and branching pattern are 
of great significance to the puffball taxonomist, but are not emphasized here. 
spore mass (gleba) 
spore case (peridium) 
stalk ..... 
. 
Vertical sections of two puffballs and one stalked puffball. Left to right: Calvatia (stalk and sterile 
base absent), Tulostoma(stalk present), and Lycoperdon (sterile base present). 
..<... '" .' 
" "- 
'. 
.. 
. 'L 
1. \;, 
'l 
-: .::! 
,J .. 
I 
c 
,.if"" 
., -, 
.'. 
..1/'", .... 
.' , ,...". . 
0-""  , .t f · 
,. #- 
I 
.......... 
r'" ...: :z, 
.. .. 
...;. '"... 
...-¥ . 
'" . ' 
\ . 
Make sure every puffball you eat is firm. white, and solid( homogeneous) inside. These are rather scaly 
specimens of coastal California's giant puffball (see Calvatia gigantea group. p. 682). (J oel Leivick) 
Besides the Lycoperdales, which includes the true puffballs such as Calvatia and 
Lycoperdon and the earthstar genus Geastrum, a superficially similar order, the Sclero- 
dermatales, is traditionally included under the title "puffballs and earthstars." This 
group differs microscopically in lacking capillitium and/ or a hymenium. It includes 
the earth balls (Scleroderma), which can usually be separated from puffballs by their 
hard, one-layered peridium and purple-black spore mass, certain earthstars (e.g., As- 
traeus), and two dusty monstrosities that bear their spores in small chambers within the 
spore case (Pisolithus and Dictyocephalos). A third group, the Tulostomatales(stalked 
puffballs), differs in possessing a true stalk. It is treated separately here, although micro- 
scopically it shares features of both the Lycoperdales and Sclerodermatales. 
It is often said that all puffballs are safe to eat so long as they're firm and white inside. 
This is not necessarily the case, however. Several species of Scleroderma are poisonous, 
some of the so-called edible puffballs have purgative effects on certain individuals, and 
others don't taste good. Therefore, it behooves you puffball-pickers to identify each 
puffball before you eat it and to sample it cautiously. Once picked, puffballs must be 
refrigerated or they will ripen rapidly. Any showing the slightest traces of color (usually 
yellow or green) should be discarded, as they become bitter and indigestible. Also be 
sure that you don't inadvertently mistake a deadly poisonous Amanita "egg" for a puff- 
ball. When sliced open lengthwise (i.e., perpendicular to the ground), puffballs are solid 
and homogeneous within (see above photo), whereas Amanita "eggs" or other agaric but- 
tons reveal the outline of cap, gills, and stalk (see photo at top of p. 679). False truffles are 
sometimes mistaken for puffballs, but they usually grow underground and do not have a 
powdery spore mass at maturity, while stink horn "eggs" are gelatinous within. 
Puffballs and earthstars can be found almost anywhere at any time, but are especially 
prominent in prairies, deserts, and high mountains, where other fungi are not so plentiful. 
Though they form a distinctive group, identifying the various species can be difficult be- 
cause you often have to know the characteristics of both mature and immature fruiting 
bodies, as well as microscopic features such as the size and shape of the spores and capil- 
litium. It is tempting to eat puffballs without bothering to identify them, but indiscrimi- 
nate sampling of any mushrooms-even puffballs-is poor practice, so at least make an 
attempt to key out each kind you find, even if you have only young (or old) specimens at 
hand. In the following key, the various genera in the Lycoperdales and Scleroderma tales 
have been grouped into several categories. 
" 
. 
-. 
... . 
. 
,- 
I 
:........ 
1 
... 
'" 
\0 
Amanita "eggs" can look like puffballs, but reveal a mushroom "embryo" of cap, gills, and stalk when 
sliced open lengthwise (perpendicular to the ground). Although this Amanita calyptrata "egg" is 
edible, the "eggs" of several Amanitas are deadly poisonous! 
Key to the Lycoperdales & Allies 
I. Outer layer(s) of fruiting body splitting into several starlike rays which unfold or bend under 
(at least in wet weather) to expose the inner skin or spore case ......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Geastrum, Astraeus, & Myriostoma, p. 699 
I. Not as above (fruiting body may rupture in starlike fashion, but ifso then there is no separate 
spore case within) ....................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 
2. Spore mass containing numerous minute peridioles (spore-bearing chambers) which look like 
particles of sand; fruiting body small to medium-sized .............................. 3 
2. Spore mass not containing peridioles, or if so then the peridioles considerably larger than grains 
of sand (usually appearing more like seeds) ....................................... 4 
3. Spore mass penetrated by a columella (internal stalk); fruiting body with an external stalk also, 
but the stalk often falling off; found in deserts (often mingling with Endoptychum arizonicum) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A raneosa columellata 
Fruiting body puffball-like, i.e., lacking a columella and stalk; found mostly in sandy soil or 
grassy or open places; widespread but not very common ...... Arachn;on album & others 
Mature fruiting body sticking out of the ground like a dusty root or half-rotted stump (but 
may be roundish to pear- or club-shaped when young); spores prod uced inside numerous small 
cham bers or seedlike bodies (peridioles) imbedded in the fruiting bod y (the peridioles are best 
seen by slicing open a young fruiting body because they soon disintegrate); usually found in 
poor soil, along roads, in deserts, etc. ............... Pisolithus& D;ctyocephalos, p.711 
4. Not as above; peridioles absent; spores produced in a single large chamber (the spore case) 5 
5. Spore case typically hard or tough with a thick rindlike skin, at least when young; spore mass 
white when very young but soondarkening( usually purple-gray to black) while remainingfirm, 
eventually becoming dark brown to blackish and powdery; basidia not borne in a hymenium; 
capillitium absent ............................................ Scleroderma, p. 707 
5. Not as above; skin (peridium) thick or thin; spore mass white when young and normally soften- 
ing or becoming mushy as it darkens, then becoming powdery; basidia usually borne in a 
hymenium; capillitium usually present ........................................... 6 
Fruiting body thick-skinned, not rupturing, usually underground; spore mass revealing a thick 
short columella (internal stalk) when sectioned lengthwise through the cemer(but columella 
sometimes disintegrating in old age)-see photos on pp. 761-762 ... (seeRad;;gera, p. 760) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. 
3. 
4. 
6. 
Spore mass with prominent veins or cords running through it, the veins seeming to originate 
from the base or peridium; rare ................................. Scleroderma, p. 707 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Sterile base present, often as a narrowed stemlike base beneath the spore case (section fruiting 
body lengthwise if unsure) ..................................................... 9 
Sterile base absent or rudimentary .............................................. to 
8. 
679 
680 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
9. Fruiting body medium-sized to quite large, rupturing (in old age) irregularly or through radial 
tears or general disintegration; peridium (skin) thick or thin ...... Ca/valia & Allies, below 
9. Fruiting body small to medium-sized (usually smaller than a baseball), typically rupturing 
through an apical pore, slit, or large mouth; usually thin-skinned Lycoperdon& Allies, p. 690 
10. Fruiting body golfball-sized to very large, rupturing (in old age) irregularly or through radial 
tears or general disintegration; peridium (skin) thick or thin; found in many habitats ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ca/valia & Allies, below 
10. Fruiting body usually marble- to golfball-sized or occasionally as large as a baseball, usually 
rupturing through a pore or large mouth (and often blowing about in the wind when old); peri- 
dium usually rather thin; found mostly in grassy or open places Bovisla& Disciseda, p. 696 
CALV ATIA& Allies (Giant Puffballs) 
Medium-sized to very large terrestrial puffballs. FRU ITlNG BODY round to top- or pear-shaped 
(broader above) to somewhat flattened. Peridium (skin) two-layered, disintegrating or rupturing 
irregularly at maturity. smooth or warty. STERILE BASE present or absent. SPORE MASS firm 
and white when immature, then slowly darkening to olive-brown, dark brown, or purple and 
becoming powdery or cottony. Spores typically more or less round. smooth to warted or spiny. 
Capillitium present. 
THESE are baseball- to basketball-sized puffballs that disintegrate in old age, i.e., a dis- 
tinct apical pore is not formed as in Lycoperdon. In some species the outer layer of the 
peridium takes the form of large warts which break up into plates and then flake off, but 
in other species it is smooth and in many it adheres to the inner layer so that the two are 
indistinguishable. Calvatias with a thick peridium are sometimes mistaken for earth- 
balls (Scleroderma species), but are usually whiter (both inside and out) when immature 
and not as hard-fleshed. The texture (whether powdery or cottony) and color of the 
mature spore mass are important features in the identification of Calvatias, as is the 
presence or absence of a sterile base. 
Calvatias are among the most prolific of living organisms. It has been calculated that 
an average-sized (30 cm) specimen of the giant puffball (Ca/valia gigantea) contains 
7,000,000,000,000 (7 trillion) spores! In these inflationary times that may not sound like 
much, but consider this: if all 7 trillion spores (each one measuring 1/200 of a millimeter) 
were lined up in a row, they would circle the earth's equator! If each spore produced a 
30 cm offspring, the resulting puffballs would stretch from the earth to the sun and back, 
and if their spores were equally successful, the formidable puffball mass would weigh 800 
times as much as the earth! Each spore is theoretically capable of germinating, yet very 
few (obviously!) do. It would be interesting to know why so many don't, or conversely, 
why such a surplus of spores is (needlessly?) produced. 
The truly giant puffballs (the C. gigamea group and C. booniana) are among the best 
known and most popular of all edible mushrooms. In fact, they are eaten by people who 
don't know a gill from a gall. Some of the smaller species (e.g., C. scu/pla and C. cyalhi- 
formis) are also excellent, but a few (e.g., C. fumosa) are bitter. None are known to be 
poisonous, but the edible species have purgative or laxative effects on some people. Each 
kind should be tested cautiously and eaten in moderation, and specimens that have begun 
to ripen should be discarded. 
Ca/valia species are partial to arid climates, which is ironic considering the gigantic 
size of some. It is a large and complex genus, especially in the prairies of the Midwest and 
the sagebrush deserts and mountains of the West, where many endemic species still await 
classification. (In our area there are several odd species which I haven't been able to 
identify to my satisfaction.) Only a handful of the more common or easily recognized 
Calvatias are described here, and three small, superficially similar genera, Mycenaslrum, 
Ca/bovisla, and AbslOma, are also treated. 
CALVA TIA & ALLIES 
681 
Key to Calvatia & Allies 
I. Sterile base absent or rudimentary (make a perpend icular section of the fruiting body if unsure) 
............................................................................. 2 
1. Sterile base present (but sometimes small), often but not always chambered ............ 14 
2. Fruiting body large (10-40 cm broad or more unless very young); peridium (skin) thick in im- 
mature specimens but thinner in age and disintegrating soon after the spore mass matures 
or turns powdery ............................................................. 3 
2. Not as above; fruiting body small to medium-sized (typically less than 12 cm broad), or iflarger 
then peridium persistent (remaining intact), tough or hard, and thick even at maturity ... 4 
3. Fruiting body with large warts or plaques when young, usually depressed-globose (broader 
than it is tall); found in sagebrush flats and mountains of the West ..... C. boon;ana, p. 684 
3. Fruiting body smooth or areolate (cracked) when young( or western form often breaking up into 
plaques in dry weather), round to somewhat flattened; found mostly in grassy or open areas, 
roadsides, etc.; widely distributed ........................... c. g;gantea group, p. 682 
4. Peridium (skin) thick and quite tough or hard, even after spore mass has matured (i.e., skin not 
readily disintegrating); spore mass not purple at maturity ........................... 5 
4. Peridium thin, fragile, and/ or disintegrating soon after spores mature (may be thick when 
young); spore mass variously colored at maturity, including purple .................. 11 
5. Fruiting body typically less than 10 cm broad; found under conifers, especially in mountains; 
spores not reticulate .......................................................... 6 
5. Fruiting body consistently larger than above, or if not then usually found elsewhere (in open 
areas, livestock corrals, etc.) and/ or spores reticulate ............................... 7 
6. Peridium (skin) smooth when young or sometimes finely cracked (areolate); fruiting' body often 
with a small cord at base ......................................... C.fumosa, p. 688 
6. Not as above; peridium with whitish to grayish or smoky-brown warts that eventually break up 
into plaques and flake off ..................................... C. subcretacea, p. 688 
7. Outer layer of peridium (skin) a thick, white felty coat which turns grayish and fibrillose and 
wears away in patches, exposing the hard thick (about 2 mm) brown persistent inner layer; 
capillitium thorny; often (but not always) found in areas where livestock loiter ........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mycenastrum corium, p. 689 
7. Not with above features ........................................................ 8 
8. Peridium (skin) with distinct warts when young; found in arctic and tundra regions ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " C. cretacea (see C. subcretacea, p. 688) 
8. Not as above ................................................................. 9 
9. Fruiting body averaging 2-8 cm in diameter ....................................... 10 
9. Fruiting body averaging 5-20 cm or more in diameter ................................. 
.............................. C.pachyderma& C.lep;dophora(see C.fumosa. p. 688) 
10. Peridium(skin) rupturing through radial tears and/ or spores reticulate .................. 
.................... Abstoma towne;& A. ret;culatum(see Mycenastrum corium, p.689) 
10. Not as above; fruiting body usually breaking up irregularly at maturity; spores not reticulate 
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. hesper;a(see C.fumosa, p.688) 
II. Mature spore mass purple or dull purple; fairly common in grass or other open areas ....... 
. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C.frag;lis(see C. cyathiformis, p.687) 
II. Not as above; mature spore mass typically some shade of brown or ochre .............. 12 
12. Mature spore mass typically persistent (i.e., rather cottony in texture) .................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. Iycoperdo;des & others, p. 687 
12. Mature spore mass typically powdery and easily dispersed .......................... 13 
13. Peridium (skin) often rupturing through radial tears and/ or spores reticulate ............. 
.................... Abstoma towne;& A. ret;culatum(see Mycenastrum corium, p.689) 
13. Not as above; spores not reticulate ................ C. paradoxa, C. owyheens;s. & others 
14. Fruiting body with prominent warts, at least when young; warts large (4-20 mm), polygonal 
or pyramidal and often lined (i.e., adorned by lines); found in western mountains ...... 15 
14. Not as above (but fruiting body may have small warts), or if large warts present then habitat 
different ................................................................... 16 
682 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
15. Warts usually pyramidal or pointed when young and sometimes very exaggerated, their tips 
sometimes joined; usually found in forests; capillitium not thorny ....... C. sculpta, p. 684 
15. Warts often flattened or truncated but sometimes pointed, not joined at their tips; usually found 
in open places or edges of woods, roadsides, etc.; capillitium thorny .................... 
................................... Calbovistasubsculpta(see Calvaliasculpla. p. 684) 
16. Outer surface of fruiting body staining yellow when bruised or rubbed, at least when young; 
found mainly in cultivated soil .............. C. rubroJlava (see C. lycoperdoides. p. 687) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Outer surface of fruiting body with red or reddish spots when fresh; mature spore mass pur- 
plish; found under pine and perhaps other trees; not common ......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. Tubrotincta (see C. cyalhiformis. p. 687) 
17. Not with above features ....................................................... 18 
18. Spore mass distinctly purple when mature (powdery); common in grass or other open areas 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. cyathiformis, p. 687 
18. Mature spore mass ochre to brown, etc., but not purple. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . .. .. .. 19 
19. S pore mass cottony at maturity and persisting for a long time(remainingintact); peridium (skin) 
smooth or granular to very wrinkled but lacking distinct warts, plaques, or spines; fairly com- 
mon in eastern and southern North America . C. craniiformis(see C. lycoperdoides. p. 687) 
19. Not as above ................................................................ 20 
20. Sterile base very prominent and elongated (up to 12 cm long) to form a stalklike base; spore 
case typically less than 8 cm broad and usually smaller in height than sterile base ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. elata& C. excipuliformis(see C. bovisla. p. 686) 
20. Sterile base sometimes prominent but not as above, and/ or spore case larger ........... 21 
21. Typically found in pastures, lawns, roadsides, and other grassy or open places; common at low 
elevations .................................................................. 22 
21. Typically found in arid regions (deserts, sagebrush flats, etc.) or under conifers, sometimes also 
in mountain meadows ........................................................ 23 
22. Fruiting body rather small, typically less than 5 (rarely 7) cm broad ...................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " (see Lycoperdon & Allies, p. 690) 
22. Fruiting body medium-sized to large (5-25 cm broad) unless very young .. C. bovista, p. 686 
23. Fruiting body typically developing warts or blunt spines (at least on top) when young or as it 
matures; found under western conifers, mainly in mountains C.lloydii(see C. bovisla. p. 686) 
23. Not as above; fruiting body lacking distinct warts and/ or habitat different ............. 24 
24. Fruiting body averaging 5-10 cm broad; base often wrinkled or furrowed and found in arid 
habitats, or if not wrinkled, then found under conifers .. C. tatrensis (see c. bovisla. p. 686) 
24. Not with above features; usually smaller; if growing in arid habitats, then base not usually 
wrinkled, and if growing in woods then base usually wrinkled ......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C. pallida & c. candida (see C. bovisla. p. 686) 
Calvat;a g;gantea group (Giant Puffball) Color Plate 184 
FRUITING BODY softball- to basketball-sized (8-60 em or more in diameter), round 
or sometimes lobed or occasionally somewhat flattened on top in age. Outer layer of 
peridium(skin) thick when young(24 mm), at first smooth (with texture of kid glove) and 
pure white or brownish-stained (but in the California version often breaking up into 
brownish scales even when young), then cracking up into flat scales or plates which 
eventually flake off to expose the thin olive-brown inner layer-which soon disintegrates 
-or both layers falling off together. STERILE BASE absent or rudimentary, but a cord- 
like "root" often present. SPORE MASS at first white and firm or cheesy, becoming 
greenish-yellow and mushy with an unpleasant odor (like old urine), finally deep olive- 
brown to brown and powdery. Spores 3.5-6 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or 
minutely spiny, apiculate. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or large circles in fields, pastures, open 
ttj "', 
't 
. 
" 
-: 
'", 
- 
. 
Immature giant puffballs, Ca/vatia gigantea group. In the fall or spring, a casual jaunt through a 
"puffball pasture" can yield quite a haul-the skillet in the foreground is one foot in diameter! For 
scalier specimens, see photo on p. 678. (Bill Everson) 
woods, cemeteries, on exposed hillsides, along roads, in drainage ditches, etc.; fairly 
common in eastern North America and the Midwest. The west coast form, which is slightly 
different (see comments), is sometimes abundant in our area after the first fall rains and 
again in the spring. In fact, when conditions are favorable it is not unusual to find 30-40 
pounds on a casual jaunt through a "puffball pasture." Because of its preference for open 
hillsides, it can often be spotted from the road, Large specimens, in fact, have been mis- 
taken by passersby for herds of grazing sheep! (Mushroom hunters, on the other hand, 
are more likely to mistake grazing sheep for giant puffballs.) Dried specimens found 
under houses have been mistaken for bleached skulls, while a sinister-looking individual 
found in England during the war was labelled "Hitler's Secret Weapon" and used for 
propaganda purposes at an exhibition to raise war funds! 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice when the flesh is firm and white, but with laxative 
effects on certain individuals. It can be sliced and fried like pancakes, or better yet, cubed 
like tofu and dropped into clear soups or eaten raw in salads. The tough outer skin should 
be peeled and those which have begun to ripen should be discarded. Size it not necessarily 
an indication of maturity, so slice them open in the field. This will enable you to check for 
maggots, which are fanatically fond of them. Infested areas can be trimmed away and the 
solid portions carried home. Dried giant puffballs have been used as sponges, tinder 
(before matches were invented), toys, and dyes. They were burned under beehives to 
stupefy bees and used to squelch bleeding. 
COMMENTS: The giant puffball is one of the best known and most familiar of all the 
fleshy fungi-and it is fleshy-5 foot, 50 pound specimens have been recorded! (Alas, 
the largest one I've found weighed "only" 7 pounds.) The exact identity of our local giant 
puffball, strangely enough, is a minor mystery. It does not seem to be either the "true" 
C. gigantea of Europe and eastern North America, or C. booniana of arid regions. The 
former is smoother and whiter than our giant puffball, while the latter is wartier and 
broader. To most people, however, its "true" identity is an academic problem best left 
to the puffball pundits, who are paid to pore over such matters-after all, any large puff- 
ball is a giant puffball, and any giant puffball is a giant meal! Langermann;a g;gantea 
and Ca/vat;a maxima are synonyms for C. gigantea. C. bovista can also be quite large, but 
has a prominent sterile base, while C. cyathiformis has purple spores at maturity Also see 
C. pachyderm a and C. lepidophora (under C.fumosa). 
683 
. f 
\ . . 
 
f 
, . a- 
:... 
. 
... 
Immature western giant puffball, Ca/valia booniana. Note the shape (longer than it is high) and 
large warts on the surface. See color plate for mature specimens. (Chuck Barrows) 
Ca/vatia booniana 
(Western Giant Puffball) 
Color Plate 186 
FRUITING BODY 15-{)0 cm or more broad and 7-30 cm or more high; sometimes round 
or lobed, but more often somewhat flattened or depressed on top. Outer layer of peridium 
(skin) thick, white to buff or tan and finally brown; at first sculptured with large warts which 
soon separate to form flattened scales, plaques, or plates and eventually disintegrate along 
with the thin inner layer. STERILE BASE absent or rudimentary. SPORE MASS firm 
and white at first, then turning yellow or greenish and mushy and stinky, finallly becoming 
powdery and olive-brown to brown. Spores4-{).5 x 3-5.5 microns, round or nearly round, 
smooth or minutely spiny. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or "flocks" in fields, under sagebrush 
or juniper and in other open areas; confined to the arid and semi-arid regions of western 
North America, and sometimes common, especially in the late spring and summer. I 
have seen it in New Mexico and Idaho, and in the mountains of southern California. A 
similar but less warty species is common along the west coast (see the C. gigantea group). 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice when firm and white inside, but with laxative effects on 
certain individuals. Like C. gigantea, it was apparently eaten by pioneers as well as by 
some Native Americans. Be sure to check for maggots when gathering them, and re- 
member. any specimens whose flesh shows the slightest traces of color (yellow, greeen, or 
brown) are no longer good to eat (unless you're a maggot!). 
COMMENTS: This giant puffball is approximately the same size as C. gigantea (50 lb. 
specimens have been reported), but is not normally as round and has larger plaques or 
warts-even when young. Calbovista subsculpta (see comments under Calvatia sculpta) 
is somewhat similar but much smaller (softball- or grapefruit-sized). 
Ca/vatia scu/pta (Sierran Puffball; Sculptured Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY more or less egg-shaped, pear-shaped, top-shaped, or somewhat 
irregular, (4) 7-18 cm high and/ or broad. Outer layer of peridium composed of long, 
pointed, white pyramidal warts (up to 2.5 cm long) which are erect or bent and joined at 
their tips; warts often lined or grooved and arising from angular plaques which soon crack 
and fall away, exposing a fragile inner layer which soon disintegrates. STERILE BASE 
present, often prominent but sometimes inconspicuous, white to yellowish, often with 
684 
... 
"'" "".. 
'-" . .. 
It. 
: 
 '-r J 
J 
<. 
; 
... 
"'" .\, ." 
...,. 
The Sierran puffball, Ca/valia scu/pla. is easily recognized by its enormous pyramidal or polygonal 
warts. Note sterile base beneath spore case (right); specimen on left is being viewed from the top 
a purplish interior (especially in age). SPORE MASS white and firm at first, turning 
yellow and then deep olive-brown as it ripens, eventually powdery. Spores 3.5-6.5 microns, 
round or nearly round, minutely spiny. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups under conifers or sometimes in the open; known 
only from the mountains of the West. It is fairly common in the Sierra Nevada in the late 
spring, summer, and fall; I have not seen it on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when immature, and better than most puffballs. 
COMMENTS: This is easily the most spectacular of all the puffballs, and is well known 
to hikers in the Sierra Nevada. The white pyramidal "peaks" make fresh specimens look 
like a cross between a geodesic dome and a giant glob of meringue. Amanita magni- 
verrucata can sometimes resemble it superficially (especially in the egg stage), but has 
gills and a stalk. Other species: Calbovista subsculpta is a common edible western moun- 
tain puffball that is similar in size but has flatter (but sometimes pointed), less flagrant 
warts. It used to be placed in Ca/vatia, but its capillitium have thornlike branches-a mo- 
mentous enough difference in the eyes of puffball specialists to merit a genus of its own. 
It is quite common in the spring, summer, and early fall in open and grassy places or at the 
edges of woods in the Sierra Nevada, Cascades, and other western mountains. 
Left Ca/valia scu/pla in the bush(Bob Winter). Right Ca/valia scu/pla in the hand (Nancy Jarvis). 
-"*'. 
. , 
....... 
..." ........ 
f 
\ 
'. 
.. 
 
'. 
.. 
... 
, 
"- 
-""' 
.I' 
..'), 
, 
I 
" 
" 
.. 
.' . . 
# 
.. 
.. .- 
,... 
. .. 
.. 
r. .. 
.. 
.. 
 
-r... 
Ca/valia bovisla, immature specimens. Note large size and prominent sterile base. Specimen in center 
is being viewed from above, hence the sterile base is not visible. 
Ca/vatia bovista 
FRUITING BODY 10-25 cm high and 5-25 cm broad, top-shaped or pear-shaped with a 
broad, often flattened top in age and a large, prominent stemlike sterile base. Outer layer 
of peridium (skin) white to grayish or occasionally yellowish-brown, covered with pointed 
scurfy warts or soft particles, slowly breaking up into flat scales that slough off, exposing 
the thin inner layer which soon disintegrates. STERILE BASE very large, constituting 
up to one half the total height of the fruiting body; chambered; exterior white when young, 
brown in age; smooth, persisting long after the spore case has decomposed. SPORE 
MASS white and cheesy, then yellow or olive and finally olive-gold to olive-brown or 
dark brown and powdery. Spores 4-6.5 microns, round, minutely warted or spiny. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in pastures, exposed soil, open woods, etc.; 
widely distributed. It is fairly common in our coastal pastures from fall through spring, 
sometimes mingling with the giant puffball rCalvatia gigantea group). 
EDIBILITY: Edible when immature, but rather soft and in my experience insipid or even 
bitter. According to puffball scholar William Burk, it has been used to stop up holes in 
drafty dwellings as well as nosebleeds. 
COMMENTS: Also known as C. utriformis and C. caelala, this is the second largest of 
our local puffballs and is easily recognized by its flattened top and large sterile base (see 
photograph). It looks something like a gigantic Lycoperdon perlalum, but does not form a 
pore at the top. The bowl-shaped base persists long after the rest of the spore case has 
disintegrated, and old bowls are often found filled with rainwater, mosquito larvae, and 
spores, or they may be windblown and completely empty. In the latter condition you may 
not recognize them as puffballs, but don't let this faze you-a special genus, Hippoperdon. 
was once erected based on these empty bowls! 
C. excipuliformis (=c. saccata) and C. elata are two similar species which have a nar- 
rower spore case (3-10 cm broad) that is granular or coated with small spines and pale buff 
to brownish, plus a narrower and greatly elongated (stemlike) sterile base. Both are wide- 
spread in wooded and open areas; the latter has practically smooth spores. C. tatrensis 
is a western species with a purplish to purple-brown sterile base; it occurs under sagebrush 
and in other arid waste places, or occasionally under conifers, and usually has a wrinkled 
or furrowed base. C. pallida and C. candida are two small species (up to 5 cm broad) with 
a sterile base and powdery spore mass; the former has a wrinkled base and grows in woods 
and mountain meadows, while the latter prefers more arid habitats. Finally, there is C. 
lloydii, a fairly common species in the dry coniferous forests of the Sierra Nevada and 
other western mountains. It is also rather small (less than 10 cm broad) and has a sterile 
base, but features warts or blunt spines on the top, at least in age. It sometimes grows 
with C. fumosa and C. subcretacea, but is easily separated from those species by its thinner 
skin, and from C. sculpta and Calbovista subsculpta by its smaller warts. 
686 
....... 
( 
... 
.." 
" .- 
 
"" 
. 
.... 
. 
,/I 
r 
Ca/valia cyalhiformis. Left: Immature specimen (turned sideways) with a well-developed sterile base. 
Right: Mature specimen in which the outer layer of the peridium (spore case) is disintegrating. The 
purplish color of the mature spores is the most distinctive characteristic of this species. 
C alvatia cyathijormis (Purple-S pored Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY 5-20 cm high and/ or broad; nearly round when young, becoming top- 
shaped or pear-shaped, or round with a flattened top and narrowed base. Outer layer of 
peridium (skin) smooth at first, but soon cracking into small, flat scales or patches, at 
least on top; white to tan or pinkish-tan becoming purplish or purple-brown in age; inner 
layer dark purple or purple-brown, smooth, thin and delicate; both layers flaking off 
in old age. STERILE BASE usually present (but see comments), chambered, white to 
dingy yellow or darker, persisting as a deep purplish to purple-brown cuplike structure 
after the spores have dispersed. SPORE MASS firm and white when young, becoming 
yellowish, then brownish and finally dull purple and powdery. Spores 3.5-7.5 microns, 
round, spiny or warty to nearly smooth. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious or in rings in pastures and other grassy places, 
widely distributed. It is common locally in the fall, occasional at other times. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and quite good when firm and white inside. It is not quite as tasty 
as the giant puffball, but is not as rich either. 
COMMENTS: The striking purple color of the mature spore mass sets apart this Calvatia 
from its brethren. It frequents the same habitats as C. bovista and our version of C. gigan- 
tea, but there is normally only one major fruiting (at least locally)-in the fall. It is smaller 
and firmer than C. bovista, and usually darker in color than the C. gigantea group. Fairy 
rings of this species in the prairies of Colorado are estimated to be 420 years old-or older 
than most trees! C. cyathijoTmis form/Tagi/is (also called C./Tagi/is) is very similar, but has 
only a rudimentary sterile base; it is also common in grassy areas on the west coast, and is 
widely distributed. Other species: C. TubTotincta has purplish spores, but is pallid with red 
spots when young; it has been found in Oregon under ponderosa pine. 
Calvatia lycoperdoides (Cotton-S pored Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY 1.5-5 cm high and broad, more or less round to somewhat cushion- 
shaped. Outer layer of peridium (skin) white or pallid becoming brownish in age, at first 
with soft granules, flakes, or spines ( or often with small warts on top); adhering to the inner 
layer and breaking up into large flakes at maturity. STERILE BASE absent or 
rudimentary. SPORE MASS firm and white when young, olive-brown to brown at 
maturity, with a cottony texture that causes it to remain intact for a long time. Spores 
4-6.5 microns, round, with small warts. 
687 
688 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups on ground in woods and under trees; known only 
from western North America, but C. craniiformis( see comments) is common in the eastern 
states. It can be found in our area in the late fall, winter, and spring, but is not common. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible when immature, but not big or plentiful enough to 
warrant collecting. I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several Calvatias with acottony(instead of powdery) mature 
spore mass. Others include: C. umbrina, a dark brown to black species; e. diguetii, a 
smooth-spored westerner with an ochre gleba; and e. rubroflava, with a greenish-orange 
mature spore mass and yellow-staining exterior, found mostly in cultivated soil( especially 
in southern latitudes). In these species an apical pore is not formed as in Lycoperdon. and 
there is no sterile base (except in C. rubroflava). Another species with a cottony spore mass, 
e. craniijormis, is often wrinkled, softball-sized, and white to tan when young, with a 
well-developed sterile base and yellow-green to yellow-brown spores. It is quite common in 
southern and eastern North America in open areas and under hardwoods, but to my 
knowledge does not occur on the west coast. It is edible, like most Calvatias, when firm 
and white inside. There are several other species with a sterile base that mayor may not 
have a cottony spore mass when mature. These include C. elata, C. excipuliformis. and 
C. lloydii(see comments under C. bovista for more details). 
C a/vatia subcretacea 
(Small Warted Mountain Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY golfball- to baseball-sized, 1.5-5 (7) cm in diameter, round or more 
often cushion-shaped to somewhat flattened. Peridium (skin) thick and white when fresh, 
the outer layer composed of white to smoky-gray or grayish-tipped warts which break up 
into plates or polygons and then flake off, exposing the yellowish to brownish inner layer, 
which breaks up irregularly. STERILE BASE absent or rudimentary. SPORE MASS 
white and firm becoming yellowish, then olive-buff to olive-brown or brown and powdery. 
Spores 3.5.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely ornamented. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in duff under mountain coni- 
fers, especially spruce and fir; fairly common in the mountains of western North America 
from late spring through early fall. I have seen it several times in the Sierra Nevada ( often 
with C.fumosa), but never on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when young, but difficult to find in sufficient quantity for a meal. 
COMMENTS: The modest size, warty peridium, and growth under mountain conifers 
help to distinguish this commonplace Calvaria (see photo at top of p. 689). It is not as 
smooth-skinned as C. fumosa, and is usually much smaller than Calbovista subsculpta 
(see comments under Calvatia sculpta). Mature specimens lack the apical pore charac- 
teristic of Lycoperdon. and their habitat is also distinctive; Sclerodermas are different in 
color and texture. e. cretacea is a similar but larger species of arctic and tundra regions. 
Ca/vatia fumosa 
FRUITING BODY golfball- to baseball-sized, round to oval, 3-8 (10) cm broad. 
Outer and inner layers of peridium (skin) adhering to each other, thick (1-5 mm) and 
persistent (not disintegrating); at first smooth and white, but soon becoming grayish to 
brownish and often areolate (cracking to form small scales), the undersurface and cracks 
white. STERILE BASE absent or rudimentary, but a mycelial cord often present. SPORE 
MASS firm and white at first, then yellowish or olive, finally dark brown and powdery (or 
yellow-brown in one variety); odor often unpleasant ("a combination of sour milk, diesel 
oil, and pit toilet"-Robert Ramsey). Spores4.5-8 microns, round or nearly round, spiny. 
"' 
. ..::t:t:.. 
,  ';;::":.:..;-;'i.J .t I 
"1of.:;:;"?( 
.". 
. 
. 
\ 
.... 
-,. 
Ca/valia fumosa (two specimens in center) and Ca/valia subcrelacea (specimens at far left and far 
right) are common under mountain conifers and sometimes grow together. Both have a thick, tough 
skin. C. subcrelacea has a warty exterior, while C.fumosa is smoother and has a cord at the base. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in duff(sometimes buried) under spruce, fir, and other 
mountain conifers; common in the western United States, spring through early fall. A 
similar species occurs in our area under cypress, and others occur in cultivated or hard- 
packed soil (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Bitter-tasting according to Orson K. Miller; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: The thick, tough, persistent skin (peridium) and modest size plus the 
absence of warts distinguish this Ca/valia from most others. Old specimens might be 
mistaken for Sclerodermas, but possess capilliitum and are differently colored. The 
peridium seldom disintegrates of its own accord, but rodents are apparently fond of 
chewing on it, thus enabling the spores to escape. There are several similar Calvatias 
with a thick, persistent peridium, including: C. hesperia, similar in size but white to gray- 
ish, with smooth spores and growing mostly in open places (farmland, deserts, etc.); C. 
pachyderma, larger (5-15 cm in diameter) and whitish when young, with smooth to 
minutely warted spores, found in open, cultivated, and arid places; and C./epidophora of 
the Midwest prairies, which is even larger (15-20 cm) and has densely warted spores. See 
also Mycenaslrum corium. 
Mycenastrum corium 
FRUITING BODY 4-20 cm broad or more, round to somewhat pear-shaped when young, 
eventually rupturing in irregular fissures to form rays or plates which may bend back 
somewhat in a star-shaped pattern. Outer layer of peridium (skin) a thick, white, felty 
coat which becomes areolate(separates into blocklike areas), forming thin, grayish, fibril- 
lose patches which eventually wear away to expose the tough, hard, persistent, smooth 
inner layer, which is brown to purple-brown and about 2 mm thick. STERILE BASE 
rudimentary or absent, but mycelial fibers often present. SPORE MASS firm and white 
becoming olive-yellow to olive-brown and finally dark brown to purple-brown and 
powdery. Spores 8-12 microns, round, warted-reticulate. Capillitium branched, thorny. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground (sometimes partially buried) in horse 
corrals, composted areas, and fields where livestock have been grazing; widely distributed, 
but especially common in the West. In our area it occurs year-round. The tough spore 
cases persist for months, sometimes breaking loose to blow about in the wind. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible when firm and white inside; I haven't tried it. 
Mycenaslrum corium, immature specimens. These were found in a horse corral, a favorite haunt of 
this species. Note the thick skin and white felty material on exterior. 
'\ 
<i 
1 
l. . 
,.. 
t. ... 
.1' 
I!. 
. , 
.J: 
. 
-, 
... 
,. 
 
-(",. 
... . 
" 
.;; 
690 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: This peculiar puffball is easy to recognize but difficult to describe. The 
thick, tough inner peridium (skin) distinguishes it from Bovista and the thin-skinned 
Calvatias, while the white, felty outer layer separates it from Scleroderma and the thick- 
skinned Calvatias. The presence of capillitium in the spore mass indicates a much closer 
kinship to the true puffballs (Calvatia, etc.) than to the earthballs (Scleroderma). Its 
tendency to fruit in localities where livestock loiter is another helpful (but fallible) field- 
mar k. A bstoma towne; and A. ret;culatum are smaller and dirtier puffballs (2-6 cm broad) 
with reticulate spores and unbranched capillitium. The first is said to occur in old pastures 
and other waste places; the latter has been found in coastal California under cypress. 
LYCOPERDON & Allies (Common Puffballs) 
Small to medium-sized pujJballs found mostly on rotten wood or on ground in woods (Lyco- 
perdon), or in grass (Vascellum). FRUITING BODY round to pear-shaped or top-shaped; peri- 
dium two-layered, the outer layer usually with spines, warts, granules, or particles; usually rup- 
turing through an apical pore. STERILE BASE usually present and often conspicuous or stem- 
like. SPORE MASS firm and white when young, becoming powdery and olive-brown to brown or 
purplish in old age. Spores more or less round. smooth to warted or spiny, sometimes pedicellate. 
Capillitium present (Lycoperdon) or replaced by paracapillitium (septate, colorless hyphae) in 
Vascellum. 
THESE are small to medium-sized puffballs that rarely exceed to cm (4 inches) in dia- 
meter. In contrast to Calvaria and Scleroderma, the spores are usually released through 
an apical pore (a hole, slit, or mouth that forms at the top ofthe mature spore case). The 
frequent presence of a well-developed, often stemlike sterile base distinguishes Lyco- 
perdon from Bovista, but the two genera intergrade through a series of forms with a slight 
sterile base. In most species the spore case is initially coated with a layer of spines, warts, 
or fine particles, but these eventually fall away to expose the inner layer of the peridium, 
in which the pore forms. 
Lycoperdons are our most common woodland puffballs, but also grow in open areas, 
waste places, and sawdust piles. In our area the major fruiting is in the fall and winter, but 
old weathered specimens can be found at any time. All Lycoperdons are thought to be 
edible when firm and white inside, but some taste better than others and it is imperative 
to discard any specimens that have begun to ripen. (In Charles McIlvaine's words, "one 
ageing L. pyriforme will embitter a hundred.") The various species are rather difficult 
to distinguish-particularly when immature-but it is always a good practice to identify 
each type before eating it. Five representative species are described here, plus one species 
of Vascellum, a small "satellite" genus that differs microscopically. Two other small 
genera, Bovistella and M organella, are included in the key. 
Key to Lycoperdon & Allies 
1. Exterior of fruiting body covered with dark brown to black spines when young; yellow tones 
often developing in age ........................................... L.foetidum, 692 
1. Not as above; fruiting body not dark brown when young (but may be pale to medium brown 
when young and become dark brown in old age) ................................... 2 
2. Growing on wood, sawdust, or lignin-rich humus (if in humus, then base with white mycelial 
threads or rhizomorphs and spore case with inconspicuous spines if any) .............. 3 
2. Not as above; usually terrestrial ................................................. 4 
3. Fruiting body with cinnamon-buff to brown spines when young, conspicuously pitted at 
maturity (after spines have worn off); sterile base well-developed to practically absent; found 
mainly in eastern North America Morganella subincarnata(=Lycoperdon subincarnatum} 
3. Not as above; fruiting body never pitted, usually with white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) 
at base or in surrounding substrate; sterile base well-developed; common and widespread 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. L. pyriforme & others, p. 691 
LYCOPERDON & ALLIES 
69] 
4. Fruiting body often broader than it is tall, white or pinkish-tinged when young; outer layer of 
skin peeling away in sheets at maturity (see photo on p. 695) L. marg;natum & others, p. 694 
4. Not as above (if peeling in sheets, then much taller than it is broad) .................... 5 
5. Fruiting body 3-12 (14) cm broad, with a narrowed rooting base; outer layer ofperidium(skin) 
composed of spines and granules, the spines often tufted or joined at their tips; usually in open, 
sandy, or cultivated ground ... Bov;stella rad;cata(see Lycoperdonpu/cherrimum. p.694) 
5. Not with above features; rooting base absent and, or fruiting body considerably smaller .. 6 
6. Fruiting body golden-orange to bright yellow when young . (see Bov;sta& D;sciseda, p.696) 
6. Not as above; differently colored ................................................. 7 
7. Fruiting body lavender-tinged or with lavender-tinged spines when young; found mainly in 
eastern North America............................. L.peck;;(see L.per/atum. p. 693) 
7. Fruiting body not lavender-tinged when young.. .... ... .. . . .... ... ... . ..... . ... .... 8 
8. Typically growing in grass, prairies, and other open areas; either paracapillitium present or 
capillitium with small round pits ................................................ 9 
8. Not as above; typically growing in woods and at their edges, under trees, on roadsides, etc. 11 
9. Sterile base very small or rudimentary; spore case rupturing through an apical pore; usually 
densely gregarious or in clusters ............. Vascellum curt;s;;(see V. pratense. p. 695) 
9. Notasabove ................................................................ 10 
10. Fruiting body typically with a large mouth at maturity (the top disintegrating); very common 
on lawns, golf courses, etc. ........................ Vascellum pratense & others, p. 695 
10. Fruiting body typically rupturing through a slit or tear at maturity; widespread but not common 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Bov;sta & D;sc;seda, p. 696) 
11. Spines on exterior of young fruiting body 2-6 mm long and often joined at their tips ..... 12 
11. Spines absent, or if present not as above (usually shorter and sparser) ................. 13 
12. Spines white becoming brown, leaving small scars or pockmarks on the inner peridium when 
they fall off ............................. L. amer;canum (see L. pu/cherrimum. p. 694) 
12. Spines remaining white until they fall off, not leaving scars (i.e., inner peridium smooth) .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. pulcherr;mum, p. 694 
13. Outer layer of peridium (skin) sloughing off in sheets or chunks at maturity; known only from 
the Pacific Northwest; rare (?) .................. L. nettyana (see L. marginatum. p. 694) 
13. Not as above; very common and widespread ...................................... 14 
14. Mature spore mass olive-brown to brown; spines leaving pockmarks on inner peridium when 
they fall away (but marks may disappear, leaving inner peridium smooth) L. perlatum, p. 693 
14. Mature spore mass purple-brown; spines not leaving scars ............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L. umbr;num (see L. per/atum. p. 693) 
Lycoperdon pyriforme (Pear-Shaped Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY pear-shaped to nearly round, but usually with a stemlike sterile 
base; 1.5-5 cm high and sometimes almost as broad in the widest part. Peridium (skin) 
whitish to pale brown when young, yellowish to dark rusty-brown in age; at first smooth 
or with a few small scattered spines on top, then becoming finely cracked to form small 
patches or minute granules or particles (making it rough to the touch), this rough outer 
layer slowly but eventually falling away to expose the smooth inner layer in which an 
apical pore or tear is very slow to form. STERILE BASE small or well-developed, 
spongy when fresh, occupying the stemlike base (if base is present); chambers very small; 
conspicuous white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) usually radiating from the base and 
connected to others in the surrounding wood or humus. SPORE MASS at first firm and 
white, then yellow to olive and finally deep olive-brown and powdery. Spores 3-4.5 
microns, round, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on stumps, rotting logs, sawdust, 
and in lignin-rich humus; widely distributed and common, fruiting mostly in the fall and 
winter in our area, but old bleached-out fruiting bodies can be found most any time. It 
sometimes forms dense clusters "as large as a loaf of bread" (to borrow a phrase from 
Alexander Smith). 
...... 
r 
@ 
...;.-- 
l' 
Lycoperdon pyriforme, immature specimens. Note absence of prominent spines, the narrowed 
sterile base, plus the clustered growth habit and white mycelial threads. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when young, but only worth collecting when it occurs in quantity. 
In my fickle fungal opinion it is one of the better puffballs, but is not as good as "a loaf of 
bread" and is apt to be bitter if not absolutely white and firm inside. 
COMMENTS: The tendency to grow on rotting wood is a distinctive feature ofthis pear- 
shaped puffball, but it often appears to be terrestrial (when growing from buried wood 
or humus rich in lignin). The white rhizomorphs or "roots" that emanate from the base of 
the fruiting body plus the narrowed or stemlike base and absence of prominent spines 
are also good field marks. I t is one of the few L ycoperdons that occurs in sufficient quantity 
to merit collecting for the table. Other species: L.pedicellatum also grows on rotten wood. 
but has longer spines and ornamented spores. 
Lycoperdonfoetidum (Dark Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY pear-shaped to nearly round, but usually with a narrowed base; 1.5-6 
cm high and 1.5-4 cm broad. Outer layer of peridium (skin) composed of fine pointed 
black to dark brown spines (especially dense on top) interspersed with granular material, 
the spines persisting or eventually falling away; background (inner layer) thin, grayish- 
tan to yellowish (usually distinctly yellow in age), developing an apical pore or tear at 
maturity. STERILE BASE well-developed, chambered and spongy when fresh; exterior 
usually paler than the rest of fruiting body, at least when young. SPORE MASS white 
when young, then yellow, finally dull cinnamon-brown to dark brown or sepia, and pow- 
dery. Spores 4-5 microns, round, minutely spiny. 
Lycoperdonfoetidum, immature specimens. Note the dark brown to blackish color-its principal 
fieldmark. A pore forms at the top in old age. 
"I' 
'''i. 
.,," 
'> 
'" : 
..- 
" to} 
, 
'" 
'-.... 
./ 
It 
LYCOPERDON 
693 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus and debris in deep woods along 
the west coast (also Europe). Fairly common in our area from fall through early spring- 
especially under conifers- but easily overlooked because of its dark color. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible when firm and white inside; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: Also known as L. nigrescens, this attractive puffball is our only Lyco- 
perdon with dark brown to black spines when immalure (several species may be quite 
dark in age, however-see L. per/alum). The dark spines contrast nicely with the white 
flesh, and the yellowish background color that develops in age is also distinctive. The 
species epithet is something of a misnomer, for I have never found it to have an odor other 
than the usual slightly unpleasant smell that all ripening puffballs develop. 
Lycoperdon per/alum (Common Puffball; Gemmed Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY pear-shaped or top-shaped (broader above) or with a flattened lop, 
or at times practically round with a narrowed, often wrinkled stemlike base; 1.5-6 (9) cm 
broad, 3-7 (10) cm high. Outer layer of peridium (skin) consisting of slender, short, cone- 
shaped spines interspersed with smaller spines or granules, the larger ones leaving scars 
or pockmarks when they fall off; spines white to gray or in one form brown. Inner layer 
at first with scars, but often smooth in old age, white to tan becoming yellowish-brown 
to grayish-brown or dark brown in old age; eventually rupturing through a pore at the 
top. STERILE BASE large, well-developed, chambered, forming a stalklike base beneath 
the spore mass; at first white and spongy, then yellow, olive, brown, or chocolate-colored. 
SPORE MASS firm and white but soon becoming soft and turning yellow, then olive, and 
finally becoming dark olive-brown to chocolate-brown or brown and powdery. Spores 
3.54.5 microns, round, minutely spiny. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or clustered on ground in woods and under 
trees, along roads, or sometimes in the open; very widely distributed. It is probably the 
most abundant woodland puffball in North America, and our region is no exception. It 
can be found most any time in our area, but usually fruits in the fall or winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when firm and white inside, but specimens showing the slightest 
traces of yellow should not be eaten. It occasionally occurs in enough quantity to merit 
collecting, but in my experience it is bland at best and bitter at worst. 
Lycoperdon per/alum, maturing specimens. If you look closely you can see some of the spines and 
the small scars they leave when they fall off. Younger specimens usually lack the apical pore that is 
beginning to form in these; older ones are often smooth (without scars or pockmarks). 
694 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: Also known as L. gemmatum, this cosmopolitan puffball is easily told 
by its white to gray or brownish, slender, cone-shaped spines which leave small scars behind 
when they fall off. As pointed out in the description, however, the pockmarks may 
eventually disappear. It is one of the most variable of all puffballs, especially in color and 
size, but the well-developed sterile base, dark olive-brown mature spore mass, and 
ubiquitousness help to identify it. Very large specimens are occasionally found, but these 
can be distinguished from Calvatia by the apical pore which forms in old age. There are 
several similar species, including: L. umbr;num (=L. molle), widely distributed and 
common, with spines that do not leave scars plus a dark brown to purple-brown mature 
spore mass and a purplish-tinged sterile base at maturity; L. muscorum, small and rare, 
found in deep moss; L. peck;;, with lavender-tinged spines when young; andL. r;mulatum, 
with purplish spores and a nearly smooth peridium. See also L. pyriforme. 
Lycoperdonpulcherrimum (Long-Spined Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY more or less pear-shaped or rounded above with a narrowed, stem- 
like, often wrinkled base; 2-5 cm broad and high. Outer layer of peridium (skin) with a 
dense coating of long (3-6 mm), slender, white spines which typically form numerous 
fascicles (by uniting at their tips); spines eventually wearing away to expose the smooth 
brown to dark purple-brown inner layer; pore forming at the top in age. STERILE BASE 
occupying up to one half the height of fruiting body, chambered, white when young, brown 
to purple-brown in age. SPORE MASS white and firm at first, becoming yellow and 
eventually dark purple-brown and powdery. Spores 4-4.5 microns, round, minutely spiny, 
with a long pedicel ("tail") 10-13 microns in length. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups in humus or on very rotten wood, usually under 
hardwoods. It is not uncommon in eastern North America (especially the southern states), 
and I occasionally find it ( or something very similar) in our area in the fall and early winter. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when young, but too small and infrequent to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The long white spines that are frequently joined at their tips distinguish 
this small puffball from the more common L. perlalUm and other small species. L. ech;- 
natum (now called L. amer;canum by some puffball pundits) is a similar but more common 
species with white spines that soon turn brown and leave small marks or reticulations on 
the inner layer of the spore case when they fall off. A third puffball that often has united 
-albeit shorter-spines, Bov;stella rad;cata, strikes a much different pose: it is larger 
(3-10 (14) cm), with a thick, rooting base and preference for disturbed or open ground. 
Though widespread, it is not particularly common, at least in our area. 
Lycoperdon marginatum (Peeling Puffball) 
FR UITIN G BODY at first round to somewhat flattened, at maturity often broader than 
it is tall, the underside usually wrinkled (at least in age) and sometimes witha short, rooting 
base; 1-5 cm in diameter. Peridium (skin) white or tinged pinkish when young, the outer 
layer composed of short erect warts or spines which peel off in sheets, exposing the smooth 
to slightly scurfy or faintly pitted, pale to dark olive-brown inner layer; an apical pore 
eventually forming. STERILE BASE chambered, usually well-developed but sometimes 
inconspicuous. SPORE MASS white and firm at first, then olive to grayish-brown and 
eventually powdery. Spores 3.5-5.5 microns, round, minutely ornamented or smooth, 
sometimes with a broken pedicel ("tail"). 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups or clusters on ground, usually in sandy soil or waste 
places; widely distributed. I find it regularly in sandy soil under oak, pine, madrone, and 
manzanita, usually in the late fall and winter. 
A 
!. 
i-- 
i. 
. . 
.  
". 
,. 
, 
 .. 
"," 
Lycoperdon marginatum, maturing specimens. Note how the outer layer of the spore case is peeling 
away in sheets. Exterior is white or pinkish-tinged when immature, browner in age. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when firm and white inside. In Mexico, this species and L. mizte- 
corum are used to induce auditory hallucinations. It is known as "gi-i-sa-wa," meaning 
..fungus of the second quality"(L. miztecorum being the fungus offirst quality). However, 
no intoxicating substances were found when these puffballs were analyzed. 
COMMENTS: The peculiar manner in which the outer layer of the peridium separates 
completely from the inner layer and peels off in sheets is the hallmark of this pleasing 
puffball. L. cand;dum is a synonym.L. nettyana, known only from the Pacific Northwest, 
also peels off in sheets, but is more or less pear-shaped (with a well-developed, stalklike 
sterile base). Vascellum (=Lycoperdon) curtis;; is also quite similar, but usually grows 
in grass and has little or no sterile base. L. rimulatum (see comments under L. perlarum) 
sometimes peels off in sheets, but has a smooth (spineless) peridium. 
Vascellum pratense (Field Puffball) 
FR UITIN G BODY typically top-shaped (broader above) or round with a narrowed base, 
often wrinkled somewhat below; 2-6 cm high and 2-4 cm broad. Outer layer of peridium 
(skin) scurfy from a coating of particles or fine spines (especially on top) which disappear 
in age, exposing the smooth inner layer; white when young, yellowish-tan to metallic 
brown in age ( or the inner layer grayish); rupturing at the top to form a large pore that soon 
widens so that only the base and lower portion of the spore case remain, forming a..bowl." 
STERILE BASE usually well-developed, chambered, white becoming brownish or 
purplish in age, separated from the spore mass by a thin membrane (but see comments). 
SPORE MASS white but rather soft when young, then greenish-yellow and finally olive- 
brown and powdery. Spores 3-5 microns, round, minutely warted, more or less apiculate. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in grassy places-la wns, golf courses, pastures, 
etc; widely distributed, but especially common on the west coast(along with V./loydianum 
-see comments). In our mild climate it occurs year-round, but is most abundant in the 
fall. I have also seen large fruitings in Oregon. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when immature, but of mediocre quality. 
Vascel/um pratense is a small grassland puffball with a conspicuous sterile base. Specimens at left 
are immature; bowl-shaped specimen at right is quite old. 
. "it,' 
",.. . . 
'-41. 
696 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: This undistinguished grassland puffball can be distinguished by its modest 
size, the presence of a sterile base and soft, deciduous, scurfy spines or granules, and the 
bowl- or urnlike remains of ruptured specimens. It is often found in the company of Bo- 
vista p/umbea, which is rounder and smoother and lacks a sterile base. It used to be called 
Lycoperdon h;emale, but was transferred to the genus Vascel/um because of microscopic 
differences. However, now that taxonomists have settled upon its genus name, they cannot 
seem to agree on a species epithet. Some hold out for V. pratense, others for V. depressum, 
while Alexander Smith has described the common western variant as a "new" species, V. 
Iloyd;anum, because the membrane separating the spore mass from the sterile base is not 
very distinct. It hardly matters what you call it, however, since it belongs to that vast army 
of fungi that are "better neglected than collected." Other species: V. (=Lycoperdon) curtis;; 
is a small (0.5-2 cm) widespread species with numerous spines when young and a distinct 
apical pore at maturity. It somewhat resembles Lycoperdon marginatum when fresh, but 
usually grows gregariously in grass. 
BOVIST A & DISCISEDA (Tumbling Puffballs) 
S mall or occasionally medium-sized puffballs found mostly in grassy or open areas. FR U ITIN G 
BODY more or less round to somewhat flattened or irregular; peridium two-layered, rupturing 
to form a large mouth at the top (Bovista), or often rupturing basally( Disciseda); inner layer usually 
thin and papery when mature; outer layer usually lacking distinct spines or warts. persistent in 
Disciseda. disappearing in Bovista. STERILE BASE typically absent or rudimentary. SPORE 
MASS firm and white becoming powdery and brown to yellowish. Spores round to oval or elliptical, 
minutely warted or spiny or smooth, often pedicellate. Capillitium present, typically branched. 
THESE small (marble- to baseball-sized) puffballs usually lack the sterile base charac- 
teristic of Lycoperdon and are smaller and/ or smoother than most Ca/vatia species. In 
old age they often break loose from the soil so that the thin, lustrous, papery spore cases 
tumble about freely in the wind. 
Bovista species release their spores through an apical pore or large mouth, and are 
probably the most common puffballs of our lawns and pastures. Disciseda, on the other 
hand, is as rare as it is bizarre. In the most common species, D. candida, the tough outer 
peridium splits around its "equator" and the papery inner layer ruptures basally, then 
the spore case breaks loose and flips over so as to resemble an acorn in a cup. 
Bovistas are edible when firm and white inside, but are bland at best and bitter at worst. 
Discisedas are too rare to be of food value and are not normally found until they are old 
and powdery. One representative of each genus is described here. 
Key to Bovista & Disciseda 
1. Outer layer of peridium (skin) persistent, often incrusted with sand or dirt particles and often 
forming an acornlike cup around the inner layer; spores typically released through a small 
pore or tear at maturity; not common ...................... D. candida & others, p. 698 
1. Not as above; outer layer of peridium not persistent, or if persistent then typically rupturing 
radially or forming a large mouth at top of spore case .............................. 2 
2. Fruiting body bright yellow to golden-orange when young B. colorata(see B.plumbea, p. 697) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Fruiting body typically buried in ground except for the apex or mouth, even at maturity .. 4 
3. Not as above (but fruiting body may be buried or half-buried when very young) ......... 5 
4. Outer peridium often persisting for a long time; found ingrass orprairiesin north-central United 
States and Canada ........................................ Gastrosporium simplex 
4. Not as above; found mainly in eastern North America under trees, along roads, in bare soil 
and waste places, etc. .............................. B. minor (see B. plumbea, p. 697) 
BOVIST A & DISCISEDA 
697 
5. Sterile base present .............................. B. dakotense (see B. p/umbea. below) 
5. Sterile base absent or rudimentary ............................................... 6 
6. Fruiting body small, with crowded spines and scurf when young, rupturing through an apical 
pore at maturity; usually clustered or densely gregarious . (see Lycoperdon & Allies, p. 690) 
6. Not as above; fruiting body smooth or with small warts or granules when young ......... 7 
7. Fruiting body small (less than 2 cm broad) and round, but usually with a narrowed or pinched, 
rooting base; rupturing through an apical pore at maturity ............................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B. pus;//a & B. /ong;spora (see B. p/umbea. below) 
7. Not as above; usually rupturing through a large mouth or tear at maturity .............. 8 
8. Fruiting body typically 1-3 (6) cm broad and attached to ground by a small patch of dirt- bound 
fibers when young ......................... _ . . _ . . . . . . _ . . B. ptumhea & others, below 
8. Fruiting body typically 3-9 cm broad, usually attached to ground by a small cord or ""root" 
when young ................................................................. 9 
9. Spore case typically dark brown to bronze-brown or coppery when mature; common in North 
America ........................................... B. pita (see B. p/umbea. below) 
9. Spore case typically gray to lead-colored when mature; common in Eurasia, uncommon or 
absent (?) in North America ..................... B. n;grescens (see B. p/umbea. below) 
Bovista plumbea (Tumbling Puffball; Tumble Ball) 
FRUITING BODY round or slightly flattened, 14 (8) em in diameter, usually with a 
small patch of dirt (held together by fibers) at base. Outer layer of peridium (skin) white, 
smooth, felty, or with small flattened scales, peeling away or shrivelling up in age to reveal 
the smooth, papery inner layer which is blue-gray to purplish-brown or lead-colored in 
age and usually has a metallic luster; inner layer rupturing at the top to form a large 
circular ""mouth." STERILE BASE absent. SPORE MASS white and firm at first, then 
yellow-olive and mushy, finally powdery and olive-brown to deep chocolate-brown. 
Spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, oval or broadly elliptical to nearly round, minutely spiny to 
nearly smooth, with a long pointed pedicel (""tair') 8-14 microns in length. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in grassy places; widely distributed and 
very common. In our area it fruits mainly in the fall and winter in pastures, year-round 
on lawns, golf courses, and cemeteries. The thin, papery windblown spore cases can be 
found most any time. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when immature, but mediocre. It is bland, and a great many would 
be needed for a meal. 
COMMENTS: This paltry puffball is a common fungal feature of our lawns and pastures. 
In the immature stage it can be distinguished from Vascel/um pratense and other grass- 
loving puffballs by its small size, smooth white skin, and absence of a sterile base, while 
older specimens are easily told by their lustrous, paper-thin spore cases. Another wide- 
spread cosmopolitan species, B. pila, is slightly larger (3-9 em in diameter) and attached to 
the ground by a small cord or "root." It has a dark brown to bronze mature spore case, 
smooth apedicellate (tail-less) spores, and grows in cultivated and manured soil as well as 
in grass and open woods. I have found it several times in our area, but it is not nearly as 
Bov;sta p/umbea. immature specimens. This common small round puffball of lawns and pastures 
lacks a sterile base. Note the patch of dirt-bound fibers below. B. pi/a (not illustrated) is similar but 
slightly larger and has a rootlike cord at the base rather than a patch of fibers. 
'" 
"..... .. 
, ... 
"" 
.. 
. .. 
Bovisla plumbea. mature specimens. Note metallic lustre. thin skin. and the large mouth that is 
starting to form in each one. 
numerous as B. plumbea. Another larger species with a cordlike root, B. nigrescens, is 
lead-gray when mature and is of questionable occurrence in North America. A cosmopoli- 
tan species, B. pusilla (=Lycoperdon pusillum), is one of our smallest puffballs. It is 
marble-sized and more or less round above and pinched below to a cordlike root. It also 
lacks a sterile base and the sporesare not pedicellate. It usually grows ingrass, bare ground, 
vacant lots, sandy soil, etc.; it is also known asB. cali/ornica. Other small species include: 
B. longispora, similar to B. pusilla, but with a slight sterile base and elliptical spores; 
B. leucoderma, reddish- to bronze-brown when mature with a patch of fibers at the base 
when young; B. minor, rare, with a trash- or dirt-covered spore case, found in poor soils 
and usually developing underground; B. colorata (=Lycoperdon coloratum), easily told 
by its bright yellow to golden-orange color; and B. dakotense, one of the few members 
of the genus to have a sterile base (leading to confusion with Lycoperdon, but usually 
growing in grassy or open areas). None of these are worth eating. 
Disciseda candida (Acorn Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY round to somewhat flattened or irregular, 0.8-3 cm broad. Outer 
layer of peridium (skin) dirt-incrusted, composed of white mycelial matter that is cottony 
when young but tough in age; inner layer minutely granulose or scurfy, pallid to tan or 
grayish, forming a basal pore at maturity. Outer layer rupturing around its periphery, 
the upper portion retaining the inner layer (spore case) within it, and detaching and flip- 
ping over so as to resemble an acorn in its cup (thereby causing the pore to appear apical). 
STERILE BASE absent. SPORE MASS white when very young, soon yellowish to olive, 
finally olive-brown to brown and powdery. Spores 3.54.5 microns, round, minutely 
warted, with a short stubby pedice1("tail"). 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups in pastures and other grassy or open areas, along paths, 
in barnyards, etc; usually developing at or beneath ground level and then flipping over or 
breaking free to tumble about in the wind. It is widely distributed, but not common. It 
has been found in southern California on sandy and grassy soil. In eastern North America 
it is sometimes found with Arachnion album (see the key to Lycoperdales). D. sublerranea 
(see comments) has been reported from Washington, Colorado, and Wyoming. 
EDIBILITY: Worthless-it is rarely found when white inside, and is insubstantial anyway. 
COMMENTS: This peculiar puffball is easily told by its small size and acornlike mature 
fruiting body. Other species: D. subterranea is similar, but has a grayish to bluish-gray 
spore case and larger spores, while D. pedicellata has spores with long "tails." Several 
other species occur in sandy or exposed soil in California and theSouthwest, butare rarely 
collected and difficult to identify because they are not necessarily acornlike. They have very 
thin spore cases (as in Bovisla) that usually retain vestiges of the outer peridium. Some 
of them are: D. ater, which has a blackish outer peridium; D. luteola, originally described 
from Lake Tahoe, California, with a yellowish to dull yellow-brown spore case; and D. 
brandegeei, a desert species with smooth spores. 
698 
699 
GEASTRUM, ASTRAEUS, & MYRIOSTOMA 
(Earthstars) 
Small to medium-sized, mostly terrestrial fungi. FRUITING BODY round or flattened when 
young (usually underground in this stage), but at maturity the uuter wall (peridium) splitting into 
several starlike rays which curl back (and often under) the spore case. SPORE CASE (inner peri- 
dium) smooth or roughened, rupturing through an apical pore (Geastrum & Astraeus) or through 
several pores (Myriostoma). or irregularly (Astraeus). SPORE MASS white when very young 
(underground), brown and powdery when mature. STALK and STERILE BASEabsent, but spore 
case sometimes mounted on a pedicel (short stalk) or pedicels. Spores round and warted or 
occasionally smooth. Capillitium present, branched in Astraeus. unbranched in Geastrum and 
Myriostoma. 
EAR THST ARS are modified puffballs in which the thick outer skin splits into starlike 
niys which unfold and often recurve, exposing the spore case (inner skin) to the elements. 
Some puffballs and earthballs (e.g., Scleroderma geaster, Mycenastrum corium) rupture 
in starlike fashion, but only the earthstars have a discrete spore case intact within the rays. 
Some earthstars are hygroscopic; the rays open in wet weather to expose the spore case 
to raindrops, and then close up in dry weather to protect it. This phenomenon can be 
observed at home by placing a closed-up earthstar in a shallow bowl of water. If hygro- 
scopic. it will open up in a few minutes-even if it is a year or two old! Earthstars are also 
accomplished acrobats, coming in an amazing assortment of unorthdox and extra- 
ordinary poses. Geastrum fornicatum in particular is so prodigious a contortionist 
that it is difficult to find two that are alike. 
The earthstars are comprised of three genera: Geastrum (= Geaster), Astraeus, and 
Myriostoma. Geastrum embraces a sizable number of small to medium-sized, difficult- 
to-identify earthstars that rupture through a distinct apical pore and have small spores 
(typically less than 7 microns long). Some Geastrums are hygroscopic, but most are not. 
Astraeus, on the other hand, is always hygroscopic. It includes two species (one quite 
large) that rupture irregularly or through a large apical pore or slit, and have relatively 
large spores (typically more than 7 microns in diameter). The third genus, Myriosroma, 
includes a single rare species whose spore case is perforated by many holes (like a salt- 
shaker) instead of just one. Most puffball pundits place the latter two genera alongside the 
earth balls in the Sclerodermatales because of certain microscopic features. However, they 
are grouped here with Geastrum because of their superficial similarity. 
Fruiting body development in Geaslrumfornicalum. Earthstars resemble puffballs when very young 
(specimen at bottom left), but their outer skin splits into rays and unfolds (bottom right), revealing 
the inner skin or spore case (specimens at top). See p. 701 for another photo of this species. 
,. 
 
 
700 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
Earthstars occur in a variety of habitats (pastures, woods, waste places, etc.), but like 
many of the Gasteromycetes, they are especially prevalent and diverse in arid and semi- 
arid regions. The Southwest, for instance, is unusually rich in Geastrum species. They 
are real crowdpleasers, but have no culinary value because of their tough or woody 
texture.* Several earthstars are described and/ or keyed out here, but in the case of Geas- 
trum, they represent only a fraction of the total number. 
Key to Geastrum, Astraeus, & Myriostoma 
I. Spore case typically rupturing irregularly or through a single apical pore (mouth at top) .. 2 
I. Spore case typically with more than one (usually several) pores at maturity ............ 18 
2. Rays distinctly hygroscopic (i.e., folding over the spore case in dry weather to protect it and 
unfolding when moistened); spore case usually sessile (nol seated on a short stalk) ...... 3 
2. Rays not hygroscopic; spore case mayor may not be seated on a short stalk ............. 7 
3. Fruiting body 5-15 cm or more broad when expanded; spore case 2.5-5 cm broad, rupturing 
irregularly (i.e., not forming a distinct pore) ................... Astraeus pteridis, p. 706 
3. Fruiting body smaller and/ or rupturing through an apical pore or slit .................. 4 
4. Spore case roughened by numerous particles; apical pore often irregular or poorly defined or 
merely a slit; underside (exterior) of rays often with blackish fibrils; spores over 7 microns 
in diameter ......................................... Astraeus hygrometricus, p. 705 
4. Not with above features; apical pore usually well-defined and spores less than 7 microns .. 5 
5. Apical pore (mouth) with distinct radial grooves ..................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Geastrum drummondii & others (see ASlraeus hygromelricus. p. 705) 
5. Apical pore not grooved (but may be fibrillose) .................................... 6 
6. Apical pore fibrillose . Geastrum mammosum & others (see ASlraeus hygromelricus. p.705) 
6. Apical pore more or less naked .. Geastrumfloriforme(see ASlraeus hygromelricus. p. 705) 
7. Spore case mounted on a distinct pedicel (short stalk) ............................... 8 
7. Spore case sessile (stalkless) or nearly so ......................................... 15 
8. Mouth of spore case "beaked" (i.e., forming a raised cone), the beak longitudinally grooved 9 
8. Not as above; mouth not beaked, or if beaked, then not grooved ..................... II 
9. Pedicel with a distinct collar around base of spore case ........................ _ . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Geastrum striatum (see G. peclinalum. p. 702) 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. "Beak" long; pedicel also long (2-6 mm) and slender .......... Geastrum pectinatum, p. 702 
10. Not as above .................... Geastrum nanum & others (see G. peclinalum. p. 702) 
II. Fruiting body small, typically less than 3 (4) cm broad when expanded; spore case typically 
3-10 mm broad ........... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 12 
II. Fruiting body larger, typically 2-6 cm or more broad; spore case typically 1-2.5 cm broad 13 
12. Fruiting body usually with 8-12 rays..... .. Geastrum minimum (see G.fomicalum. p. 701) 
12. Fruiting body usually with 4-6 rays ...... Geastrum quadrifidum (see G.fomicalum. p. 701) 
13. Fruiting body with 4-5 (6) rays (but the tips may split) that are usually attached to a "cup" of 
tissue, mycelium, and debris; fruiting body poised on the tips of its rays when mature; apical 
pore or mouth more or less same color as rest of spore case '" Geastrumfornicatum, p. 70 I 
13. Fruiting body usually with 6-12 rays, or if with fewerrays then not as above ........... 14 
14. Mouth area usually delimited (set off from rest of spore case), sometimes paler in color than rest 
of spore case ................... . . . . . . . Geastrum limbatum (see G. peclinalum. p. 702) 
14. Mouth area not clearly delimited ......... Geastrum rufescens (see G. peclinalum. p. 702) 
* Captain Charles McIlvaine, as usual. casts a dissenting opinion, saying of ASlraeushygromelricus:"whenyoung** 
it is, when cooked, soft and creamy inside. The outer part is tough and semi-glutinous but of pleasant texture. It 
has not a marked flavor, but makes a succulent dish." (Does this make any sense to you?) 
**Immature earthstars are not commonly found because they're inconspicuous and often develop underground. 
GEASTRUM, ASTRAEUS, & MYRIOSTOMA 
701 
15. Fleshy upper (inner) layer of rays often breaking away to form a broad cup or saucer around 
the base of spore case ...................................... Geastrum tr;plex, p. 703 
15. Not as above; spore case not seated in a saucer .................................... 16 
16. Mouth area sharply delimited (i.e., with a circular zone around it) .................... 17 
16. Mouth not sharply delimited ............. Geastrumf;mbr;atum (see G. saccalum. p. 703) 
17. Mouth with distinct radial grooves Geastrum campestre (see ASlraeus hygromelricus. p. 705) 
17. Mouth not grooved, but often silky-fibrillose ................ Geastrum saccatum, p. 703 
18. Spore case mounted on several pedicels (short stalks) ....... Myr;ostoma coliJorme, p. 704 
18. Spore case sessile (stalkless) ..... Geastrumplur;osteum(see Myriosloma coliforme. p. 704) 
GeastrumJornicatum (Acrobatic Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round or flattened when young and incrusted with debris, the outer 
wall (peridium) then splitting into 3-6 (usually4 or 5) rays which peel back and under until 
they're more or less erect. Mature fruiting body 3-6 cm broad and 5-10 cm high, usually 
poised on the pointed tips of its rays, the tips joined to a concave mycelial mat or "cup" 
which has a grayish interior and debris-incrusted exterior and may be broken into rays 
itself. RAYS not hygroscopic; underside usually smooth and tan to brown; upper surface 
chocolate-brown to dark brown or nearly blackish, but peeling off in patches to reveal the 
smooth, paler brown or tan undersurface. SPORE CASE 1-2.5 cm broad, round or 
somewhat flattened to urn-shaped, mounted on a pedicel (short stalk), often with a 
compressed collar underneath it (at the top of the pedicel); surface brown to dark choco- 
late brown, finely velvety; rupturing at the top to form a fairly large, irregularly torn or 
lacerated pore. SPORE MASS chocolate-brown to blackish-brown and powdery at 
maturity. Spores 3-5 microns, round, warted. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in humus under trees, on rubbish, around 
stables and other waste places, etc.; widely distributed, but apparently rare except in 
southern California and the Southwest, where it is quite common. In our area] have 
found it in only one locality-under oaks where there is run-off from a bathing area for 
horses-but it fruits there by the hundreds and can be found every month of the year. In 
New Mexico it is quite common under juniper. 
Geaslrum lomicalum. mature specimens perched on the tips of their rays. Note how the rays peel 
in patches and how the specimens at left are firmly attached to a mat or cup of mycelium and debris. 
See p. 699 for another photograph of this acrobatic species. 
A 
,. "f)., 
" 
....... '\ 
 .. 
... If.... 
. ,,9' 1.". 
- 
.,",,, 
. 
, 
.., 
.- 
. 
, 
" 
.... 
 
.. 
- 
'." .. 
., 
. 
, ,. 
} . 
. 
 . 
\ 
'" 
1.: 
-i 
-"" 
.... 
702 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
EDIBILITY: Inedible, but makes an extraordinary ornament or conversation piece (it 
is easily dried). 
COMMENTS: One of the most distinctive of all fleshy fungi, this earthstar is a true 
pleasure to find. Mature individuals defy description, but look something like a cross 
between a flat tire and a ballet dancer. The tendency of the rays to stand erect on their tips 
(like a ballet dancer) plus the membranous mycelial cup ("flat tire") to which they're 
attached are the principal field marks. Because of the likeness to a human figure, it 
was named Fungus anthropomorphus when first described in 1688. Specimens are some- 
times found with only one or two "arms" extended, as ifthey were putting out tentative 
"feelers" before committing themselves completely (and irrevocably) to exposure. Other 
species: G. quadrifidum (also called G. coronatum) is a similar but somewhat smaller 
species with a well-defined, conical mouth that is paler than the rest of the spore case; it is 
also equipped with a mycelial "cup" and is widely distributed. G. minimum, which mayor 
may not be a diminutive form of G. coronatum. has8-12 rays and usually lacks a mycelial 
cup; it occurs commonly in the Southwest under pinyon andjuniper. For other species with 
a pedicel beneath the spore case, see G. pectinatum. 
Geastrum pectinatum (Beaked Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall (peridium) then split- 
ting into 5-12 rays ( usually 6-10) which peel back and under or stand upright; 3-6 cm broad 
when expanded. RAYS not hygroscopic, copiously incrusted with mycelial matter and 
debris on underside (exterior); upper surface brown to grayish-brown, fleshy, cracking 
irregularly or flaking off as it dries, revealing the smooth undersurface. SPORE CASE 
0.5-2 cm broad, round to somewhat urn-shaped, mounted on a prominent pedicel; sur- 
face more or less smooth, lead-colored to purple-brown, but often appearing paler from a 
hoary sheen; underside sometimes striate or grooved near the pedicel; rupturing to form 
a prominent apical pore that is beaklike (more or less conical) and strongly grooved or 
furrowed longitudinally. Pedicel slender, 2-6 mm long, sometimes with a collar or ring 
around its middle or base. SPORE MASS brown and powdery when mature. Spores 
4-6 (7) microns, round, warted. 
HABITAT: Solitary or in groups in humus under trees, especially conifers such asjuniper, 
or less commonly in the open; widely distributed but not common, fruiting after rains but 
persisting for weeks or months. I have found it (or something very similar) in New Mexico. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to be edible. 
COMMENTS: The prominent pedicel and "beaked" mouth of the spore case distinguish 
this earthstar from most others. The rays are not hygroscopic, and their tips are not joined 
to a mycelial "cup" as in G. fornicatum. Other earthstars with a pedicel and grooved 
mouth include: G. striatum (=G. bryantii), similar but typically with a prominent collar 
at the base of the spore case (where it meets the pedicel); G. nanum (=G. schmide/ii), also 
similar but much smaller (up to 2.5 cm broad) and more common, with a shorter "beak" 
and a short, thick pedicel; G. smithii, common in the Southwest, with a flattened-conical 
mouth seated in a well-defined, depressed area; and G. xerophi/um, also common in the 
Southwest (but usually growing in the desert), with a short pedicel (if any) and a granular 
spore case. Two species with a non-grooved mouth should also be mentioned: G./imbatum 
is a medium-sized to fairly large species with a well-defined fibrillose (but not grooved 
or beaked) mouth and 6-12 rays (more than G.fornicatum-see photo on p. 703). It comes 
in a striking dark brown to black version that is common in the Southwest, and a paler 
(pinkish-buff to brown) form that is more widely distributed. G. ruJescens, on the other 
hand, has a poorly-defined, often fringed or torn mouth and a short or indistinct 
, 
'" 
Left Geastrum limbatum (see comments under G. pectinatum). Note the numerous rays and the 
pedicel (short stalk) below spore case. Right Geastrum triplex, mature specimen. The "saucer" 
around the spore case is distinctive. 
pedicel. It is fairly large (5-10 cm broad) and is more common in eastern North America 
than in the West. All of these are better eyed then fried. 
Geastrum triplex (Saucered Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round to flattened or bulblike when young, the outer wall splitting 
at maturity into 4-8 rays which unfold and then bend under the spore case; 3-10 cm broad 
when expanded. RAYS not hygroscopic, usually free of adhering debris on underside; 
upper surface with a rather thick, fleshy, pinkish to tan or brown layer that cracks into 
patches, the central region usually breaking loose to form a broad cup or saucer around 
the spore case. SPORE CASE 1-3 cm broad, round or flattened, sessile (nol mounted on 
a stalk); pale to dark tan, grayish, or even red4ish-brown, rupturing through an apical 
pore which is often paler, slightly raised, and radially fibrillose. SPORE MASS deep 
brown to smoky-brown and powdery when mature. Spores 3.5-4.5 microns, round, 
warted. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups in forest humus and under trees (usually hardwoods); 
widely distributed and common in some regions. I have found it only twice in our area 
(in the fall and winter), but have seen large fruitings under aspen in the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Supposedly edible when immature (white inside), but like all earthstars, 
rarely found in that stage, and too tough and fibrous to eat when older. 
COMMENTS: Also known as G. indicum, this relatively large, attractive earthstar is 
distinguished by the shallow cup or"saucer" that often forms around the base ofthe spore 
case. There seems to be a great deal of variation in the extent to which the fleshy upper 
surface of the rays cracks, and those which don't crack and lack a saucer can be confused 
with G. saccalurn and G. firnbriaturn (which, however, are often smaller). For other 
relatively large, non-hygroscopic earthstars, see comments under G. peclinaturn. 
Geastrum saccatum (Sessile Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round, flattened, or bulblike when young, the outer wall splitting 
at maturity into 4-8 rays which unfold and then bend back under the spore case; (1.5) 2-5 
cm broad when expanded. RA YS not hygroscopic, rather rubbery when fresh, relatively 
clean and buff to pale tan on underside; upper surface fleshy, pallid becoming pale tan, 
pinkish, or ochre-brown; sometimes cracking. SPORE CASE 0.5-2 cm broad, round to 
somewhat flattened, smooth, sessile (without a stalk or pedicel), papery, pallid to buff, 
dull grayish, or brownish; rupturing through an apical pore that is often paler in color 
and set off from the rest of the spore case by a circular line, ridge, or groove; pore usually 
raised and fibrillose. SPORE MASS brown and powdery when mature. Spores 3.5-5 
microns, round, warted. 
703 
" 
!. 
'\ 
.. 
""" 
\"--.... 
"  
"', 
Left Geastrum saccatum lacks a pedicel and "saucer," but features a circular zone around the pore 
at top. The rays often bend under the spore case as shown in photo at right. Right: Geastrumfim- 
briatum resembles G. saccatum. but lacks circular zone (see comments under latter species). 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus under trees (especially conifers), 
in woods, or occasionally in the open; widely distributed. This species and G.fimbriatum 
(see comments) seem to be the most common Geastrums in our area. They fruit mainly 
in the fall and winter, but persist for weeks or months without decaying. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible in the mature state in which it is usually found. 
COMMENTS: The spore case in this species has neither the pedicel (short stalk) of G. 
fornicatum and G. pectinatum. nor the saucer of G. triplex. and the rays are not hygro- 
scopic. There are several similar species, including: G. fimbriatum (=G. sessile), often 
slightly darker, with a torn or fringed apical pore that is not set off by a circle, usually 
growing under trees and widely distributed; and G. rufescens and G. xerophilum. both 
of which may have a slight pedicel (see comments under G. pectinatum for more details 
on these species, and also note the hygroscopic Geastrums discussed under Astraeus 
hygrometricus, most of which lack a pedicel). 
Myr;ostoma coliforme (Saltshaker Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall (peridium) splitting 
int05-14 pointed rays which open out; 2-12 cm broad when expanded. RAYS not hygro- 
scopic; more or less smooth on underside (exterior), but often covered with dirt near base; 
inner (upper) surface with a brown to cinnamon fleshy layer that weathers or peels away, 
revealing the paler (bufO undersurface. SPORE CASE 1-5 cm broad, round to somewhat 
flattened, usually mounted on several slender, short, sometimes inconspicuous pedicels 
(columns); surface minutely roughened, brown to silvery-brown or grayish in age, rup- 
turing through several to many mouths or pores, mostly on the upper portion (the number 
of mouths often corresponding to the number of pedicels). SPORE MASS powdery and 
brown at maturity. Spores 4-6 microns, round, warted. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups in sandy soil, sometimes under trees, fruiting after 
heavy rains but persisting year-round; widely distributed. It is usually listed as rare, but 
is not uncommon in New Mexico, where I have seen it in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible. 
COMMENTS: This fungal rarity can be recognized with clarity by its saltshaker-like 
spore case mounted on several short columns. Most taxonomists place it alongside 
Astraeus in the Sclerodermatales because of certain microscopic features. Geastrum 
pluriosteum is a rare southwestern earthstar that forms one to several pores on a stalkless 
spore case. 
704 
, 
.0; 
- 
I 
"- 
Aslraeus hygromelricus. mature specimens. Ten minutes before this picture was taken, the fully 
expanded individuals were curled up into tight "fists" like the one in foreground. However, a quick 
"bath" caused the "fists" to unclench. Note the roughened surface of the spore case. 
A straeus hygrometricus (H ygroscopic Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall splitting at maturity 
into 6-15 pointed rays; 1-5 (8) cm broad when fully expanded. RAYS hygroscopic (un- 
folding in wet weather and closing up over the spore case in dry weather), often unequal in 
length, tough and leathery when moist, hard when dry; underside (exterior) fibrillose, 
usually with adhering sand and sometimes with black hairlike threads (rhizomorphs) at 
base; upper surface (interior) at first smooth, but often developing numerous cracks, 
pale tan darkening to brown, gray, or blackish-brown. SPORE CASE 0.5-3 cm broad, 
round or somewhat flattened, sessile (without a stalk), thin and papery; surface whitish 
to grayish or brownish and roughened by particles (and/ or finely reticulate); rupturing 
at maturity through an irregular or poorly defined apical pore or slit. SPORE MASS 
brown to cocoa-brown and powdery when mature. Spores 7-11 microns, round, finely 
warted. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in old fields, sand or sandy soil, pastures, 
roadsides, waste places, etc.; worldwide in distribution. It grows from sea level to above 
timberline, from verdant pastures to desert wastelands. In our area it fruits mainly in the 
fall, but the tough fruiting bodies persist for months without decaying. I have seen hundreds 
of spiderlike fruiting bodies in Arizona under pinyon pine, but when the weathered, 
blackened outer skins (rays) are found without their spore cases, they look like old tire 
patches. 
EDIBILITY: Indisputably inedible because of its toughness. 
COMMENTS: This veritable barometer is the most theatrical of all the earthstars. A few 
minutes' immersion in water will open up old, dried-up specimens that seem as tightly 
closed as clenched fists. It is distinguished from A. pteridis by its smaller size (but see 
comments under that species). There are also several hygroscopic species of Geastrum 
that have spores less than 7.5 microns in diameter. They grow mainly in arid climates( e.g., 
the deserts of the West), but a few are more cosmopolitan. Several of these Geastrums can 
be distinguished from A. hygrometric us by the presence of a prominently grooved apical 
pore, e.g., G. drummondii, with a granular spore case; G. umbilicatum, with a smooth 
spore case; and G. campestre, with a roughened spore case and sometimes a short pedicel 
(stalk). Others have a fibrillose or fringed pore, e.g., G. mammosum, especially common 
in the Southwest under pinyon and juniper; G. recolligens, very similar, but found in sand 
or waste places; and G. arenarium, also in sand or deserts, but only slightly hygroscopic. 
Still others have a naked mouth (merely a puncture or slit) like that of A. hygrometricus. 
One ofthese, G.JloriJorme(=G. delicatus) is widely distributed and occurs in our area, but 
can be separated from A. hygrometricus by its small ( up to 1.5 cm broad), smoother spore 
case and smaller spores. 
, -,- .,,: 
:....,; 
;<t...: _' , 
- .. 
 , 
... 
<II 
.." 
",o:.:' 
 .,.. "t. 
't' 
., .1 
 " 
· ) f' :, .... 
.. fJ ' 
I, · 
, " 
,. 
( 
t 
. 
I 
,. '" - ;... 
......  . 
. 'Cr:... 'f \".-( .. 
 ... .. ,: 
J..,. . f 
,..... 'j , 
'.., 
....... . "' 
. 
.' 
" 
, (, 
t 
.....  ...... 
. .,. 
. -. 
,#.it... If 
.. . 
t 
- 
. 
 
, 
" : 
... 
# 
.. . , 
, . 
;. t 
... 
, ..".... 
,,' t 
. ........ 
- 
.. 
:.' 
.. 
=-.. ,. 
.... 
, 
 . . 
. . 
. \ . -.:.... ... : 
'\ . 
... t\.." 
\. 
-..," 
. i 
. i 
Astraeus pteridis. mature specimen. This species is much larger than A. hygrometricus and often 
has a more pronounced crazy-quilt pattern on its rays. Note how the spore case disintegrates irregu- 
larly. (Joel Leivick) 
Astraeus pteridis (Giant Hygroscopic Earthstar) 
FRUITING BODY round or somewhat flattened when young, the outer wall then split- 
ting into 6 or more rays;5-15 cm or more broad when fully expanded. RAYS hygroscopic 
(unfolding in wet weather, closing up overthe spore case indryweather), thick (3-6 mm), 
tough and leathery becoming hard or woody when dry; exterior (underside) with a thin 
coating of matted brownish fibrils which mayor may not wear away; upper surface (in- 
terior) often conspicuously cracked or fissured transversely to form a checked pattern; 
tan when fresh (but dark brown in the cracks), darker overall in age(but weathered speci- 
mens sometimes whitened). SPORE CASE2.5-5 cm broad, round or somewhat flattened, 
sessile (not seated on a stalk); at first roughened, veined, or fibrillose, but soon smooth or 
merely roughened; grayish-brown to brown; rupturing irregularly in age, i.e., not forming 
a distinct pore. SPORE MASS dark brown and powdery when mature. Spores 8-12 
microns, round, warted. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups on ground, usually along roads, rail- 
road tracks, in waste places, old fields, etc., but sometimes in woods; known only from 
western North America. In our area it is fairly common year-round. 
EDIBILITY: Much too leathery or woody to be edible. 
COMMENTS: The thick rays which are frequently checkered like a crooked crossword 
puzzle plus the large size and irregular rupturing of the spore case distinguish this im- 
pressive species from its more mundane cousin, A. hygrometricus. and other hygroscopic 
earthstars. However, the two species seem to intergrade in our area (e.g., you can find 
fairly large, uncheckered specimens), and consequently some earthstar authorities "re- 
duce" A. pteridis to a variety of A. hygrometricus. For some inexplicable reason, the 
fructifications remind me of "tribbles"-those lovable but relentlessly prolific creatures 
of "Star Trek" renown. 
707 
SCLERODERMA (Earthballs) 
Medium-sized to fairly large fungi found in humus, soil, sand, or on rotten wood. FRUITING 
BODY more or less round to oval, lobed, or with a stemlike base; rupturing irregularly in old age 
or splitting into starlike rays or sometimes forming an apical pore or tear. PERIDIUM usually 
one-layered and typically thick. tough. and rigid when fresh; smooth or wrinkled or with scales, 
typically yellowish to brown but sometimes whitish. STERILE BASE absent, but a stalklike base 
composed of tough mycelial fibers often present. SPORE MASS initially white and very firm, 
but in most cases soon becoming gray to purple-black (sometimes marbled with paler veins) and 
remaining firm. then eventually becoming powdery and sometimes browner. Spores more or less 
round, spiny and! or.reticulate, not borne in a hymenium. Capillitium absent or rudimentary. 
ALSO known as the thick-skinned or hard-skinned puffballs, the earthballs superficially 
resemble the true puffballs ( Calvaria. Lycoperdon. etc.), but differ in several fundamental 
respects. Their peridium (skin) is typically hard (rindlike) when fresh and tough or 
leathery in age, and the spore mass becomes colored (usually purple-gray to black) at 
an early age while remaining firm. In the puffballs, on the other hand, the peridium is 
often thin and papery in age and the spore mass becomes soft or mushy as it ripens 
(darkens). There are other differences as well. In Scleroderma there are no specialized 
threadlike cells ( capillitium) in the spore mass, the exterior ofthe spore case lacks the spines 
or soft particles found in many puffballs, and there is no sterile base, though a stalklike or 
rootlike mass of tough mycelial fibers is often present. These differences have led most 
taxonomists to group the Sclerodermas in a separate order, the Sclerodermatales, along 
with several other genera such as Pisolirhus. 
As their name implies, earthballs are often buried or partially buried before maturity, 
leading to possible confusion with the false truffles (Hymenogastrales & Allies). The 
spore mass, however, becomes powdery in old age and the thick, tough peridium is dis- 
tinctive. The deer truffles (Elaphomyces) also have a thick peridium, but tend to grow 
deeper in the ground, lack a distinct basal point of attachment, and bear their spores in asci. 
Sclerodermas are common and ubiquitous, but are not as conspicuous as the true 
puffballs. Their nomenclature is very confused. Over 150 species have been described 
but in a 1970 monograph, Gaston Guzman condenses them into a mere 21 widespread, 
polymorphic species. However, even with only 21 species to choose from, identification is 
difficult without a microscopic examination of the spores. The genus is divided into three 
"sections" based on whether the spores are echinulate (spiny), reticulate (covered with a 
network of ridges), or a compromise between the two, and species in the different sections 
resemble each other closely. 
Many Sclerodermas are thought to be mycorrhizal, but they can grow almost any- 
where-in woods or at their edges, under planted trees and shrubs, in sand and asphalt, 
along roads and trails, on exposed hillsides, around old stumps, etc. In our mild climate 
they occur year-round, but seem to favor warm weather. Three representative species are 
described here ( one from each "section") and several others are discussed. Sedecula, a rare, 
smooth-spored, underground genus possibly related to Scleroderma, is also keyed out. 
Key to Scleroderma 
1. Spore mass (interior) divided into large irregular chambers by tough cordlike veins (which may 
turn into coarse black mycelial cords at base); fruiting body 2-9 cm broad, oval to cushion- 
shaped; exterior often pitted or split in age, whitish to grayish to olive-buff or yellowish (but 
often blackening in age); spore mass black and powdery to slightly gelatinous when mature; 
spores 20-28.5 x 11-16 microns, smooth; widespread under western conifers (especially in 
mountains), but rather rare; usually growing underground ........... S edecula pulv;nata 
1. Not as above; mature spores ornamented; found underground or above; common ....... 2 
2. Fruiting body growing underground, typically without an obvious basal point of attachment to 
substrate; peridium (skin) sometimes marbled in cross-section; spores borne inside asci (but 
asci soon disintegrating) .................................. (seeElaphomyces, p. 862) 
2. Not as above; fruiting above the ground, or if underground then usually with an obvious base or 
point of attachment; peridium not marbled in cross-section; spores borne on basidia .... 3 
708 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
3. Peridium (skin) very thick (3-10 mm), rupturing into starlike lobes in old age; fruiting body 
medium-sized to large; spores partially reticulate ............. S. geaster & others, p. 710 
3. Not as above; either peridium thinner (averaging 1-4 mm) or not rupturing into starlike lobes; 
fruiting body fairly small to medium-sized (rarely large) ............................ 4 
4. Fruiting body with a long"stalk" composed oftough strands and fibers that totals at/east half 
(and usually three-quarters) of the fruiting body's total height; spores reticulate; found in 
sand dunes or sandy soil...................... .S. macrorhizon(seeS. citr;num. below) 
4. Not as above ("stalk" if present shorter and/ or habitat different) ...................... 5 
5. Peridium (skin) covered with prominent inherent rosette-like scales (i.e., each scale often with 
a central wart); widespread, but especially common in forests (see Color Plate 190) ...... 6 
5. Not as above; peridium typically smooth (at least when young) but often becoming fissured 
or cracking and peeling to form scales in age ...................................... 7 
6. Peridium( skin) rather thin( typically less than2 mm), usually rupturing in old age through a pore 
or slit at top; spores spiny ......... S. verrucosum& S. areo/atum (see S. c;tr;num. below) 
6. Peridium fairly thick (usually 1-4 mm), rupturing into lobes in age or forming an irregular 
pore; spores reticulate ........................................... S. citrinum, below 
7. Spores spiny but not reticulate ................................. S. cepa group. p. 709 
7. Spores reticulate or partially reticulate ...... S. bovista & others (see S. cepa group, p. 709) 
Scleroderma citrinum (Common Earthball) Color Plate 190 
FRUITING BODY 2-10 (12) cm broad and 2-6 cm high, round or somewhat flattened, 
the underside often with a stemlike base composed of ridges, mycelial fibers, and/ or 
adhering debris; eventually cracking into lobes to form an irregular pore, the lobes nol 
normally bending outward or unfolding appreciably. PERIDIUM (skin) hard and fairly 
rigid (rindlike), 1-3 mm thick, white when sectioned but usually staining pinkish (if fresh); 
surface yellow-brown to dingy yellow to ochre or tan and cracked or arranged into 
prominent, inherent scales which often have a smaller, central wart. SPORE MASS 
white when very young, soon gray to purple-gray with whitish veins often running through 
it, then dark purple-gray to purple-black or black and still solid and firm; eventually 
becoming powdery and blackish-brown. Spores 8-13 microns, round, strongly reticulate. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clumps on ground and rotten wood, 
usually in forests but sometimes in gardens or in sandy or disturbed soil; widespread and 
the most common of all Scleroderma species. Although it is more typically a northern 
than a southern species, I have seen enormous fruitings in the Great Smoky Mountains 
of Tennessee. In our area I have found it in a garden in October, but it is rare-at least 
in comparison to other species. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! If eaten raw or consumed in quantity it causes nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, and even chills or cold sweats. Nevertheless, it has been used by some unscrupu- 
lous individuals to adulterate truffles. 
COMMENTS: Also known as S. aurant;um and S. vulgare, this earth ball is easily 
recognized by its scaly, yellow-brown, rindlike skin that tends to stain pinkish when cut, 
and the purple-black spore mass (see color plate). It might be mistaken for an edible puff- 
ball, but is only rarely found while still white inside: The scales often looked embossed 
(i.e., with a central wart), a character that helps distinguish it from scaly specimens of 
S. cepa. S. bovisla. etc. (see comments under S. cepa). Other species: S. macrorhizon has a 
long "stalk" composed of tough strands and fibers and grows exclusively in sand (often 
in sand dunes!). It is widely distributed in northern latitudes and has spores similar to 
those of S. cilrinum. but slightly larger. S. verrucosum and S. areolatum (=S. lycoper- 
do;des) are smallish species with a thin (up to I mm thick), delicately scaly peridium that 
usually ruptures in old age through an apical pore or tear. Both have spiny rather than 
reticulate spores, and a stalklike, fibrous base, and are widely distributed under hard- 
woods or sometimes conifers. (In S. verrucosum the spores are 7-11 microns in diameter; 
in S. areo/alum they are 10-18 microns.) 
:.I 
"f 
J' 
.,.. 
. 
". t' t 
4J- 
. ,< ..1.. 11 
'" 
"- 
 
. 
 
Scleroderma cepa group. Note thick, relatively smooth skin and dark (purple-black) interior when 
young. Also note how the older specimen at right is beginning to split open. These specimens stained 
burgundy when rubbed, especially near base (staining is visible in middle specimen). 
Scleroderma cepa group (Smooth Earthball) 
FRUITING BODY 1.5-8 (10) em broad and/or high, more or less round to somewhat 
flattened or lobed (often broader than it is high), the underside often-but not always- 
with a rootlike or stalklike base made up of tough mycelial fibers and adhering debris; 
eventually rupturing irregularly or splitting at the top into lobes which may peel back 
slightly. PERIDIUM (skin) hard and fairly tough (rind like) when fresh, 1-3 mm thick, 
white in cross-section but often staining reddish-pink to vinaceous when cut (if fresh). 
Surface whitish or pallid, soon becoming buff, yellowish, straw-colored, or brownish, 
often staining reddish or vinaceous when rubbed (especially the underside), then dis- 
coloring brownish; smooth when young, often becoming areolate (cracked to form scales) 
in age or where exposed to light (especially on top). SPORE MASS white and very firm 
when young, soon becoming black or purple-black (sometimes with paler veins) while 
remaining firm, then eventually becoming powdery and somewhat paler or browner. 
Spores 7-12 microns. round, spiny but not at all reticulate. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious under trees (both hardwoods and conifers), 
in woods or cultivated areas, along roads, in gardens, lawns, etc.; widely distributed. 
In our area this species and its numerous look-alikes (see comments) are common year- 
round in a variety of habitats, but seem especially prevalent under pineand/ or eucalyptus. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! Chanterelle picker and Russula-kicker Bob Sellers of Santa 
Cruz, California, ate a small piece of S. laeve (see comments) under the impression that all 
"puffballs" were edible. Twenty minutes later he broke into a cold sweat, felt nauseous, 
and started vomiting. After expelling the offender, he recovered quickly. 
COMMENTS: There are a number of microscopically distinct Sclerodermas that will 
more or less fit the above description. Collectively they can be recognized by their pallid 
to buff or yellow-brown peridium that is initially smooth but may crack into scales as it 
Scleroderma cepa group. These specimens differ from those in above photo in their more highly 
developed "stalk" composed oftough fibers. Microscopically, however, they are indistinguishable. 
Left Fairly young specimens. Right An older individual which has split into lobes or "rays." 
f. 
>. 
J; . 
{\ 
-I}' 
, 
 
 .'" 
\. 
710 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
is exposed (the scales are not inherent as in S. citrinum), by their tough rindlike skin, and 
by their firm purple-black spore mass when young. Features such as the tendency ofthe 
peridium to stain reddish when rubbed and the presence or absence of a "stalk" composed 
of mycelial fibers seem to vary according to environmental conditions. Other species: 
S. jlavidum is considered by some Scleroderma-scholars to be a form of S. cepa. It is 
microscopically identical, but does not usually bruise reddish and normally splits open 
into starlike lobes which bend back to expose the spore mass. S. laeve closely resembles 
the "true" S. cepa, but has slightly larger spores (9-15 microns); it appears to be the most 
common Scleroderma in our area. S. albidum is also similar, but has even larger spores 
(12-17 microns). S. reae, which favors arid habitats and ruptures irregularly, can be dis- 
tinguished microscopically by its partially reticulate spores(9-18 microns).S.jloridanum 
also has partially reticulate spores, but is tropical and subtropical and ruptures stellately 
(i.e., splits into starlike lobes). There are also four farflung Sclerodermas with completely 
reticulate spores: S. bovista, which sometimes develops blackish spots or stains in old 
age and has spores 9.5-16 microns broad;S.juscum, which favors conifers and has spores 
averaging 13.5-19.5 microns; S. hypogaeum (=S. arenicola), a common vinaceous- 
staining conifer-lover that often grows underground and has an unusually thick peridium 
and spores 18-23 microns broad; andS. michiganense, which has spores likeS. hypogaeum 
and often grows underground, but has a thinner peridium and favors hardwoods. All of 
the above species are widespread and vary considerably in size, form, and scali ness, and all 
but the latter species may stain reddish or vinaceous when bruised. They should be con- 
sidered poisonous until proven otherwise. Also see the species listed under S. citrinum. 
Scleroderma geaster (Dead Man's Hand) 
FRUITING BODY 4-15 em broad or high when closed, 12-30 em broad when expanded 
(after rupturing); at first round to oval (but often somewhat flattened or irregularly lobed), 
eventually splitting into several (usually 4-8) coarse, irregular, thick rays which curl back 
in starlike fashion to expose the spore mass. PERIDIUM (skin) very thick (3-10 mm) and 
firm and tough when fresh; exterior whitish becoming yellowish, straw-colored, or 
brownish, roughened or somewhat hairy, often with adhering debris and often fissured 
or cracked into scales, especially in age; interior (upper side of rays) brownish becoming 
blackened and empty in old age; base often attached to the soil by a mycelial "roof' of 
tough fibers. SPORE MASS at first firm and pallid, soon dark gray to purple-black 
or black (and still firm), eventually becoming brown to dark brown or purple-brown 
Scleroderma geasler (=S. po/yrhizon), mature but rather small specimens that have split into rays. 
In this stage they might be mistaken for old cup fungi, but usually contain traces of spore powder. 
,- 
 
.A- 
" . 
'."" 
 
, . 
I 
.# . 
Scleroderma geasler (=S. polyrhizon). young specimens which have yet to split open. Note how thick 
the skin is! These were found along a road with Pisolilhus tinclOrius (p. 712). 
and powdery. Spores (5) 6-11 (12) microns, round, with warts or spines that often form 
incomplete lines or ridges (i.e., partially reticulate). Peridium containing few if any thick- 
walled hyphae. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on hillsides, along roads, in ditches, poor 
soil, sand, asphalt, gravel, etc.; often buried or partially buried before maturity. It is 
widely distributed and quite common in our area, especially in sandy soil. It usually ap- 
pears in the fall, but the thick tough skins take a long time to decompose. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous? This is one fleshy fungus I've never been tempted to eat! 
COMMENTS: The large size and tough skinJhat splits into coarse, thick rays are the 
telltale traits of this bizarre fungus. It is also known (more correctly) as S. polyrh;zon 
or S. polyrh;zum. It rivals Piso/ithus tinclOrius ("Dead Man's Foot") for grotesque- 
ness. The two thrive in similar milieu-asphalt, sand, poor soil, etc.-and make a well- 
matched if not exactly charming couple. It might be mistaken for a large cup fungus (e.g., 
Sarcosphaera), but it usually has traces of the powdery spore mass to distinguish it. The 
rays lack the intact inner spore case characteristic of the earthstars, and there mayor 
may not be a stemlike base of mycelial fibers. It can also be confused with Mycenastrum 
corium. but that puffball has a thick white felty outer peridium and a smooth, purple- 
brown inner one which splits into lobes at maturity. Other species: S. texense (=S. Jur- 
ellum) is a very similar, thick-skinned species with a scalier (often shingled) exterior 
and thick-walled hyphae in the peridium; it has a more southerly(tropicaland subtropical) 
distribution but also occurs on the west coast. S. flavidum( see comments under the S. cepa 
group) also splits in starlike fashion, but is much smaller, witha thinner(about I mm thick) 
peridium that is tawny and more or less smooth. 
PISOLITHUS& DICTYOCEPHALOS (Oddballs) 
Medium-sized to fairly large terrestrial fungi found mostly in poor soil. FRUITING BODY 
variously shaped at maturity. PERI DIU M variously colored and rupturing irregularly in old age. 
STERILE BASE absent, but a stalk often present. VOL V A absent (Pisolithus) or often present 
(Dictyocephalos). SPORE MASS either composed of numerous small capsules (peridioles) or 
divided up into numerous "cells" or chambers; brown and powdery at maturity, the peridioles or 
"cell" walls mostly disintegrating. Spores more or less round, warty or spiny. Capillitium absent. 
THESE two oddballs are easily distinguished from puffballs and earthballs by the struc- 
ture of their spore mass. In Piso/ithus there are hundreds of small spore-containing cap- 
sules (peridioles) imbedded in the fruiting body. The peridioles disintegrate, however, 
so they are best seen by making a lengthwise section of a fairly young specimen. The 
711 
712 
L YCOPERDALES & ALLIES 
fruiting body is internally sticky when young, but at maturity it becomes crumbly and 
protrudes from the ground like a dusty stump, half-rotted root, or ball of dried-up dung. 
Dictyocephalos is just as unsightly, but has a long, woody stalk. It is likely to be mistaken 
for a stalked puffball at first glance, but its spore mass is divided into numerous "cells" 
or cl-tambers. Most of the chamber walls disintegrate, but the lowermost ones can often 
be sen after the spore mass has dispersed. In each genus there is a single variable species 
with a worldwide distribution. 
Key to Pisolithus & Dictyocephalos 
1. Fruiting body with a long, tough or woody stalk; volva often present at base of stalk; spore mass 
cham bered when young; found mostly in deserts ...... Dictyocephalos attenuatus, p. 713 
1. Fruiting body lacking a volva and true stalk (but often with an elongated stalklike sterile base); 
spores borne in numerous lentil-like capsules imbedded in upper part of fruiting body (best 
seen when young); widespread in poor soils, along roads, etc. .. Pisolithus tinctorius, below 
Pisolithus tinctorius 
(Dead Man's Foot) 
Color Plates 185, 189 
FRUITING BODY 5-30 cm or more high and 4-20 cm broad, at first round to pear- 
shaped, then club-shaped (i.e., usually but not always with a narrowed, rooting base or 
"stalk"), finally breaking up in age or taking on the appearance of a large dusty root or 
stump; odor mild to aromatic or unpleasant, depending on the age. SPORE CASE with 
a thin, brittle peridium (skin) that is variously colored (but usually yellowish, purplish, 
olive-black, or brown) and often lustrous and soon ruptures irregularly or flakes away. 
Upper portion of fruiting body containing hundreds of seedlike peridioles which grad ually 
dIsintegrate, turning into a crumbly or dusty mass of brown spores (the disintegration 
process starts at the top of fruiting body and proceeds downward). Peridioles small (24 
mm long), elongated to oval or circular, whitish to greenish-yellow, yellow, brownish, or 
vinaceous, at first imbedded in a sticky dark or blackish substance which dries out and 
becomes brittle or crumbly at maturity. Lower portion of fruiting body typically con- 
sisting of a fibrous, stalklike, persistent, sterile, rooting base which may have coarse 
greenish-yellow mycelial fibers attached. VOL V A absent. SPORE MASS powdery when 
mature, dark brown to cinnamon-brown. Spores 7-12 microns, round, warty or spiny. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups on or along roads, in waste 
places, and in hardpacked, poor, sandy, or gravelly soil; very widely distributed, but 
especially common in California and the Pacific N orthwest( the largest fruitings I've seen 
were in the Siskiyou Mountains of northern California). In our area it fruits chiefly in 
the late summer and fall, but is slow to decay and can be found most any time. It forms 
mycorrhiza with a wide range of trees and shrubs (oak, pine, etc.) and is said to be of value 
in reforestation projects. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. In Europe it is known as the "Bohemian Truffle" and 
used as an aromatic seasoning when unripe, and in China it is employed medicinally. It 
is scarcely appetizing, however, and should be tried very cautiously, if at alL The name 
tinctorius reflects its use as a dye-a variety of rich colors (mostly browns and golds, but 
also blacks and dark blues) can be obtained, depending on the mordants used and the 
type of soil in which it is found. 
COMMENTS: This dusty monstrosity is among the most distinctive and memorable of 
all the fleshy fungi. Young specimens are somewhat puffball-like (i.e., pear- or club- 
shaped), but are easily told by the hundreds of seedlike peridioles they contain (see Color 
Plate 185). In this stage the peridium often has a beautiful metallic luster. Older spe- 
cimens, on the other hand, can be recognized from a great distance by their dusty 
brown stumplike stance. Fresh specimens will stain practically anything they come into 
.....; 
I 
:'I 
-"" 
.. 
, 
-.. 
'-:- 
 
 ,: 
"'" 
.... 
,; 
" 
J 
" . 
..,'# 
P;so/;thus t;nctor;us. When young this monstrosity is puffball-shaped, but its outer skin ruptures 
(left), exposing the powdery brown spore mass. Old specimens protrude from the ground like dusty 
stumps (right), and bear little resemblance to puffballs or any other fleshy fungi. For other views of 
this distinctive fungus (including a close-up of the lentil-like spore capsules), see the color plates. 
contact with, and the dry spore dust coats everything in the vicinity. This species has a 
penchant for adversity, inevitably fruiting in poor soil, ditches, chaparral, or road cuts 
(often in the company of "Dead Man's Hand," Scleroderma geasler), or even bursting up 
through asphalt. As might be expected, it is disdained by many mycologists (" I t is the most 
objectionable of all fungi ..."; "This ugly, stinky fungus ..."), but to me it is one ofthe most 
enthralling-if not beautiful-of all fungi (I call it "Dead Man's Foot" not to demean it, 
but because it looks like one). Its wide distribution and variable features have resulted 
in a plethora of aliases, includingP. arenarius,P. arrhizus, andPolysaccumpisocarpium. 
D;ctyocephalos attenuatus (Stalked Oddball) 
FRUITING BODY beginning underground as an "egg" completely encased in a mem- 
brane, the stalk then elongating ra pidly and the ruptured outer membrane forming a volva 
at its base. Mature fruiting body consisting of a spore case mounted on a tough stalk. 
SPORE CASE round to somewhat flattened or even depressed on top, or irregular(e.g., 
sometimes with several lobes), 2-6 cm high and 5-13 cm broad, seated on a disclike enlarge- 
ment of the stalk apex which is white to brownish in old specimens. Outer peridium(skin) 
fleshy to slightly gelatinous when young, becoming tougher and developing brown to 
reddish scales or warts which vary from small, flat, and more or less persistent to large, 
pyramidal and deciduous; lower margin sometimes with a hanging "veil" composed of 
adhering tissue stripped from the stalk during expansion. Inner layer of peridium 1-2 mm 
thick, usually paler( whitish to bufO than outer peridium, but sometimes darkeninginage. 
Upper portion of spore case breaking up into irregular pieces which fall away; lower 
portion tougher and persisting as a more or less bowl-shaped structure. STALK (5) 
10-40 (52) cm long, 2-5 cm thick at apex, equal or more often tapered downward (rarely 
thicker below or bulbous), the base sometimes pointed and free of the volva, sometimes 
with 1-2 rootlike mycelial cords attached; solid (or with insect cavities), sometimes forked 
(with one spore case on each branch), fleshy-tough becoming woody when dry; at first 
white, but becoming brown in age; often grooved, ridged, and/ or flattened and sometimes 
twisted; often cracking, peeling, or curling back to form scales or sometimes even an 
irregular "ring" or "annulus:' VOLV A at base of stalk saclike, but occasionally poorly 
developed or absent; white to tan when fresh, 3-11 cm high; tough, hard, or chalky in age. 
713 
""f . 
...... 
." 
.. '" 
, of 
. 
1 .& "" 
, t.,4    
'A' 
, ;Jr , 
...... 
, . f 
.', 
\- 
. '- , '- .. .. ' 
r _., 
... " 
\i . : '  
 :t. '" 
,\ 
" 
.. 
t 
.. ' 
. iI - 
,I " 
.. :')' 
t,'.. '" 
\t .. . " 
" 
.., 
 
. ... 
.\0 , 
.....t" ' 
....... .. .".  
-.. \ " 
." :: ..... \ 
\ , .. r . 
\ ,.. " 
'-'",... 
-... -It 
.' 
... 
..... 
..... 
. 
. 
, 
. 
.. 
r. ... 
, ..... 
, t. \ 
,  \.-:" 
,'"  " 
:. I.... ,. 
 \.. " 
..,... '. 
.... 
Dictyocephalos attenuatus. Left: Two typical dusty, mature specimens. The one on the left has lost 
most of its spore case but retains its volva, while the one on the right still has its spore case but has 
lost its volva. Note the well-developed stalk in both specimens. Right: A close-up of the lower part of 
a mature spore mass, showing the hairy or fibrous remains of the walls that originally divided the 
spore mass into numerous small chambers (a feature which separates it from the stalked puffballs). 
SPORE MASS divided up into numerous whitish-walled "cells" (peridioles), but all but 
the lowermost "cell" walls disintegrating, so that the mature spore mass is brown and 
powdery, usually with an unpleasant odor (like decaying fish); lowermost "cell" walls 
often persisting after the spores have been dispersed as flattened, pointed "teeth" on the 
inner surface of the spore case, giving it a pitted or reticulate appearance. Spores 5-7 
microns, round or nearly round, warted or spiny. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups ( often in tufts of 2-5 individuals 
and occasionally two emerging from a single volva) in barren sandy soil or clay, waste 
places, etc. It is widespread in the arid and semi-arid parts of the West, but is most com- 
mon in the deserts of southern California, the Four Corners area, and the Southwest- 
often near or under saltbush (A trip/ex) or along washes. It fruits after seasonal rains, but 
the fruiting bodies are practically impervious to bacterial and fungal decay, persisting 
for as long as 30 years in their natural environment! Mature specimens can protrude 
from the soil like dusty roots (in the grand tradition of Piso/ithus tinctorius), or remain 
underground, depending on the hardness of the soil and weather conditions. W. H. Long, 
who gathered a gaggle of them near Antelope Valley, California, reports that developing 
specimens raised hard blocks of soil weighing 15 pounds each! 
EDIBILITY: Much too crusty, musty, and dusty to be worthwhile, but possibly useful 
as a dye (see Piso/ithus tinctorius). 
COMMENTS: As can be surmised from the description, this "oddball," like Piso/ithus 
tinctorius, exhibits a great deal of variation in size, shape, color, and degree of scaliness 
-in other words, it is not difficult to identify but is easy to misidentify. Its polymorphism 
has resulted in the naming of dozens of "new" species, when in fact there is only one highly 
variable one. It can be distinguished from the stalked puffballs and other desert fungi by 
714 
DICTYOCEPHALOS 
715 
its chambered spore mass, the pitted-reticulate upper surface of old (empty) spore cases, 
the long and tough or woody stalk, plus the frequent presence of a volva and irregular 
breaking up of the peridium (a distinct apical pore is not formed). Its closest relative, 
Piso/ithus tinctorius, lacks the well-developed stalk and volva, and does not usually 
grow in such desolate places. 
Stalked Puffballs 
o 
. 
. 
TULOSTOMATALES 
spores 
Small to medium-sized puffballs often found in arid habitats or in sand or poor soil. FRUITING 
BODY with a spore case mounted on a we//-developed. differentiated stalk. SPORE CASE typi- 
cally with a two-layered peridium, rupturing apically, peripherally, stellately, or irregularly. 
STERILE BASE absent. STALK not percurrent; usua//y tough or woody and often hairy or scaly 
(but gelatinous in Calostoma). VOL V A present or absent. SPORE MASS powdery at maturity 
and buff to rusty-salmon to cinnamon-brown or dark brown. Spores typically round and orna- 
mented, but occasionally smooth. Capillitium usually present, well-developed. 
THESE are puffballs with a clearly differentiated, well-defined stalk. As in the true 
puffballs (Lycoperdales), the mature spore mass is powdery and the peridium (skin) that 
encloses it is composed of at least two layers. The presence of a stalk can lead to confusion 
with the gastroid agarics (Podaxales & Allies, p. 724), but in those fungi the stalk is per- 
current, i.e., it extends through the spore mass to the top of the spore case or "cap," 
just like the stalk of a gilled mushroom. In the stalked puffballs, on the other hand, the 
stalk terminates at the spore case rather than extending through it. 
Tulostoma, with over 30 species, is the largest and most cosmopolitan genus of stalked 
puffballs, yet it is by no means common. It can aptly be characterized as"a puffball on a 
stick" because that's just what it looks like, with its slender stalk and its small round spore 
case with an apical pore. There are six other genera of stalked puffballs, none with more 
than five North American species and several with only one. Calostoma is the most out- 
landish of the lot, with its brightly colored gelatinous fruiting body. Battarrea is also 
unmistakable, for its outer peridium forms a volva at the base of the stalk and the spore 
case ruptures around its rim or through several holes. Chlamydopus, like Tulostoma, 
forms an apical pore, but lacks the ball-and-socket relationship of stalk to spore case 
t'tat characterizes that genus. Schizostoma ruptures stellately (that is, splits into several 
lobes), while Phellorina and Queletia rupture irregularly. An eighth genus, Podaxis, is 
often treated as a stalked puffball, but in this book is grouped with the gastroid agarics 
because it has a percurrent stalk. 
With the notable exception of Calostoma, the stalked puffballs tend to grow in environ- 
ments that most fleshy fungi find inhospitable-sand, poor soil, waste places, etc. Several 
like it hot and are found strictly in the desert, where they form a fairly large percentage of 
the fungi in the arid wastelands of the Great Basin and Southwest. Calostoma, as already 
noted, is the exception. It prefers the humid forests of eastern North America and is 
particularly common in the southern Appalachians. 
N one of the stalked puffballs are known to be poisonous. None are known to be edible 
either, because most of them spend their youth underground (a necessary adaptation to 
their harsh environment). As a result, they are invariably encountered after their spore 
mass is mature and powdery (and thus inedible), and the stalks are much too tough to eat, 
unless you're starving and barefoot (in other words, you're better off chewing on a shoe!). 
Six stalked puffballs are fully described here, and several others are keyed out. 
716 
TULOSTOMA TALES 
Key to the Tulostomatales 
1. Stalk (and often spore case) with a viscid or gelatinous outer layer when fresh; spore case rup- 
turing through an apical pore at maturity; confined to humid regions, especially southeastern 
North America .............................................................. 2 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
2. Spore case red when fresh (but may fade to yellow or buff) .. Calostoma cinnabarina, p. 718 
2. Spore case yellow to buff when fresh (but mouth may be red) ......................... 3 
3. Spore case with a viscid or gelatinous outer layer when fresh ........................... 
. . . . . . . _. .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Calostoma lutescens(see C. cinnabarina, p. 718) 
3. Spore case not viscid ... Calostoma ravenelii& C. microsporum (see C. cinnabarina, p. 718) 
4. Spore case rupturing around its lower periphery, the top falling offlike a lid in old age (as shown 
in photo on p. 717); stalk usually long, often scaly at maturity ......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Battarrea phalloides & others, p. 717 
4. Not as above; spore case not rupturing around its lower periphery. . . . . . .. . . . . .. . .. . . .. 5 
5. Cap cylindrical (shaggy mane-shaped); stalk extending into (and often through) the spore 
mass ....................................................... (seePodaxis, p. 725) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Spore case typically rupturing through a single small mouth at the top (an apical pore) ... 7 
6. Spore case rupturing through several pores or by splitting into lobes or by irregular disinte- 
gration .................................................................... II 
7. Stalk comprised of a mass of tough rootlike fibers; spore mass often purplish or black when 
young and firm (but often browner when powdery) ............ (see Scleroderma, p. 707) 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Stalk thickest at apex, not inserted into the spore case like a ball-and-socket; volva present 
when fresh; found mostly in deserts .................. Chlamydopus meyenianus, p. 721 
8. Stalk sometimes thicker above but usually equal, with a ball-and-socket-like attachment to 
the spore case (but not necessarily separating easily); volva present or absent; found in many 
habitats, including deserts ..................................................... 9 
9. Fruiting body medium-sized (spore case typically 1.2-3.5 cm broad; stalk typically 0.5-2 cm 
thick) .................................. Tulostoma macrocephalum & others, p. 720 
9. Fruiting body usually rather small and slender (spore case typically up to 2 cm broad; stalk 
typically 2-6 mm thick) ....................................................... to 
10. Stalk with a volva at base and one or more"roots" below the vol va; spore case white or whitish; 
found in desert .................... Tulostoma cretaceum(see T. brumale group. p. 719) 
10. Not with above features; volva present or absent; found in many habitats (including desert) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tulostoma brumale group & many others, p. 719 
11. Spore case rupturing through several holes (pores); volva usually present when fresh; found 
in deserts ................................ Battarrea digueti (see B. phalloides, p. 717) 
11. Spore case disintegrating, rupturing irregularly, or splitting into several lobes; volva present 
or absent; found in many habitats (including deserts) .............................. 12 
12. Stalk continuous with spore case (i.e., bottom of spore case merely an expansion of stalk) 13 
12. Stalk and spore case distinct, with a ball-and-socket-like attachment .................. 15 
13. Fruiting body full of spore-containing capsules when young and protruding from ground like a 
dusty stump in old age or spore mass composed of numerous cells or chambers (when young) 
whose walls usually give a pitted, reticulate, or hairy appearance to inside surface of bottom of 
spore case in old specimens; volva present or absent (seePisolithus& Dictyocephalos, p. 711) 
13. Not as above; spore mass lacking capsules. chambers, or "cells"; volva typically absent .. 14 
14. Stalk composed of tough rootlike strands or fibers; spore mass often purplish to black when 
young and firm (but often browner when powdery); found in many habitats ............. 
. ... .. . ..... . . . . ... . .... .. .......... . .. . .. ... . . . . .. ..... . (see Scleroderma, p. 707) 
14. Not as above; found in deserts ............................ Phellorina strobilina, p. 723 
15. Spore case rupturing stellately (i.e., splitting into several starlike rays orlobes) when old; found 
in deserts ............... Schizostoma laceratum (see Chlamydopus meyenianus, p. 721) 
15. Spore case rupturing irregularly or disintegrating; very rare (reported from Pennsylvania) 
. ..... ..... .... ... . .... . ...... Queletia mirabilis(see Chlamydopus meyenianus, p. 721) 
t . 
. 
} 
'-. 
\.- 
., 
1, 
..... 
,,' 
\' 
, 
.... 
Battarrea pha//oides. Left A mature specimen in which the spore case has ruptured around its 
perimeter and the top has fallen off. Note large volva at base. Right Old specimens. some of which 
have lost their volvas. Note how stalks vary considerably in thickness and degree of scaliness. 
Battarrea phalloides (Scaly-Stalked Puffball) Color Plate 187 
FRUITING BODY initially underground and completely enclosed by a membrane 
(outer peridium) which ruptures around its periphery, the stalk then bursting through and 
rapidly elongating. Mature fruiting body composed of a spore case (the inner peridium) 
mounted on a long stalk, with the ruptured outer peridium leaving a volva at base of stalk 
and sometimes a volval patch on top of the spore case. SPORE CASE 3-5 (6) cm broad 
and 1-3.5 cm high, typically rounded (convex) on top. with a flat or even depressed (con- 
cave) underside that somewhat resembles a "veil"; surface smooth. pallid or whitish, 
soon splitting around its lower periphery so that the upper (rounded) portion falls off, 
thereby exposing the spore mass; lower portion remaining intact as a disc beneath the 
spore mass and sometimes persisting (after spore mass has dispersed) as a disclike"cap" 
or sliding down the stalk to form a "ring." ST ALK 10-40 cm long, 0.4-1.5 cm thick, not 
percurrent. equal or tapered downward (but volva-encased base may be swollen); rigid 
and tough or even woody, hollow, white to brownish or rusty-brown, longitudinally 
striate or grooved and covered with fibers that often peel or split to form fine to very coarse 
needlelike, ribbonlike, or shaggy scales. VOLV A at base of stalk saclike, whitish or 
dirt-incrusted. often loose, buried in ground and soon rotting away. SPORE MASS 
rusty-brown and powdery when mature. adhering to everything it comes in contact with; 
odor sometimes unpleasant in old age. Spores (4) 5-8 (10) microns, round to broadly 
elliptical, warted. Capillitium of two types: simple, short hyphae up to 10 microns long. 
and elators (elongated cells with internal spirals) up to 100 microns long. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups in sand. poor soil, and waste places 
(but often under trees in deep shade); very widely distributed. but in the United States 
apparently confined to the West. It is generally regarded as rare, but in the deserts and 
sagebrush country of the Great Basin and Southwest it is relatively common for a desert 
fungus. It also occurs along the California coast and Orson Miller reports it from Alaska. 
In our area it fruits during the rainy season but persists for months without decaying. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible. 
717 
....., 
----... "'*".. 
Battarrea phalloides. old specimens bereft of volva and spores. Only the bottom of the spore case 
remains, forming a thin "cap" on the stem. In this condition they are as light as straws. 
COMMENTS: The fibrous-scaly stalk, presence of a volva (which, however, often rots 
away or can be left behind in the ground), and curious manner in which the spore case 
ruptures around its periphery are the telltale traits of this intriguing fungus. The flattened 
or concave, veil-like underside of the spore case is also unique. The upper portion or" lid" 
usually detaches completely; it can often be found on the ground nearby, but is some- 
times blown away by the wind. The volval patch (when present) may tear away from the 
"lid," leaving a gaping hole as shown in the photograph. The stature ofthe fruiting body 
varies considerably according to soil and weather conditions. S orne specimens (especially 
the coastal ones) have relatively thick, coarsely scaly stalks, whereas others (particularly 
desert dwellers) have longer, thinner stalks. All sorts of intergradations can be found, 
however. Some authorities claim that the" true" B. phalloides of Europe has a gelatinous- 
layered volva in the egg stage. If this is really the case, then the American species, which 
lacks the gelatinous layer, is more correctly called B. stevenii. (Since the"eggs" develop 
deep in the ground, they are rarely encountered and it is difficult to know whether or not 
this distinction is a valid one.) Another questionably distinct species, B. laciniata, has a 
more persistent, multi-layered volva with inner, concentrically-arranged "leaflets" 
around the stalk base. It usually has a white to buff or reddish volval patch on top ofthe 
spore case and tends to be more robust (stalk 24 cm thick at apex and spore case 4-8 cm 
broad, 24 cm high). It occurs in southern California and the Southwest, usually in "rich 
loamy alkaline soil" in the open desert (not under trees). S till another species, B. digueti, 
is definitely distinct, for it does not rupture by peripheral cleavage. Instead, its outer 
peridium ruptures apically (thus never leaving a volval patch) and its spore case remains 
intact, with several holes forming in the upper (convex) portion. It also has longer elators 
than B. phalloides. but in other respects (shape and overall appearance) is quite similar. 
It appears to be strictly a desert fungus. I have found it in Baja California, and it is also 
known from southern California, mainland Mexico, and the Southwest. 
Calostoma cinnabarina (Red Slimy-Stalked Puffball) Color Plate 188 
FRUITING BODY consisting of a spore case mounted on a thick, short, fluted stalk (the 
spore case often barely protruding above the ground). SPORE CASE 0.5-2 cm broad, 
more or less round to somewhat oval, at first covered by the outer peridium, which is 
composed of a thick, gelatinous or slimy, translucent layer and a thin, bright red inner 
layer; outer peridium breaking up into pieces and falling away (the pieces of the inner 
layer often imbedded in the gelatinous pulp of the outer layer so as to resemble small 
tomato or pomegranate seeds). Inner peridium persistent, not gelatinous, at first red and 
scurfy or powdery, but often fading to orange, yellow, or buff as the scurf wears away; 
rupturing through a crosslike apical pore(mouth) formed by4-5 dark red to scarlet ridges 
or "teeth." STALK 1.54 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, typically thick and short, more or less 
equal, spongy, with an outer gelatinous layer when fresh; otherwise composed of firm, 
branching strands that form a ridged, netted, and/ or pitted pattern; ochraceous to red or 
cinnabar-red to yellow-brown, often fading in age. VOL V A absent. SPORE MASS white 
at first, becoming powdery and buff-colored at maturity. Spores 14-28 )( 6-11 microns, 
elliptical to oblong, pitted. Capilliiium present when young but soon disintegrating. 
718 
. 
. 
 ,," 
$., -' 
.. . 
.... .. 
t 
. , 
'1' 
. #.....' 
t ...: 
 
Ca/ostoma cinnabarina. Since these mature specimens are dried out, the gelatinous layers evident in 
the color plate do not show. The bright red color (when fresh) and thick, fibrous stalk are distinctive. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil and humus in woods, along roadcuts, under 
trees, etc.; fairly common in the late summer and fall in the southern and eastern United 
States, especially at higher elevations. It occurs as far west as Texas, and is to be looked 
for in southern Arizona and New Mexico, where several "eastern" mushrooms occur. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-but too small and slimy to merit experimentation. 
COMMENTS: In a group (the puffballs) not noted for its bright colors, the genus Calo- 
stoma stands out. The complex structure of the outer and inner peridiums (each has at 
least two layers) and peculiar microscopic features such as the absence of capillitium in 
the mature spore mass have made it difficult for taxonomists to relate it to other puffball 
genera. The thick gelatinous outer layer, which can be likened to a universal veil, dis- 
tinguishes Calostoma from other stalked puffballs, and the powdery spore mass separates 
it from the stinkhorns, which may also be slimy. C. cinnabarina is the only red Calostoma. 
Others-all southeastern in distribution-include: C. lutescens, with a longer stalk that 
usually elevates the spore case above the ground, and a light to bright yellow spore case 
(except for the red mouth or pore) that usually has a wide collar at its base formed by the 
outer peridium; C. ravenelii, a smaller species with a gelatinous-fibered stalk and non- 
gelatinous spore case that is tan to yellowish (with a red mouth) and often decorated with 
warts left by the outer peridium; and C. microsporum, rather similar to C. ravenelii but 
slightly larger, with smaller spores (up to II microns long). 
Tulostoma brumale group (Common Stalked Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY consisting of a small spore case mounted on a stalk. SPORE CASE 
round (but often somewhat collapsed or flattened), 1-2 cm broad, the underside shrinking 
as it dries and often pulling away from the stalk to form a collar. Outer layer ofperidium 
(skin) brownish, but covered with sand and other debris, peeling away to reveal the inner 
layer, but often remaining intact around the base. Inner layer smooth or with minute 
particles, tan to pinkish-buff to buff, gray, or whitish, developing an apical pore at ma- 
turity; pore usually encircled by a raised collar or tube. ST ALK 1-6 cm long, 2-4 (6) mm 
thick, usually slender, equal except for a small bulb at base; tough but usually pliant, 
covered at first with coarse brown to rusty-brown fibers, but sometimes smoother and! or 
paler in age; longitudinally striate, joined to spore case via a ball-and-socket arrangement. 
VOL V A absent or inconspicuous. SPO R E MASS rusty-salmon and powdery at maturity. 
Spores 3-5 microns, more or less round, minutely warted. Capillitium well-developed. 
HABIT AT: Scattered or in groups in sand and gravel, sandy soil, and other waste places 
(even in the mortar of brick walls!); very widely distributed, but not particularly common. 
719 
.. 
 
"",4. 
. 
 oj ) 
  
" 
Tu/oslOma berleroanum (see comments under T. bruma/e group) is probably the most common 
stalked puffball in coastal California. Left Stocky specimens. Right More slender ones. Note the 
small pore that forms at the top of each spore case. 
In our area this species and its close relatives (see comments) fruit mainly in the fall and 
winter, but the weathered fruiting bodies can be found most any time. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible when mature, and rarely found in the immature stage. 
COMMENTS: TuloslOma species are easily recognized by their slender stalk, small 
spore case, and rusty-salmon spores. The fruiting body develops underground as in Bat- 
tarrea, and the stalks of mature specimens are often buried so that only the spore case 
is visible. The absence of a volva in most species plus the small size and formation of an 
apical pore distinguish TuloslOma from Battarrea, and the stalk is not as consistently 
thickened at the apex as it is in Chlamydopus. There are several closely related Tulostomas 
that will more or less fit the above description, including T. berteroanum(see photo), the 
most common in our area. They are partial to sandy soil and are best differentiated 
microscopically (in other words, leave them to the TuloslOma taxonomists). Some ofthe 
more widespread species are: T. striatum, which has ridged spores and an outer peridium 
that leaves an acornlike cup around the lower half of the spore case; T. simulans, in which 
the spore case is persistently covered by adhering sand particles and other debris; T. 
campestre, also sand-incrusted, but lacking a well-defined tube around the apical pore; and 
T. fibrillosum, a fairly common species which also lacks a tube but has practically smooth 
spores and a longer, coarsely hairy stalk. 
There are also several species apparently endemic to the Southwest (or at least to arid 
regions), including: T. involucratum, common, with a membranous (not granular) outer 
peridium that often forms a frilled cup around the inner peridium plus a tubular apical 
pore; T. opacum, a rare species with large spores (7-1 I microns); T. meristostoma, small, 
with a slit or irregular tear instead of a raised apical pore or tube even whenfresh (in many 
species the pore becomes slitlike or irregularly torn after weathering); T. cretaceum, a 
common and highly distinctive sand-loving species with a chalk-white spore case and a 
stalk that tapers downward to a volva beneath which are one or more rootlike processes 
(at least in most specimens); and T. excentricum, with an off-center tubular mouth and 
inconspicuous volva plus a spore case which is not white unless weathered. All of these 
species differ from Chlamydopus meyenianus in the ball-and-socket relationship between 
the spore case and stalk (though the two may be firmly attached), and all are rather small 
and slender-stemmed. For larger species, see T. macrocephalum. 
Tulostoma macrocephalum (Fat-Headed Tulostoma) 
FRUITING BODY consisting of a spore case mounted on a stalk. SPORE CASE 1.2-3 
cm broad and 0.8-1.5 cm high, nearly round to somewhat flattened (usually broader than 
it is high), firmly attached to the stalk. Outer layer of peridium (skin) grayish-white to buff 
and soon falling a way to reveal the inner layer, but often remaining intact around the base. 
Inner layer smooth, dingy whitish, tough, developing a short tubular apical pore (mouth) 
720 
\( 
.. 
Left Tu/ostoma macrocepha/um has a thicker stem and larger "head" than most Tulostomas. 
Right Ch/amydopus meyenianus. rather small specimens in which the rough outer peridium (skin) 
has completely worn away, leaving the beautiful smooth inner layer. Note volva in specimen on right. 
at maturity. ST ALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, usually rather long, equal or tapered 
slightly toward the base, which usually has a bulb; tough or woody, usually scaly and/ or 
transversely cracked. VOLV A absent or present only as a small fragile dirt-incrusted 
sack or collar at base of stalk. SPORE MASS rusty-salmon to cinnamon-brown and 
powdery at maturity. Spores 4-5.5 microns, round, warted. Capillitium present. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in sand or sandy soil in arid regions, fruiting most any 
time if rainfall is sufficient. It was originally found in the gypsum dunes of White Sands 
National Monument in southern New Mexico (I have seen it there), but has also turned 
up in southern California and can probably be found throughout the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Inedible because of its toughness. 
COMMENTS: The broad head, scaly stalk, and relatively large size (for a Tulostoma) 
are the hallmarks of this distinctive stalked puffball. The presence of an apical pore dis- 
tinguishes it from Battarrea. and the equal or only slightly tapered stalk separates it from 
Chlamydopus. It is not likely to be found by the average mushroom hunter, but any mush- 
room willing to grow in gypsum crystals warrants attention. Another robust southwestern 
species, T. Iysocephalum, has a coarser, dirtier appearance and its soil-incrusted "head" 
topples off easily and is often found beside the stalk. It grows under mesquite and other 
desert shrubs, but is not common. 
C hlamydopus meyenianus (Desert S talked Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as an underground "egg" encased in an outer peridium, 
the stalk then elongating rapidly; outer peridium rupturing around its periphery, the 
lower half forming a volva at base of stalk, the upper portion forming a patch of warty, 
brittle tissue that breaks up and disintegrates or occasionally clings to the top ofthe spore 
721 
722 
TULOSTOMATALES 
case. Mature fruiting body consisting of a spore case(inner peridium) mounted on a stalk. 
SPORE CASE round to somewhat flattened, 1-3.5 cm broad and 0.5-2 cm high, tough, 
persistent, attached firmly to the stalk; surface smooth or slightly roughened, pallid to 
buff, pinkish-buff, yellowish, or sometimes cinnamon, developing an apical pore at 
maturity which may enlarge in age to form a "mouth." ST ALK4-15 (35) cm long, 0.2-1.5 
(3.5) cm thick at apex, tapering downward, usually solid and tough or rather woody, often 
curved and/ or flattened; usually longitudinally striate or grooved, smooth to silky- 
fibrillose or sometimes fibrillose-scaly; colored more or less like spore case or browner; 
not percurrent. VOLV A at base of stalk saclike, two-layered, thick, often rotting away 
or staying behind in the ground; white to brownish, usually incrusted with dirt or sand. 
SPORE MASS rusty to ochraceous to brown and powdery at maturity. Spores 5.5-9 
microns, round, spiny (or rarely smooth). Capillitium present. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to scattered or in small groups in sandy, gravelly, or volcanic soil, 
sand dunes, gypsum flats, and other barren places; sometimes also in adobe soil. It is 
found throughout the arid and semi-arid regions of the world (Australia, North Africa, 
etc.) and was originally described from Peru. It is widespread in western North America, 
but is common only in the Southwest-and then only sporadically. I have seen it nearthe 
Painted Hills in eastern Oregon and outside San Bernardino in southern California. It 
fruits after heavy rains but, like other stalked puffballs. persists for months afterward. 
EDIBILITY: Worthless-it is much too tough and fibrous, even as a substitute for beef 
jerky. 
COMMENTS: Like other desert-dwelling stalked puffballs, this species is quite variable 
in size and appearance but still easy to recognize. When still covered by the warty outer 
peridium it is reminiscent of Phel/orina strobilina. but the presence of a volva (in most 
specImens) distinguishes it. Once it has shed its outer coat (as shown in photo on previous 
page), it resembles the cosmopolitan genus Tulostoma. but is slightly larger, lacks the 
ball-and-socket connection of spore case to stalk typical of that genus, and is characteristi- 
cally thickened at the apex of the stalk and tapered downward. The presence of a volva is 
also noteworthy, but it decays more quickly than the rest of the fruiting body and is not 
always evident in older specimens. The tendency of the spore case to rupture through a 
single pore distinguishes it from Battarrea. which also has a volva. Two other distinctive 
stalked puffballs should also be mentioned. Schizostoma laceratum is a desert dweller 
whose spore case ruptures along sutures to form rays or lobes which subsequently spread 
out somewhat (see photo). The spore case is attached firmly to the stalk via a ball-and- 
socket arrangement (as in Tulostoma) and there is no volva, though the base ofthe stalk 
may split to form a free rim or collar. Queletia mirabilis resembles Schizostoma. but 
has a spore case that ruptures irregularly. It is widely distributed but rare-there is one 
report of it from Pennsylvania. 
Schizostorna /aceraturn (see comments above) is easily distinguished from other stalked puffballs 
by the way in which its spore case ruptures into rays in old age. 
t 
, 
\ 
. 
i \ 
""" 
V' 
. 
.. to 
... 
t 
<;. ....---....  
Phel/orina strobilina. This desert dweller releases its spores through general disintegration of the 
spore case, leaving an urnlike structure behind (specimen at far right). Note presence of large warts 
in the youngest individual (far left). 
P hellorina strobilina 
(U rnlike Stalked Puffball) 
FRUITING BODY consisting of a spore case which narrows downward into a distinct 
stalk. SPORE CASE round to oval or pear-shaped, 1.5-6 cm broad and/ or high. Outer 
layer of peridium (skin) scaly, the scales erect or pyramidal and often quite large on top, 
usually smaller and more or less shingled below; white when fresh but soon becoming 
brown to cinnamon and rupturing irregularly and falling away in pieces, exposing the 
inner layer. Inner peridium a cup- or urnlike expansion of the stalk apex (i.e., completely 
continuous with the stalk), pinkish-buff to cinnamon, with a large (2-5 cm) irregular 
mouth forming at the top in age. ST ALK 2-5 cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick at apex, dilated at 
apex and tapered downward, but with a bulb at the base; firm, solid, woody, brown or 
cinnamon and scaly like the outer peridium of the spore case (but scales may wear away 
in age); not percurrent. VOL V A typically absent, but the basal bulb sometimes splitting 
or peeling to form a vol va-like collar or rim. SPORE MASS powdery when mature and 
cinnamon to rusty-brown. Spores 5-7 x 4.5-6 microns, round or nearly round, warty 
or spiny. Capillitium present but often scanty. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups (occasionally two or three growing from a com- 
mon base) in desert soil, usually near shrubs; widely distributed in the warm, arid regions 
of the world. It occurs throughout the Southwest after heavy rains but is not common and 
only rarely fruits in large numbers. I have seen it outside Reno, Nevada and near Tucson, 
Arizona as well as in India. 
EDIBILITY: Much too woody to be edible. 
COMMENTS: Also known as P. inquinans, this peculiar stalked puffball is reminiscent 
of the common desert fungus Podaxis pistil/aris when young, but its stalk is not per- 
current (i.e., it terminates at the base ofthe spore case). The scales flake offthe spore case 
or "cap" and the top eventually ruptures to form a large mouth so that old specimens 
resemble wine goblets. These might be confused with Dictyocephalos atlenuatus, but 
the spore mass lacks the chambers characteristic of that species and there is normally no 
volva at the base of the stalk. 
723 
724 
\) 
Gastroid Agarics 
spores  
PODAXALES & Allies 
THIS motley assortment of bizarre and inelegant fungi combine the features of an agaric 
(presence of a cap and stalk and a spore mass composed of chambers, plates, or rudi- 
mentary gills) with those of a Gasteromycete (lack of forcible spore discharge and a 
frequently enclosed spore mass). Most of them look like gilled mushrooms that have 
failed to open or develop properly, and that is precisely what they are most frequently 
mistaken for. A few, such as Momagnea arenarius. have a fully exposed spore mass at 
maturity, but they lack true gills and do not forcibly discharge their spores. Those with 
an enclosed spore mass might be mistaken for stalked puffballs, but their stalk is percurrent 
(i.e., it extends all the way through the spore mass to the top of the cap, just as in a gilled 
mushroom). In the stalked puffballs, on the other hand, the stalk terminates at the 
bottom of the spore case or ""cap:' 
The gastroid agarics are sometimes called ""secotioid" fungi because many ofthem were 
originally grouped in a single genus, Secolium. To facilitate identification they are retained 
together here as an artificial subgroup of the Gasteromycetes. It should be realized, how- 
ever, that they are thought to have evolved independently from each other, and that 
toadstool taxonomists try to express their true relationships by scattering them among the 
various families of gilled mushrooms which they resemble. Most of them thrive in severe 
environments (e.g., deserts or high mountains), suggesting that they are indeed 
metamorphosed agarics which, through a process of adaptation and specialization, have 
lost the ability or necessity to forcibly discharge their spores (hence they also go by the 
unflattering moniker ""reduced agarics"). Podaxis pislillaris, a common desert fungus, is a 
good example: it resembles the shaggy mane (Coprinus comalus), but its cap remains 
closed to protect the developing spores from the desert heat, and the mature spores are 
thick-walled to prevent moisture loss. Taxonomists still argue about its relationship to 
Coprinus. but most of the other gastroid agarics have clearcut counterparts among the 
gilled mushrooms-e.g., Longula is closely related to Agaricus. Momagneato Coprinus. 
Brauniellula to Chroogomphus. M acowaniles and Arcangeliella to Russula and Lac- 
larius, and so forth. Some gastroid agarics are closely related to the false truffles. As 
defined here, however, the false truffles lack a stalk and/ or grow underground. 
The gastroid agarics are particularly prominent and diverse in western North America. 
They fruit after seasonal rains but the tougher types persist, like the stalked puffballs, 
for weeks or even months before decaying. Some are said to be edible when very young, 
but as a rule they are better observed or preserved than served. 
Key to the Podaxales & Allies 
I. Spore mass composed of tubes or empty tubular chambers ........................... 2 
I. Spore mass solid, slimy, or powdery or with rudimentary gills. plates. or cavities ......... 3 
2. Fruiting body resembling a misshapen or aborted bolete; spore mass (tubes) exposed at 
mat urity, lining the underside of cap ........................ (see Gastroboletus, p. 544) 
2. Spore mass enclosed by a peridium(skin); not as above (see Hymenogastrales& Allies, p. 739) 
3. Fruiting body averaging 3-8 cm high, narrowly to broadly club-shaped or with an oval cap; 
peridium (skin) of "cap" often wearing away in age; spore mass greenish-brown to brown and 
often slimy, or becoming powdery in old age; found on living or dead wood (especially pine) 
and other debris in humid regions (e.g., southeastern U.S.) . Rhopalogaster transversar;um 
3. Fruiting body not as above, or if similar then habitat different ........................ 4 
4 . Fruiting bod y shaggy-mane-like; cap oval to cylindrical( much taller than it is wide), usually with 
shaggy scales or fibrils which may, however, wear off in age; spore mass enclosed, at least until 
very old age; found in deserts and other hot, arid environments .......... Podax;s, p. 725 - 
4. Not as above; differently shaped (including narrowly conical), etc. .................... 5 
PODAXALES & ALLIES 
725 
5. Fruiting body Russu/a- or Lactarius-like: mature spore mass or"gills" white to yellowish, ochra- 
ceo us, or pinkish; stalk also pale in color; fruiting body crisp, briuleorfragile, the stalk typically 
snapping open cleanly like a piece of chalk; sporescolorless under the microscope, with amyloid 
ornamentation; found in forests or under trees Macowan;tes, Arcange/;e//a, & Allies, p. 736 
5. Spore mass brown to black at maturity, or if paler then not as above ................... 6 
6. Flesh in stalk orange to ochraceous to vinaceous when fresh and mature spore mass smoky 
to gray or black; found under conifers ............................ Braun;e//u/a, p. 732 
6. Not as above (but flesh may stain yellow) .......................................... 7 
7. Flesh white in upper part of stalk, bright yellow in base, spore mass minutely chambered; found 
under conifers .............. Gomphogaster /eucosarx (see Braunie//u/a nancyae. p.732) 
7. Notasabove ................................................................. 8 
8. Growing on hardwoods in Mid west; spore mass or"gills" white; cap usually with small brownish 
scales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lent;nus t;gr;nus(gastroid form) (see Lentinus & Lentine//us. p. 141) 
8. Growing on ground, or if on wood then not as above ................................ 9 
9. Cap narrowly conical and not expanding appreciably (see photo on p. 734, top right); usually 
found in grass or alpine meadows ....... Thaxterogaster, N;vatogastr;um, & Allies, p. 733 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Fruiting body Agaricus-like or Coprinus-like; mature spore mass or "gills" dark brown to 
black; terrestrial ..................................... Endoptychum & Allies, p. 727 
10. Not as above (mature spore mass may be paler brown or grayish); found on wood or ground II 
II. Fruiting body somewhat Lep;ota- or puffball-like, at least when young; spore mass often white 
at first but yellowish to brown or grayish and often powdery in age; fruiting body sometimes 
broadly conical but not narrowly conical; growing mainly in grass, cultivated earth, deserts, 
open places, etc.; terrestrial ............................ Endoptychum & Allies, p. 727 
II. Not as above; spore mass soon yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown or reddish-brown; cap very 
narrowly conical, or if not then usually found on wood or on ground in forests and under 
trees (including eucalyptus) ............ Thaxterogaster. N;vatogastr;um. & Allies, p. 733 
PODAXIS 
THIS genus occurs throughout the hotter parts ofthe world. It displays several interesting 
protective adaptations which enable it to survive in its hostile environment, e.g., the spores 
are thick-walled to prevent moisture loss and the cap never opens out. The single species 
described here is easily recognized by its tough, shaggy mane-like fruiting body and 
powdery mature spore mass. The presence ofcapillitium(seecomments)isalsodistinctive. 
Podaxis pistillaris (Desert Shaggy Mane) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 2-15 cm high and 14 cm broad, oval to 
cylindrical or sometimes somewhat twisted; surface dry, pure white to tan, yellow-brown, 
or brown; typically breaking up to form shaggy fibrils or scales which may eventually peel 
or wear away to reveal the smooth undersurface; eventually tearing radially or irregularly, 
the margin usually remaining attached to the stalk for a long time. SPORE MASS con- 
sisting of contorted plates or rudimentary gills; at first white, soon darkening to yellowish, 
then reddish, and finally reddish-brown to dark brown to blackish; powdery at maturity 
(but liquefying slightly under certain conditions). ST ALK4-l5 (26) cm long,0.2-l (l.5)cm 
thick, equal above, the base usually swollen; extending into the spore mass and often 
percurrent; usually long and slender, rather tough and fibrillose to raggedly scaly( but often 
smoother in age); solid or hollow, often twisted-striate; white, or in age often discolored 
like the cap. VEIL not clearly differentiated from cap and stalk tissue. VOLV A absent. 
SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores averaging (7) 10-16 (20) )( (5) 9-15 microns, but 
sometimes much larger (to 36 microns!); round to broadly elliptical, pear-shaped, or 
irregular, smooth, thick-walled, with an apical germ pore. Capillitium present. 
" 
. 
" 
f 
 
Podaxis pistil/aris looks like a shaggy mane, but lacks gills and grows in the desert. Stalk is percurrent 
(i.e., it extends into the spore case or"cap"). Left: Typical specimens witha shaggy or scaly cap. Right: 
Weathered specimens in which the scaly layer has worn away, revealing the smooth undersurface. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to gregarious or clustered on ground in deserts, washes, 
lawns, gardens, irrigated fields, etc.; occurring throughout the warm, dry parts of the 
world (known from every continent except Antarctica). It is the most prominent desert 
fungus of the western United States, showing a preference for sandy soil but also coming 
up in clay or adobe. In California it has been found from below sea level to over 5,000 
feet (in the Panamint Mountains). It usually fruits between April and October, but the 
fruiting bodies persist for months and consequently can be found most any time. I have 
seen it growing outside the T aj Mahal in India, accompanied by Agaricus bitorquis. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible when very young (white inside), but tough and dusty in age. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive denizen of the desert looks like a shaggy mane (Coprinus 
comatus) but does not have gills, does not normally deliquesce, and has a powdery spore 
mass when mature. To the feverish, sun-fried, dust-incrusted fungophile driving deli- 
riously across the monotonous mushroom-meager desert while dreaming of cool coastal 
pine forests bulging with boletes and flower-filled mountain meadows overflowing with 
Agaricus, it is likely to be mistaken for a miraculous mirage or wistful hallucination. 
To the methodical mushroom taxonomist, on the other hand, it is an evolutionary 
anomaly: the stalk is percurrent as in other gastroid agarics, but the spore mass contains 
capillitium as in the stalked puffballs. (Some taxonomists consider it to be a "gastroid" 
relative of Coprinus, while others sequester it in an exclusive order of its own, the Podax- 
ales.) The percurrent stalk distinguishes it from the similarly-shaped Phel/orina strobilina 
(a stalked puffball), and the shape and habitat separate it from other gastroid agarics and 
stalked puffballs (but see Rhopalogaster transversarium in key on p. 724). It's interesting 
to note that, like the shaggy mane, it sometimes grows with Agaricus bitorquis. Perhaps 
since the latter fruits underground, it has a greater temperature range than either the 
saggy mane (which likes it cool) or the desert shaggy mane (which likes it hot). Other 
species: P. argent;nus, with an olive-brown to yellow-brown mature spore mass, and P. 
m;crosporus, with a reddish-brown mature spore mass, are both very similar but have 
much smaller spores (5-9 microns long). P. long;; also has smaller spores, but has a large 
and robust fruiting body (1745 cm tall, stalk 1-2.5 cm thick at apex). Allofthese occur in 
the Southwest, but are not nearly as common as P. pistil/aris. 
ENDOPTYCHUM& Allies 
Medium-sized to fairly large, terrestrial fungi found mostly in arid places. FRUITING BODY with 
a cap and stalk. CAP variously shaped. Flesh usually white whenfresh. but often staining or dis- 
coloring. SPORE MASS typically composed of plates, irregularly contorted gills that may branch 
to form cavities. etc.; enclosed or exposed. typically brown to deep brown or black at maturity 
and sometimes powdery. ST ALK percurrent, long to very short. VEIL and/ or VOL V A typically 
present when fresh. but sometimes disintegrating or easily overlooked. SPORE PRINT not ob- 
tainable. Spores yellow-brown to dark brown under the microscope, round to elliptical, smooth. 
Capillitium absent. 
THESE dark-spored fungi are remarkably reminiscent of Agaricus and Coprinus, but 
do not forcibly discharge their spores. Five genera are treated here. The central genus, 
Endoptychum, may someday be divided into two genera because some of its species{e.g., 
E. depressum) are obviously related to Agaricus, while others {e.g., E. agaricoides) may 
be closer to the parasol mushrooms (Lepiota and Chlorophyllum). In Endoptychum the 
spore mass is typically enclosed by the cap and becomes rather powdery in old age. A 
similar genus, Longula. usually has an exposed spore mass at maturity. It also resem- 
bles Agaricus, but has congested or disfigured "gills." Neosecotium is a small genus 
which, like Endoplychum. is probably related to the Lepiotas. The other two genera, 
Montagnea and Gyrophragmium. have blackish spores and very small, disclike caps with 
a fully exposed spore mass. They are thought to be related to the genus Coprinus. although 
the name Gyrophragmium has also been used for Agaricus-like forms. 
Most of the above fungi fruit in hot, open, arid or semi-arid habitats (E. depressum, 
however, fa vors mountain conifers). N one are known to be poisonous, but they are usually 
found after the spore mass has matured and the fruiting body has toughened. 
Key to Endoptychum & Allies 
I. Cap thin and disclike (less than 4 cm broad), with spore-bearing plates or" gills" hanging from 
its underside or margin; mature spore mass black .................................. 2 
I. Spore mass enclosed for a long time, or if exposed then not as above ................... 3 
2. Spore-bearing plates or "gills" attached to underside of cap; rare ........................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Gyrophragm;um californ;cum (see Montagnea arenarius, below) 
2. Spore-bearing plates hanging from margin of cap; fairly common Montagnea arenar;us, below 
3. Found with mountain conifers (or aspen); mature spore mass chocolate-brown to black; young 
fruiting body often with a sweet odor when broken open . Endoptychum depressum, p. 730 
3. Not with above features; usually found in deserts, lawns, gardens, open areas, etc. ....... 4 
4. Mature spore mass usually exposed and brown to blackish ........ Longula texens;s, p. 729 
4. Spore mass usually enclosed until very old age, white becoming yellowish to brownish (but 
never chocolate-brown or blackish) ............................................. 5 
5. Spore mass containing minute peridioles (spore-bearing capsules) which look like grains of 
sand; stalk separating easily from cap ................ (see Lycoperdales & Allies, p. 677) 
5. Notasabove .............................. Endoptychumagar;co;des& others, p. 731 
Montagnea arenarius (Gastroid Coprinus) 
FRUITING BODY at first deeply buried and enclosed in a tough membrane, then expan- 
ding as the ruptured outer skin forms a volva at base of stalk. Mature fruiting body with 
a stalk and disclike cap (the cap first appearing oval, but all but the disc (center) soon 
splitting into spore-bearing plates. CAP 1-3.5 cm broad, merely a thin disclike expansion 
of the stalk; convex becoming plane or depressed, persistent; surface smooth, white to 
grayish, buff, or occasionally straw-colored, often with a volval patch or remnants; mar- 
gin often tattered or fringed in age. Flesh (in stalk) white when fresh. SPORE MASS ex- 
posed at maturity, composed of thin plates which hang from the margin of the disclike cap 
,. : 
" I 
\ , 
 
) 
Left: Montagnea arenarius. small specimens. Note how central disc or "cap" has "gills" radiating 
from its edge. Right: Gyrophragmium ca/ifornicum (see comments under Montagnea arenarius), a 
rare mushroom whose "gills" are attached to underside of cap. Both species have a volva when fresh. 
and are entirely free from the stalk; plates often wavy or curled, up to 3.5 (6) cm long, 
reddish-black to blackish at maturity, eventually falling off the cap or disintegrating, 
but not deliquescing. STALK (5) 8-30 cm long, 0.2-1.5 (2.5) cm thick, percurrent, more 
or less equal or often tapering downward, hollow, tough or almost woody when old and 
dry (but very light); smooth or longitudinally fibrillose-striate, often splitting or cracking 
into fibrillose or shaggy scales, white to buff or sometimes discoloring darker in old age. 
VEIL absent or rudimentary. VOL V A at base of stalk saclike, usually buried in soil, 
loose (often remaining in ground), two-layered, the outer layer white and ample, the 
inner layer composed of tough fibers. SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores (7.5) 12-20 
(28) x (4.5) 6-11 (14) microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, with a germ pore. Capil- 
litium absent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in sandy soil, old fields, and other waste 
places; widely distributed and fairly common in the arid and semi-arid parts of western 
North America (from Mexico and Texas to California and eastern Washington). It has 
been found high up on the slopes of Mount Shasta, and by the hundreds in fields in eastern 
Oregon. In California it is quite common inland. I have yet to find it in our area, but the 
very similar Gyrophragmium californicum (see comments) does occur rarely in sandy soil. 
EDIBILITY: Like myself, too thin and tough to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This odd but interesting fungus can be told by its long stalk and thin 
disclike cap from whose margin the spore-bearing plates are suspended. The presence 
of a volva is also distinctive, but the volva is deeply buried and easily left behind in the 
ground (or sometimes rots away). The size and stature vary considerably-those from 
Oregon and north-central California being rather small and slender (usually less than 20 
cm tall), and those from southern California and the Southwest being somewhat taller 
(20-30 cm) and often thicker. The blackish spores and thin spore-bearing plates suggest 
that Montagnea evolved from Coprinus. but the fruiting body does not deliquesce, nor 
does it have true gills. A similar but much rarer fungus, Gyrophragmiumcalijornicum, has 
dark brown to blackish spore-bearing plates that hang from the underside of the disclike 
cap rather than from the margin. It also has a loose volva plus a double-layered partial 
veil that either disappears or forms an annulus (ring) on the stalk. It is known only from 
the San Francisco Bay region of California, and appears to be quite rare. In both ofthese 
728 
MONTAGNE A 
729 
species the volva and spore mass disintegrate or rot away, while the light woody stalk 
and thin disclike cap remain intact and persist for months without decaying. In this 
condition they can be mistaken for old specimens of Battarrea phalloides (a stalked puff- 
ball) whose spore mass has dispersed. In the latter species, however, the disc at the top of 
the stalk represents the underside of the old spore case rather than the cap. 
Longula texensis (Gastroid Agaricus) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 3-9 cm broad, oval to round or broadly 
convex or somewhat flattened; surface dry, white to buff becoming tan to ochre or 
brownish in old age, smooth or often breaking up to form white to brown fibrillose scales 
or warts that may wear a way in age; becoming fragile as it dries out, often rupturing longi- 
tudinally in age (especially near margin); margin at first joined to cap by a veil. Flesh firm, 
white, but bruised areas often stained yellowish (or sometimes pinkish-stained in stalk). 
SPORE MASS composed of crowded, convoluted, folded or branched plates and/ or 
cavities; free from the stalk (at least in age); brownish becoming deep chocolate-brown 
to blackish at maturity and usually exposed or partially exposed in age. ST ALK 2-10 cm 
long, 1.5-3.5 (5) cm thick, equal or thicker at base, smooth or longitudinally striate, firm 
and solid when fresh, becoming tougher or even woody as it dries out; white or colored like 
cap; percurrent. VEIL two-layered, at first continuous with the cap margin and stalk, but in 
age usually pulling away from the stalk or separating from the cap to forma superiorringon 
stalk. VOLV A present or absent (usually intergrown with stalk and therefore inconspi- 
cuous). SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores 6-7.5 x 5-6.5 microns, nearly round, 
smooth. Capillitium absent. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in poor soil, waste places, irrigated fields, 
lawns, disturbed areas, etc.; apparently widespread in the arid and semi-arid areas of the 
West (from Texas to California and north at least to Oregon), fruiting after rains or 
artificial watering. I t used to be common in the San Francisco Bay area, but has apparently 
been pushed out by development. I t can still be found with regularity in the Sacramento and 
San Joaquin Valleys, and has also been found in Santa Clara and San Mateo counties. 
EDIBIITY: Unknown. I t has probably been eaten as an Agaricus button, but I can find no 
specific information on it. According to Rick Kerrigan, it is easily cultivated. 
Longu/a texensis looks like an aborted or deformed Agaricus. Note wide variation in size and shape. 
At left a stout button has been sliced open to show the dark spore mass inside; at far right are two slim 
buttons; at center are three small, mature, dried-up individuals (two with a fully exposed spore mass). 
" 
J 
, 
 
" 
 
_. -t. 
" \.. 
\'" 
'.j- 
"...., , 
f 
.. 
""" 
',' , 
... 
 
" \ 
\ . 
! 
1:\ 
(' 
" 
, , 
'- 
 - " 
, , 
f ,. 
,  
ij 
\" 
"- 
\ " 
. <F *' 
.. .. 
Ie 
" 
Longu/a texensis. These large specimens were found near Coalinga, California. The cap can be scaly 
or smooth (see photo on previous page). 
COMMENTS: Originally called Long;a (or Gyrophragm;um) texens;s, this mushroom 
is closely allied to Agaricus, and is likely to be mistaken for that genus because of the veil 
(which sometimes forms an annulus Or ring), cap, stalk, and dark spore mass. However, it 
lacks true gills and the spores are not forcibly discharged. When the veil breaks or pulls 
away from the stalk or the cap splits radially, the spore mass is exposed to the elements, 
whereas in Endoplychum the spore mass usually remains enclosed. A giant version of this 
species,L. texens;s var. major, occurs throughout the range ofthe typical variety. Its cap is 
6-12 Or more cm broad and often quite scaly, and the stalk is 10-25 cm long and 2.5 cm 
or more thick (see photograph above). 
Endoptychum depressum Color Plate 84 
(Mountain Gastroid Agaricus) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 3-15 cm broad, rounded or convex or 
flattened on top, often centrally depressed in age; surface smooth or occasionally scaly, 
white to dingy whitish or buff, often staining yellow or amber when bruised and in age 
(and sometimes staining vinaceous-brown near bottom); margin depressed around the 
stalk and joined to it by a veil, sometimes pulling away from stalk in age or the cap rup- 
turing irregularly. Flesh white, firm becoming tough in age, often bruising yellow; odor 
usually sweet (like almond extract or anise) when young but often unpleasant or musty at 
maturity. SPORE MASS composed of branched or contorted, crowded plates (rudi- 
mentary gills) or elongated chambers, pallid soon becoming chocolate-brown to blackish- 
brown, usually powdery at maturity and not normally exposed except in old age. STALK 
14 cm or more long, 0.8-3 cm thick, equal or tapered, usually short (but see comments), 
Endoptychum depressum. the widespread short-stalked form. Specimen at right is beingviewed from 
top, the specimen next to it from the bottom. Specimen at far left has been cut open to show the dark 
mature spore mass. Specimen next to it is being viewed from side. See color plate for long-stalked form. 
'It 
-" 
",' 
. 
.... 
III 
'.. 
ENDOPTYCHUM 
731 
firm, white or stained like the cap, smooth. percurrent. VEIL rather tough, covering the 
juncture of cap margin and stalk, not normally rupturing but sometimes breaking away 
from the stalk in age. VOL V A typically absent. SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores 
variable in size but usually averaging 6-10 )( 5.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical, 
smooth, thick-walled. Capillitium absent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (or some- 
times aspen); common in the mountains of western North America, especially in the late 
summer and fall. The short-stemmed form typical of the Sierra Nevada often develops 
underground but usually pokes through the surface by maturity. A long-stemmed version 
(see comments) is sometimes abundant under ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible (use only firm specimens); I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: This mushroom is closely related to the section Arvenses of the genus 
Agaricus by virtue of its sweet odor when young, tendency to stain or age yellow, and 
dark spores. However, the veil doesn't normally break until after the spores are mature (if 
it breaks at all) and the gills are misshapen to practically absent. The stalk is usually quite 
short (as shown in the black-and-white photo), but the long-stemmed variety (which may 
or may not be distinct) shown in the color plate is the prevalent one in the Southwest. 
Several other species may occur in the West, but have not been formally described. The 
namesSecotium and Gyrophragmium are used by some authors instead of Endoptychum. 
Endoptychum agar;co;des (Gastroid Lepiota) 
FRUITIN G BODY with a round to oval to pear-shaped, broadly conical, or heart-shaped 
(narrowed at top) cap and a short stalk. CAP (I) 2-7 (10) cm broad, 2.5-10 (12) cm high; 
surface dry, white when young and fresh, but discoloring buff to tan, ochre, or brownish 
with age; fibrillose, but often breaking up to form scales which give it a shredded ap- 
pearance; margin typically joined to the stalk. Flesh (in stalk and cap) white when fresh, 
but in one form staining vinaceous-brown when exposed. SPORE MASS composed of 
distorted chambers and/ or plates (rudimentary gills) crowded within the cap; at first 
white and fleshy, then turning yellowish and finally becoming brown to yellow-brown in 
old age, and sometimes powdery. STALK percurrent, sometimes entirely internal (a 
vertical column that extends to the top of ca p), but usually extending slightly below the cap 
(up to 2 cm), usually thickest at base of cap; white when fresh, but often discoloring like 
the cap in age; usually with a mycelial cord at base. VEIL not clearly differentiated from 
This immature Endoptychum agaricoides has been sliced open to show the percurrent stalk and white 
spore mass. Later the spores turn yellowish or brown and may become powdery. Note the Lepiota- 
like scales on cap. 
 
 " 
. 
" -'  
... 
. 
,, 
"- 
-fI> 
" 
I! 
732 
PODAXALES & ALLIES 
cap (i.e., underside or ""margin" of cap joined to stalk). VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT 
not obtainable; spores 6-9 (11) x 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a thick inner wall 
that has an apical pore. Capillitium absent. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in la wns, fields, flower beds, waste 
places, etc.; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain 
region in the summer and early fall, but I have not seen it in coastal California. It is one of 
the few gastroid agarics to be found in eastern North America. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible when young; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: Also known asSecol;um agar;co;des, this unsung, farflung fungus looks 
like an unexpanded Agaricus or Lepiota, but has only rudimentary gills and never upens 
out. The rather pale spore color and thick inner spore wall with a pore suggests a closer 
relationship to Lepiota or Chlorophyllum than to Agaricus. It does not appear to have 
much in common with other Endoptychums( e.g., E. depressum), but is the "type" species 
of the genus. Other species: E. ar;zon;cum of the Southwest is very similar, but has much 
larger spores; Neosecol;um macrosporum of the Midwest, Southwest, and southern 
California also has larger spores, but they are ornamented rather than smooth and the 
fruiting body is usually slightly smaller (1-4 cm high). 
BRA UNIELL ULA 
EASILY recognized by its orangish to vinaceous flesh and gastroid appearance, this 
small genus is clearly related to the pine spikes (Chroogomphus). Like the latter, it has 
grayish-black spores and amyloid flesh and grows exclusively with conifers. As there is 
only one common species, a key hardly seems necessary. 
Brauniellula nancyae (Gastroid Pine Spike) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and short stalk. CAP (0.5) l cm broad, rounded to 
convex or lobed, or sometimes flattened on top; surface dry to very slightly viscid, fibril- 
lose, ochre to pale or dull orange beneath a layer of flattened grayish to brownish-gray 
fibrils, often becoming vinaceous in age; margin often lobed, at first attached to the stalk by 
the veil, separating from the veil in age but remaining incurved. Flesh thick, firm, pale 
orange to ochraceous when fresh. SPORE MASS composed of crowded, convoluted 
plates and/ or cavities; ochraceous to pale orange, becoming darker (grayish to nearly 
black) as spores mature; usually remaining covered by the veil, but sometimes partially 
exposed. STALK 0.3-2 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, often so short 
that it scarcely protrudes below the cap; solid, firm, ochraceous to dull orange, usually 
fibrillose, often becoming vinaceous or reddish-stained in age and/ or at base. VEIL 
fibrillose, ochraceous or becoming vinaceous. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT not 
obtainable; spores 16-20 x 6.5-9 microns, narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in duff under conifers 
(especially fir and pine) in the summer and early fall; known only from western North 
Braunie//u/a nancyae (=B. a/bipes) is common under mountain conifers throughout the West. Note 
short stalk. It is closely related to Chroogomphus. (Herb Saylor) 
, . 
.- 
 
 , 
 
BRAUNIELLULA 
733 
America. It is common in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades as well as in Idaho; it is also 
said to occur in northern Arizona. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but probably edible. 
COMMENTS: This curious mountain fungus is an almost exact replica of a Chroo- 
gomphus, except that it has only rudimentary gills (if any) and does not open out, and is 
often buried or half-buried in the humus layer. Note that it is the same color as Chroo- 
gomphus( dull or pale orange to ochraceous, becoming vinaceous in age) and has the same 
spore color (gray to black) and habitat. The grayish fibrils on the cap are suggestive of C. 
leplOcyslis (see comments under C. IOmentosus). According to Eric Gerry, B. albipes 
is an earlier (more correct) name for B. nancyae. Other gastroid members of the Chroo- 
gomphus-family (Gomphidiaceae) include: an undescribed species (or perhaps just a 
"freak") found under a pine in southern California (larger than B. nancyae, and lacking 
the grayish fibrils on the cap); and Gomphogaster leucosarx, described from Idaho, which 
has white flesh in the upper stalk and a bright yellow stem base (like the agaric genus 
Gomphidius), but which has a minutely chambered spore mass instead of gills. 
THAXTEROGASTER, NIV ATOGASTRIUM, & Allies 
Medium-sized to small fungi found on wood (Nivatogastrium) or ground (Thaxterogaster & 
others). FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP narrowly conical to convex, plane, orcen- 
trally depressed, viscid or dry. SPORE MASS enclosed by the cap but occasionally exposed at 
maturity, composed of rudimentary gills or plates that sometimes branch toform cavities. ochre 
to brown. rusty-brown. or reddish-brown at maturity, not normally becoming powdery. STALK . 
usually well-developed (but sometimes very short), percurrent. VEIL absent or if present then 
thin and fibrillose. VOL V A typically absent. SPORE PRINT not obtainable. Spores tawny to 
brown under the microscope, mostly elliptical, smooth or roughened. Sphaerocysts and capillitium 
absent. 
SIX miscellaneous genera of gastroid agarics are treated here. All have brown spores 
and are thought to have evolved independently from various brown-spored gilled 
mushrooms. NivalOgastrium, for instance, is closely related to Pho/iora; like that genus, 
it grows on wood. Thaxterogaster, on the other hand, is terrestrial and allied to Cor- 
tinarius; Weraroa and Galeropsis, with their distinctive pointed caps, may be derived 
from Psilocybe or possibly Conocybe; Setchelliogaster and Gastrocybe are both sug- 
gestive of the Bolbitiaceae. All six are small genera and none are worth eating. Three 
characteristic species of our western mountains are described here. 
Key to Thaxterogaster, Nivatogastrium, & Allies 
I. Growing on wood (on mountain conifers) ............. Nivatogastrium nubigenum, p. 735 
I. Growing on ground ............................................................ 2 
2. Cap very narrowly conical (like a dunce cap); usually found in grass or mountains ....... 3 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
3. Found on lawns; fruiting body soon dissolving or collapsing ........................... 
................................... Gastrocybe lateritia (see Weraroacucullala, p. 734) 
3. Usually found in mountains (but often among grasses); fruiting body not dissolving quickly 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Weraroa cucullata & others, p. 734 
4. Associated principally (if not exclusively) with eucalyptus; stalk slender .................. 
.............................. Setchelliogastertenuipes(see Weraroacucullala. p. 734) 
4. Not as above; associated mainly with conifers ...................................... 5 
5. Veil thick and/ or persistent; gills present; spore print obtainable ... (see Cortinarius, p.417) 
5. Veil fibrillose or not well-developed, persisting or disappearing; spore mass composed of 
contorted plates or cavities; spore print not obtainable ..... Thaxterogaster pingue, p. 734 
'It.. 
't 
, - 
Ii 
"., 
Left Thaxlerogasler pingue. Note percurrent stalk in sliced specimen on left. The stalk can be very 
short or fairly long depending on environmental conditions. Right Weraroa cucullala is easily told 
by its small size and narrow, pointed "head." 
Thaxterogaster pingue (Gastroid Cortinarius) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and short stalk. CAP 1-5 cm broad, rounded Or obtuse to 
convex or lobed, the top often flattened somewhat in age; surface slightly viscid to slimy 
when moist, smooth, buff to olive-yellow to dingy yellow-brown or dark brown. Flesh 
firm, white or tinged cap color. SPORE MASS composed of crowded, contorted plates 
and/ or small cavities; yellowish becoming dull brown to pale or dark cinnamon-brown. 
ST ALK 0.5-4.5 cm long, 0.8-2.5 cm thick, very short or rudimentary in some forms, well- 
developed in others; equal or swollen at base; percurrent (the portion in the spore mass 
usually quite narrow and unbranched); smooth, often viscid near base when moist, dull 
yellowish to buff or colored like the cap, often purple or lilac where exposed to light. VEIL 
fibrillose or cobwebby, persisting or disappearing. VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT 
not obtainable; spores (12) 14-16.5 x 8-9.5 microns, elliptical to somewhat oblong, warty 
and/ or wrinkled. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in duff under conifers in western North America; fairly 
common in the summer and fall, especially at higher elevations. It is one ofthe most fre- 
quently encountered gastroid agarics of the Rockies (usually under spruce). In the Sierra 
Nevada and Cascades it favors fir. In our area it is rare-one specimen of local origin 
was brought to me, but its collector did not note the habitat. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown-but hardly tempting. 
COMMENTS: This species is best recognized by its viscid cap, dingy yellowish-brown 
to brown overall color, and frequently violet-tinged stalk. It is a variable species insofar 
as shape is concerned-specimens growing in regions of high rainfall are apt to fruit above 
the ground and have a well-developed stalk, while those growing in drier habitats are more 
likely to remain buried in the duff and have a short stalk that barely protrudes from the cap 
(i.e., the fruiting body can be roundish and Rhizopogon-like). Thaxterogaster is thought 
to be closely related to the agaric genus Cortinarius. Several other species of Thaxtero- 
gaster occur in the United States, some ofthem undescribed. 
Weraroa cucullata (Gastroid Liberty Cap) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 1-4 cm high, 0.4-1.5 cm broad, narrowly 
conical with a pointed apex; surface dry to slightly viscid, smooth or fibrillose, often 
wrinkled, yellow to yellowish-buff to tawny or yellow-brown; margin often splitting in 
734 
WERAROA 
735 
age and retracting slightly from the stalk. SPORE MASS composed of crisped or con- 
torted gills that mayor may not branch to form cavities; brown to reddish-brown. ST ALK 
long and thin (5-12 cm long, 1-4 mm thick), equal or with a small bulb at base, hollow or 
stuffed, rather tough, smooth or fibrillose, colored like cap, dry. VEIL (partial) absent 
or evanescent. VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores 11-14 (16) x 6-8 
(10) microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore; tawny to brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground, usually among grasses in wet alpine 
meadows; widely distributed in the mountains of western North America. It occurs in the 
Sierra Nevada and I have found it in the southern Rockies in August. 
EDIBILITY: Utterly and irrefutably inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: The narrowly conical, pointed cap perched on a long thin stalk plus the 
rudimentary gills make this a most distinctive mushroom. It is reminiscent of a liberty cap 
(Psilocybe semilanceata), but does not have true gills. Ga/erops;s cucu//ata is an older 
name for it. Ga/erops;s po/ytr;cho;des, found in the same habitats, may be a smaller- 
spored version of the same species. G. angust;ceps is an eastern species. Gastrocybe 
/ater;t;a is also similar but grows on lawns and, like Conocybe. collapses or dissolves 
very quickly (within a few hours). Also deserving mention is Setche//;ogaster tenu;pes, 
a small species probably related to the Bolbitiaceae. It has a convex to round or cylindrical, 
yellow-brown to brown or reddish-brown, non-viscid cap with a chambered or gill-like, 
exposed spore mass and a short or long but slender stalk. It is associated with eucalyptus 
and is either especially fond of erudite settings or is only sought for by "academia nuts." 
(It has been found on the Stanford and University of California campuses.) 
N ;vatogastr;um nub;genum (Gastroid Pholiota) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP (I) 2-8 cm broad, nearly round to convex, 
sometimes expanding in age, the center often flattened or slightly depressed; surface 
smooth or slightly fibrillose, ochraceous or tawny to dingy yellowish, buff, or white 
(usually fading to whitish in age), slightly viscid when wet, sometimes pitted; margin at 
first incurved and often lobed, remaining attached to the stalk or sometimes pulling away 
in old age. Flesh white in the cap and columella (that portion ofthe stalk surrounded by the 
spore mass), usually brown in the stalk; rather soft but tough (especially in the stalk); 
odor mild or fragrant (like bubble gum). SPORE MASS brown to cinnamon-brown when 
Nivalogaslrium nubigenum grows on dead mountain conifers in the spring. S pore mass is composed 
of contorted gills and is sometimes exposed in old age (large specimen). Note pale color. 
". 
.. 
. 
\' '-" 
'" 
.... 
.. 
736 
PODAXALES & ALLIES 
mature, composed of irregularly contorted gills that often form chambers; exposed only 
in old age if at all. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or thicker at either end, 
percurrent, usually short and stout, quite tough (difficult to section); white or stained 
brownish to rusty-btown, not viscid. VEIL present as whitish fibrillose tissue that extends 
from the cap margin to the stalk; often disappearing in age, not forming an annulus (ring). 
VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT not obtainable; spores (3)7-9 (12»)( (3) 5.5.5 microns, 
elliptical, smooth, brown in mass, honey-colored under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or in small clusters on rotting conifers, often near 
melting snow or shortly after the snow disappears; fairly common in the mountains of 
the West in the spring and early summer, especially on fir and lodgepole pine. I have seen 
large fruitings in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades, but have yet to find it on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: This distinctive member of the "snowbank" mushroom flora is easily 
identified by its pale color, growth on wood, and irregularly contorted or chambered 
brown "gills" which remain enclosed by the cap or are exposed only in old age. Like other 
gastroid or "reduced" agarics, it is apt to be mistaken for an unopened gilled mushroom. 
Its occurrence on wood and brown "gills" plus the color and shape ofthe spores relate it 
to the agaric genus Pholiota. Another Pholiota-relative, N. wrightii, has been found in 
the mountains of southern California. 
MACOW ANITES, ARCANGELIELLA, & Allies 
Small to medium-sized, terrestrial woodland fungI with a crisp and brittle or fragile texture. 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP variously shaped but never conical. dull or brightly 
colored; margin frequently joined to or touching the stalk, at least when young. Flesh white or 
pallid. SPORE MASS white to yellow, pinkish, or ochraceous; usually composed of contorted 
gills which may branch to form cavities; enclosed or exposed. Latex present in Arcangeliella, other- 
wise absent. STALK often short, percurrent, white or pale-<:olored, brittle (typically snapping 
open cleanly like a piece of chalk). VEIL and VOL V A absent. SPORE PRINT not obtainable. 
Spores hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, round to elliptical, ornamented with amyloid 
warts, spines, or ridges. Sphaerocysts usually present in some part of tissue. Capillitium absent. 
THESE curious fungi 1000k like disfigured specimens of Russula and Lactarius, which is 
essentially what they are. Like those genera, they have white to ochre gills, a crisp or brittle 
texture, and ornamented amyloid spores. However, as in other gastroid agarics, the 
cap does not expand fully and the gills are irregularly contorted or aborted and have lost 
the ability to forcibly discharge spores. Furthermore, while they are not truly hypogeous 
(subterranean), they exhibit a tendency in that direction, i.e., they are frequently only 
partially exposed at maturity. In other words, they are intermediate in aspect between the 
Russulaceae (Russula and Lactarius) and certain genera of false truffles (Marte/lia. 
Gymnomyces. and Zel/eromyces). (The latter are microscopically similar but have gone 
completely underground, lost their stalk, and typically have a chambered rather than 
gilled spore mass.) 
In Macowanites the fruiting body is Russula-like (i.e., the cap is sometimes brightly 
colored and there is no latex). In Arcangeliel/a. on the other hand,a latex is usually present 
as in Lactarius (the latex is best seen by slicing open afresh fruiting body). A third genus, 
Elasmomyces. closely resembles Macowanites, but has spores which are not modified for 
forcible discharge (thus it is a step closer to the false truffles) and lacks sphaerocysts in the 
gills. (Macowanites has sphaerocysts in the gills and its spores are modified for forcible 
discharge though they are not actually discharged.) 
Like Russula and Lac tarius. these mushrooms are strictly mycorrhizal. They are 
MAcaw ANITES, ARCANGELIELLA, & ALLIES 
737 
especially common and diverse under conifers in the mountains of western North America, 
but several (e.g., Macowanites magnus) occur in our area. They are not often collected 
for food and those with an acrid (peppery) taste or unpleasant odor should be avoided. 
Over 25 species of M acowanites have been described from the United States. Most of them 
are difficult to identify without a microscope. Arcangeliella and Elasmomyces have 
fewer species, but are still not easy to identify. One Macowanites and one Arcangeliella 
are described here. 
Key to Macowanites, Arcangeliella, & Allies 
1. Taste very acrid (peppery), but sometimes latently so ................................ 2 
I. Taste mild or distinctive but not acrid ............................................ 4 
2. Fruiting body exuding a latex (milk or juice) when cut open, at least when fresh and moist(but 
latex sometimes very scant) .................................................... 3 
2. Latex absent ................................................................. 9 
3. Stalk usually well-developed; latex usually copious; found mainly in coastal forests ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Arcangeliella variegata (see A. crassa, p. 738) 
3. Stalk usually short, often poorly developed; latex copious or scanty; found mainly under moun- 
tain conifers (in Sierra Nevada, Cascades, etc.) ...... Arcangeliella crassa & others, p. 738 
4. Fruiting body medium-sized to fairly large (cap 3-14 cm broad, stalk 3-7 cmlongand often 3 cm 
thick); cap dull-colored (cinnamon-buff to pale tan to dark brown); odor usually unpleasant 
in age ............................. Macowanites magnus (see M. american us. below) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Odor antiseptic (like iodoform) or chlorine-like, at least at maturity ................... 6 
5. Odor mild or distinctive but not as above .... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
6. Odor chlorine-like; taste unpleasant Macowanites chlorinosmus (see M. american us. below) 
6. Odor antiseptic; taste mild ............ Macowanites iodiolens (see M. americanus. below) 
7. Odor sweet, at least in age or when dried .......................................... 8 
7. Odor mild or unpleasant but not sweet ............................................ 9 
8. Cap whitish ............... Elasmomycesodoratus(see Macowanitesamericanus. below) 
8. Cap tan to rusty-brown ................ Arcangeliella camphorata (see A. crassa. p. 738) 
9. Associated primarily with hardwoods (oak, etc.); cap whitish to bright red or reddish. . .. 10 
9. Associated primarily with conifers; cap whitish to yellow, blue, olive, vinaceous, salmon, rosy, 
purplish, vinaceous, or mixtures thereof ........................................ II 
10. Spore mass composed of contorted or rudimentary gills ............................... 
............... _ Elasmomycesrussuloides& others (see Macowanitesamericanus. below) 
10. Spore mass minutely chambered, not normally exposed .... (see Martellia & Allies, p. 742) 
II. Taste acrid (peppery) ......... Macowanites luteolus & others (see M. american us. below) 
II. Taste mild or at least not acrid ........... Macowanites americanus & many others, below 
Macowanites american us (Gastroid Russula) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 1-5 cm broad, convex or irregularly lobed, 
but often expanding in age to plane or even centrally depressed; surface viscid when wet, 
smooth or often breaking up into scalese especially at center); color variable: lilac, purplish, 
vinaceous, olive, blue, yellow, or even whitish, or often mixtures thereof; margin not 
typically joined to the stalk but often touching it when young. Flesh brittle, crisp, white; 
odor and taste mild. SPORE MASS consisting of irregular or distorted, often veined or 
even chambered gills that are whitish at first but soon become ochre tod ull yellow-orange; 
usually attached to stalk. STALK 1-3 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, more orlessequal, firm, 
brittle, smooth, white, percurrent. VEIL and VOLV A absent. SPORE PRINT not 
obtainable; spores 8.5-13.5 )( 8-12 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid warts 
and ridges, modified for forcible discharge but not actually discharged. 
738 
PODAXALES & ALLIES 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff under conifers (sometimes buried); 
fairly common and widespread in western North America, especially under spruce, fir, 
Douglas-fir, and pine. It fruits mainly in the summer and fall and is said to be the most 
common member of the genus. I have seen it in northern California. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible-but be sure of your identification. 
COMMENTS: This conifer-lover looks like a deformed or aborted Russula, which is 
essentially what it is! The spores are not forcibly discharged and hence a spore print is 
unobtainable. There are more than 20 other members of the genus in North America, 
including: M. ;od;olens, very similar but with a distinct iodoform (antiseptic) odor, found 
under conifers; M. subol;vaceus, a mild-tasting species wtih a white or olive-tinged cap 
and smaller spores, found in the Sierra Nevada under conifers;M. chlor;nosmus, with a 
whitish to yellow cap, deep ochre spore mass, chlorine odor, and unpleasant taste, found 
under conifers; M. luteolus, ad ull or pale yellowish, acrid-tasting species found in coastal 
California and the Pacific Northwest under conifers;M. subrosaceus, a pinkish-capped, 
ochraceous-staining species; M. (=Elasmomyces) rose;pes, with a pinkish to salmon or 
vinaceous cap whose margin never touches the stalk, favoring spruce and fir;M. alp;nus, 
a white to creamy-buff montane species; and M. magnus, a large species (cap 3-14 cm 
broad, stalk 3-7 cm long and up to 3 cm thick) with a viscid tan to dark reddish-brown cap 
and an unpleasant odor, originally collected in Santa Clara County, California. The 
closely related genus Elasmomyces has spores which are not modified for forcible dis- 
charge and seems to be more common under oak than conifers, at least in California. Its 
members include: E. russulo;des, with a red to reddish-brown cap (at least in age), widely 
distributed; E. pilosus, which tends to grow underground in association with oak; and 
E. odoratus of Washington, with a strong fragrant odor. None of these are worth eating. 
A rcangeliella crassa (Gastroid Milk Cap) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex when young, be- 
coming plane to shallowly depressed or irregular in age; surface pale buff to pinkish-buff, 
sometimes darkening slightly (to cinnamon-buff) in old age, dry or slightly viscid, smooth; 
margin typically remaining attached to the stalk, but often not quite reaching it in some 
places, and in age sometimes separating slightly from it. Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white to 
pinkish-buff; odor often unpleasant in age; taste very acrid (peppery). Latex present 
but often scanty (especially in dry weather), white, unchanging. SPORE MASS com- 
prised of contorted plates or rudimentary, often chambered gills; pale pinkish-buff to 
ochre-buff, usually completely enclosed by the cap but occasionally exposed when old, 
especially near the stalk. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, usually stubby and 
poorly-developed, often off-center; solid or hollow, crisp, brittle, dry, smooth, percurrent; 
whitish or colored likethecap. VEILand VOLV Aabsent.SPOREPRINTnotobtainable; 
spores 7.5-11 )( 5.5-8 microns, elliptical, with strongly amyloid ridges (reticulate). 
Left: Macowanites sp. (perhaps Macowanites magnus), a Russula-like fungus with deformed gills. 
Right: Arcange/ie//a crassa has short stalk plus white latex which is not visible here. (Herb Saylor) 
,:'; ;:,.' '\ 
,. 
,.. -\, 
'. .. 
:. 
 
" , . 
... 
"". 
\' . 
.:' 
>of 
ARCANGELIELLA 
739 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in duff under conifers and in mixed woods; known only 
from the mountains of western North America. It is sometimes common (along with A. 
tenax-see comments) in the Sierra Nevada in the spring, summer, and fall. Like many 
gastroid agarics, it does not seem to occur on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but the acrid taste is a deterrent. 
COMMENTS: The genus Arcangeliella is closely related to Lactarius. and this species 
looks like an aborted milk cap. The overall buff to pinkish-buff color and white acrid 
latex are important field characters. A. tenax and A. lactar;o;des (the latter with a 
gelatinous cap cuticle) have also been described from the mountains of Oregon and Cali- 
fornia; they are very similar if not the same. Other species: A. var;egata is a coastal species 
with a grayish-buff to olive-buff cap that is often yellowish-spotted in age plus a copious 
white to almost clear, acrid latex and well-developed white stalk. It occurs in our area but 
is more common northward. Still another species, A. (=Elasmomyces) camphorata of 
Washington, is remarkable for its strong fragrant odor like that of candy caps (Lactarius 
fragilis and relatives), especially when dry. As in candy caps, its latex is often absent, but 
the odor and overall tan to rusty-brown color distinguish it. See also Zelleromyces(under 
Martellia & Allies). 
False Truffles 
$ 
 
 
spores 
HYMENOGASTRALES & Allies 
THE false truffles, deprecatingly dubbed "squirrel food" by at least one jaded fungophile 
I know, are easy-to-overlook, difficult-to-identify, subterranean, tuberlike fungi. They 
are neither delicious (unless you're a squirrel) nor conspicuous (unless you're a squirrel) 
nor attractive (unless you're a squirrel), but they are interesting from an evolutionary 
standpoint (unless you're a squirrel) because many are thought to have evolved from the 
Hymenomycetes (e.g., agarics and boletes) or perhaps to have given rise to them. 
The fruiting body of a false truffle is typically potatolike: round to oval or knobby with 
a tough or cartilaginous to rubbery or gelatinous interior. The spore mass or gleba (in- 
terior) is often composed of small chambers that give it a spongelike appearance. The 
spores are borne on the walls of the chambers or sometimes within the chambers them- 
selves. The gleba usually remains intact through maturity rather than becoming powdery 
and dispersing. These features, plus the fact that most false truffles are hypogeous (sub- 
terranean) or erumpent (i.e., they "erupt" through the surface of the ground at maturity) 
distinguish them from the puffballs and earthballs, which have a powdery spore mass in 
old age and usually fruit above the ground. 
Some false truffles, such as Truncocolumella. possess an internal stalk or columella- 
a branched or unbranched central column which penetrates the spore mass and sometimes 
protrudes slightly beneath it as a rudimentary stalk or "stump." The columella can be 
quite slender, so you should always make several sections ofthe fruiting body so as not to 
overlook it. The columella or "stalk" is not usually percurrent as in the gastroid agarics, 
and in many false truffles (including the most common genus, Rhizopogon) it is al- 
together lacking. 
The false truffles can also be confused with the "true" truffles, which are not as common, 
usually have a channelled or marbled or hollow interior, and lack a columella (see lengthy 
footnote on p. 844). As might be expected, there are some exceptions (e.g., false truffles 
such as Melanogaster and Alpova have veins in the spore mass, and some truffles have a 
.,;: ": '"' 
" 
. 
"-e. 
,.. 
 
.., 
,t 
.. 
j. 
, 
1 
" 
>1 - 
. . 
\ 
" 
False truffles look something like puffballs, but usually grow underground and do not have powdery 
spores at maturity The interior is usually divided into chambers, but the chambers can be so minute 
that a hand lens is required to see them. This species is Rhizopogon ochraceorubens(p. 755). 
chambered interior), and it is sometimes necessary to make a microscopic determination 
as to whether the spores are borne inside asci (the true truffles) or on basidia (the false 
truffles).. 
As defined here, the false truffles are an artificial and heterogeneous group. Several 
genera are related to the agarics (e.g., Hymenogaster to the Cortinariaceae, Hydnangium 
to Laccaria. Martellia to Russula. and Zelleromyces to Lactarius). A few, like Trunco- 
columella. show affinities to the boletes, while the origins and relationships of others 
(e.g., Rhizopogon and Alpova) are obscre. 
Western North America harbors more than its share of false truffles-more, in fact, 
than any other region in the world. Most if not all are mycorrhizal. They are very common, 
but since they tend to grow underground, they're unlikely to be seen unless sought for. 
The best way to find them is to take a handrake and sift gently through the humus or needle 
duff and upper soil layer (see chapter on truffles for more details), giving special attention 
to areas where squirrels, deer, or wild pigs ha ve been digging. You face fierce competition, 
however, for those not devoured by animals are eagerly snatched up by mycologists (it 
is only in the last fifty years that the false truffles have been studied closely-dozens have 
yet to be named and many of the named ones are known only from a single locality). 
Relatively few are left in the ground to rot in peace, which may actually be to their advan- 
tage-since their spore mass is not powdery and easily dispersed, they rely on rodents, 
insects, rain, and mycologists to spread their spores for them. Many have strong odors 
(e.g., like marzipan, garlic, or vanilla) that help to broadcast their presence. 
The false truffles are of more interest to the evolutionary taxonomist than the most 
revolutionary gastronomist. Some have an unpleasant taste or texture; a few, I am told, 
are edible. The overwhelming majority, however, have not been tested (by humans), in 
part because field identification can be very difficult. A microscope is often needed to 
determine the genus and family as well as the species. 
The false truffles are a vast group-there are over 150 species of Rhizopogon alone! 
Only a few representatives are depicted here. The keys, which unavoidably resort to 
microscopic characteristics, are greatly modified versions of those in How to Know the 
Non-Gilled Mushrooms by Alexander Smith, Helen Smith, and Nancy Weber. Those 
of you who wish to know more about the false truffles should consult the extensive keys 
in that book, the technical literature on the subject (see bibliography), and/ or the 
squirrel representative nearest you. 
Key to the Hymenogastrales & Allies 
I. Spore borne inside asci. ...................................... (see Tuberales, p. 841) 
I. Spores borne on basidia. ....................................................... 2 
2. Columella present, branched or unbranched, percurrent (extending all the way through spore 
mass) or stumplike, sometimes very thin (be sure you slice the fruiting body perpendicular to 
the ground and through its center-you may want to make several thin slices so as not to over- 
look the columella) ........................................................... 3 
2. Columella absent (but a stalk like base oftough fibers sometimes present) ............... 7 
· For some fairly reliable ways to distinguish the T uberales (truffles) from the false truffles in the fie/d. see the ex- 
tensive footnote at bottom of p. 844. 
740 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
741 
12. 
Columella short and stumplike or branched, usually prominent; peridium (skin) typically 
yellow to olive; spore mass composed of empty tubular chambers, not blueing when cut; spores 
smooth, yellowish to pale brown under the microscope; associated mainly if not exclusively 
with Douglas-fir ......................................... Truncocolumella, p. 752 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Outline of gills and cap present in longitudinal (perpendicular) section (see Agaricales, p. 58) 
4. Not as above ............... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5 
5. Peridium (skin) 2-5 mm thick; columella fairly thick (sometimes rounded or cushion-shaped), 
not percurrent; spore mass lacking chambers but with radiating lines or plates when young; 
white becoming brown or black; firm to gooey or in old age powdery .... Radiigera, p. 760 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Spore mass usually (but not always) greenish to olive-gray or olive-brown, typically tough or 
cartilaginous when young but often slimy in old age; columella often translucent (but some- 
times whitish), branched or unbranched; peridium (skin) usually well-developed; spores 
smooth or enclosed in a wrinkled outer coat .............. Hysterangium & Allies, p. 762 
6. Not as above ................................................................ II 
7. Spore mass white even in age, the chambers usually gel-filled orexuding a white latex when cut; 
spores with a gelatinous sheath, not amyloid ......... Leucophleps& Leucogaster, p. 759 
Mature spore mass darker (may be white when young), or if white then not as above ..... 8 
Peridium (skin) thick ( occasionally I mm, usually 2-5) and tough or leathery; spore mass at first 
white but soon black, purplish, or dark brown, remaining firm for a long time but finally pow- 
dery, sometimes with veins but lacking gel-filled char.1bers ...... (see Scleroderma, p. 707) 
8. Not as above; peridium usually thinner; spore mass only rarely powdery ............... 9 
9. Spore mass typically marbled with paler veins, the chambers usually gelatinous or gel-filled; 
spores smooth ...................................... A Ipova & Melanogaster, p. 756 
Not as above (but may have some of above features) ............................... 10 
Spores smooth (not ornamented), elliptical to oblong, sometimes amyloid but not dextrinoid, 
spore mass composed of minute chambers; outer surface often (but not always) with mycelial 
threads; very common, especially under conifers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Rhizopogon, p. 753 
Not as. ab?v:; sore, typically ornamented with lines, warts, wrinkles, spines, etc., or showing 
dextnnold stnpes .......................................................... II 
Spores round, elliptical, or elongated, colorless to yellowish or brown under microscope, not 
amyloid; spore mass variously colored (sometimes dark); peridium absent or present ... 12 
Spores round to elliptical with amyloid or partially amyloid warts, rods, ridges, or spines; 
spores usually colorless or nearly so under the microscope; spore mass variously colored but 
often white at first and not typically dark brown to blackish; peridium usually present .. 16 
Spores round to broadly elliptical and ornamented with large warts, cones, or spines; spores 
usually colorless under the microscope but sometimes brown; found in many habitats but 
especially common under eucalyptus .................... Hydnangium & Allies, p. 744 
Spores nearly round to elliptical, spindle-shaped, or elongated and typically wrinkled, warted, or 
longitudinally lined (rarely smooth or honeycombed), yellow-brown to rusty-brown or brown 
under the microscope: common in many habitats (including eucalyptus) .............. 13 
Spores appearing smooth except in iodine solution(and then showing prominent brown bands 
or stripes, i.e., dextrinoid); spore mass white to yellow or yellowish .................. 14 
Not as above; spores typically ornamented (rarely smooth, but if so then not as above) .. 15 
Peridium white to brownish; found in Sierra Nevada ............ Protogautieria substriata 
Peridium absent or practically so; known from eastern Washington ... Protogautieria lutea 
Peridium (skin) often thin and soon wearing away; spore mass quite tough and crisp when 
young; spores ornamented with longitudinal lines ... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Gautieria, p.746 
Not as above; peridium usually well-developed, persistent. .. Hymenogaster& Allies, p. 748 
Outer layer of each spore consisting of amyloid rods imbedded in non-amyloid material; 
sphaerocysts absent; fruiting body 1-4 cm broad, usually irregular in shape, white becoming 
yellowish to olive-yellow or olive-gray; spore mass white and very dry, becoming olive in age; 
found under conifers, not common but sometimes fruiting prolifically Mycolevis siccigleba 
Not as above; spores ornamented with free spines, warts, and/ or ridges; sphaerocysts usually 
(but not always) present somewhere in fruiting body; mature spore mass variously colored but 
not often olive; widespread and fairly common ................ M artellia & Allies, p. 742 
7. 
8. 
3. 
9. 
10. 
10. 
II. 
II. 
12. 
13. 
13. 
14. 
14. 
15. 
15. 
16. 
16. 
742 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
MARTELLIA & Allies 
Small to medium-sized woodland fungi usually found underground. FRUITING BODY round 
to knobby or lobed (potato-like), variable in color. SPORE MASS (interior) typically composed of 
large to small or minute chambers; usually rather crisp whenfresh. white to pinkish. ochre. ochre- 
brown. or cinnamon-brown. Latex often present in Zelleromyces. otherwise absent. STALK 
absent except in a few species; columella present or absent. SPORES round to elliptical, orna- 
mented with amyloid warts. spines. and/ or ridges; hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. 
Basidia forming a hymenium that lines the walls of the chambers. Sphaerocysts usually present 
somewhere in the fruiting body (but sometimes absent in Martellia). Capillitium absent. 
THESE are poorly known, difficult-to-identify false truffles with a white to yellow- 
or cinnamon-brown spore mass and amyloid spores. Like the gastroid agarics Maco- 
wanites. Arcangeliella. and Elasmomyces. * they are thought to be closely related to 
Russula and Lactarius. but are one step farther removed (i.e., they lack the cap and stalk 
of those genera, grow underground, and typically have a chambered rather than plated or 
gilled spore mass). 
The most common gen us, M arrellia. lacks a latex and is thought to be related to Russula. 
A second genus, Gymnomyces. mimics Martellia but differs microscopically (the central 
strata of tissue in the walls between the chambers contain sphaerocysts; in Martellia they 
do not). A third genus, Zelleromyces. is probably closer to Lactarius than to Russula 
because the fresh fruiting body often exudes a latex Uuice) when cut. (A Zelleromyces 
recently discovered in Yosemite National Park has a scanty dark red latex and stains 
greenish-just like Lactarius rubrilacteus!) 
Unless the spores are examined, all three genera are easily confused with other false 
truffles such as Hymenogasterand Octavianina. However, they are often crisper or fleshier 
(or not as tough) as many false truffles and often paler in color, at least when young. 
Martellia and Gymnomyces, and to a lesser extent, Zelleromyces. are fairly common 
in our area under oak, madrone, and various conifers. However, theydo not normally fruit 
in the large numbers characteristic of some of the other false truffles (e.g., Rhizopogon 
and Gautieria). All three genera need critical study, especially Martellia. which is fairly 
sizable. As the various species are differentiated almost exclusively on microscopiccharac- 
teristics, only two are described here. 
Key to Martellia & Allies 
I. Fruiting body with a scanty dark red latex; wounded tissue usually staining greenish (within 
several hours); columella present but stalk absent; spore mass chambered; peridium (skin) 
practically absent; known only from Yosemite National Park .......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . Z elleromyces sp. (name soon to be published by Harry Thiers and Herb Saylor) 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Columella and/ or stalk present, usually percurrent (extending clear through spore mass) . 3 
2. Stalk absent; columella absent or rudimentary ..................................... 5 
3. Fruiting body exuding a latex when cut; columella thin, branching; found mainly under oak 
along the west coast ........................................ Zelleromyces gardneri 
3. Latex absent ................................................................. 4 
4. Spore mass rosy to pinkish to pinkish-buff ................. Gymnomyces socia/is. p. 743 
4. Mature spore mass more or less cinnamon-buff Martellia cremea(see M. brunnescens. p.743) 
5. Fruiting body exuding a white latex when cut; exterior cinnamon to reddish; spore mass(interior 
. of fruiting body) pale cinnamon-buff; widespread in eastern North America, especially under 
pine .................................................. Ze//eromyces cinnabarinus 
5. Not as above; latex absent ...................................................... 6 
6. Exterior tinged or spotted rose or red . Gymnomyces roseomaculatus(see G. soc;a/is. p. 743) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
· Macowanites. Arcangeliella. Elasmomyces. Zelleromyces. Gymnomyces. and Martellia constitute the so-called 
"astrogastraceous series." In modern classifications they are usually placed alongside Russula and Lactarius 
in the Russulales and/ or Russulaceae 
 ". 
Marte//ia fa//ax (see comments under M. brunnescens). Specimen at upper right is immature, as 
evidenced by white interior. Specimen at upper left is mature and distinctly fragrant. Since many 
species share these features, a microscope is usually needed to distinguish them. 
7 . Walls ofthe spore-bearing chambers containing sphaerocysts in their central layers (a micro- 
scopic feature); uncommon . GymnomycesJerruginascens& others (see G. socia/is. below) 
7. Walls of the spore-bearing chambers lacking sphaerocysts in their central layers (sphaero- 
cysts mayor may not be present elsewhere) .. Martellia brunnescens& many others, below 
M artellia brunnescens 
FRUITING BODY 1-3 cm broad, round to oval or irregularly knobby (potato-like). 
Outer surface white when young, developing ochre- to rusty-brown or brown stains in age 
or after handling, and usually entirely brownish in old age; smooth or pitted. SPORE 
MASS (interior) composed of small chambers, crisp and white when young, but dis- 
coloring brown to rusty-brown when cut (often slowly) and becoming ochre-brown to 
brown at maturity; odor often sweet (somewhat reminiscent of vanilla), at least in age. 
ST ALK and columella absent. SPORES 8-11 x 8-9 microns, broadly elliptical to round, 
with strongly amyloid warts and spines; hyaline ( colorless) under the microscope. Cystidia 
absent. Walls of tissue between the chambers lacking sphaerocysts in their central layers. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in soil or humus (buried) in woods; known 
only from western North America. It favors conifers and is one of the most common 
Martellias of Oregon and California. I have found it in mixed woods and under Douglas- 
fir in April, July, and October. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: There are many Martellias that will more or less fit the macroscopic 
features of the above description. The sweet odor which develops in age might seem to be 
a distinctive feature, but is found in a number of other species (e.g., M.fragrans of Idaho, 
which has a strong vanilla-like odor). Another common western species,M.jallax, smells 
like Russulafragrantissima (at least to me). It is quite common in our area under hard- 
woods, and differs microscopically from M. brunnescens in having cystidia which are 
golden in potassium hydroxide (KOH). Also worth mentioning areM.joetens, an Idaho 
species that smells like M.fa//ax;M. cremea, which hasa percurrentcolumella; andM. cal- 
iforn;ca, M. boozer;, M. parks;;, M. ell;psospora, et aI, which differ microscopically. 
Gymnomyces socialis 
FRUITING BODY 1-2 cm broad (but several sometimes tightly clustered to form larger 
masses), roundish to somewhat irregular. Outer surface pallid to creamy or pinkish, 
usually staining ochraceous to rusty-brown when handled or dried; more or less smooth. 
7A'J 
744 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
SPORE MASS (interior) composed of minute chambers, rosy-pinkish to pinkish-buff at 
maturity. STALK present as a short sterile base (at least in larger specimens) which is 
tucked into the depression formed by the lower portion ofthe peridium(skin), giving rise 
to a columella which penetrates the spore mass and is usually percurrent; whitish to 
pinkish-buff. SPORES 9-14 )( 8-11 microns, round or nearly round, ornamented with 
amyloid warts or spines, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. Walls of tissue between 
the chambers containing sphaerocysts in their central layers. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or clustered in soil or humus under oak; known only 
from California. According to Herb Saylor, it is fairly common in our area in the late fall, 
winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species can be told by its small size, pinkish-tinged peridium (skin) 
and spore mass, and the presence of a columella which usually extends below the spore 
mass as a short stalk. The latter feature is unusual for a Gymnomyces. and serves to dis- 
tinguish it from G. roseomaculatus, which also develops pinkish or reddish spots or 
tinges and grows under oak. Specimens with a well-developed stalk might be mistaken 
for a Macowanites or Elasmomyces. but do not have the rudimentary gills and exposed 
spore mass of those genera. Other species: G. cinnamomeus and G.ferruginascens both 
lack a columella and have a brownish to rusty-ochre or cinnamon exterior, at least in age. 
The first occurs in California under oak; the latter is recorded from Idaho under conifers. 
HYDNANGIUM& Allies 
Small to medium-sized fungifound mostly underground. FRUITING BODY round to irregularly 
lobed (potato-like), variously colored. SPORE MASS (interior) typically composed of chambers 
or elongated cavities; pinkish in Hydnangium. yellow-orange at maturity in Sclerogaster, variously 
(but usually differently) colored in Octavianina. Latex present or absent. ST ALK absent or present 
as a short sterile base; columella present or absent. SPORES usually round or nearly round and 
warted or spiny but not amyloid: hyaline (colorless) or pale under the microscope (or sometimes 
brown in Octavianina). Capillitium absent. 
THREE miscellaneous genera with spiny or warted, non-amyloid spores are treated here. 
The most common genus, Hydnangium, is easily told by its pinkish to flesh-colored spore 
mass and frequent association with eucalyptus. Sc/erogaster also has a distinctively 
colored spore mass: bright golden-yellow to orange-yellow at maturity. It favors conifers. 
Octavianina. on the other hand, is variable in color and cannot reliably be distinguished 
from other false truffles without examining its spores. I ts spore mass, however, is not 
normally pinkish or orange-yellow. 
Hydnangium is thought to be closely related to the agaric genus Laccaria. The affinities 
of Sc/erogaster and Octavianina are unclear. 
Key to Hydnangium & Allies 
1. Spore mass pinkish to flesh-colored; peridium (skin) pinkish or whitish; usually (but not 
always) associated with eucalyptus ...................... Hydnangium carneum, p. 745 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Spore mass typically golden-yellow to orange-yellow when mature (may be whitish at first) 3 
2. Not as above ........................ Octavianina asterosperma group & others, p. 745 
3. Fruiting body 0.5-2.5 cm broad, white to pale yellow; spore mass sometimes powdery in age; 
odor often strong at maturity but not like peanut butter; spores 8-11 microns broad; not un- 
common in Southwest and Rocky Mtns., especially under pine .. Sclerogaster xerophilum 
3. Not as above; odor resembling peanut butter when mature; known from southern California 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. S clerogaster columnatus 
III 
....' 
# ..'" 
.... ..."'- 
'" 
, 
, 
. .. 
..  
'» .... . 
"t. " 
"" 
<. 
" 
, 
,":  .. 
, 
" ...-( 
'1 
. 
 
.. 
'.. 
..'., 
 
. . 
4" 
 
. ., .. 
Hydnang;um carneum, a pinkish false truffle that favors eucalyptus. Left: Specimens with a well- 
developed sterile base or "stalk." Right: A sectioned specimen lacking a sterile base. (Herb Saylor) 
Hydnangium carneum (Rosy Eucalyptus False Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 0.5-4 cm broad, round to irregularly lobed and/ or flattened. Outer 
surface often pitted or wrinkled, dry, fibrillose or minutely velvety, pale rose to pinkish, 
pinkish-cinnamon, pinkish-buff, or flesh-colored (but often whitish when young and/ or 
retaining white areas in age), sometimes also with darker spots. SPORE MASS (interior) 
composed of small, often elongated or mazelike chambers that give it a spongy or marbled 
appearance; pinkish or rosy (like exterior or darker); odor usually mild. ST ALK absent 
or often present as a fragile whitish to pinkish sterile base which may extend into the spore 
mass as a thin columella. SPORES 10-18 microns, round or nearly so, with large non- 
amyloid warts or spines; hyaline (colorless) or tinged yellow under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus under eucalyptus and possibly other 
exotic trees and shrubs (e.g., Leptospermum); widely distributed wherever eucalyptus 
is planted or naturalized. In California it fruits from late fall through the spring, but is par- 
ticularly common from January through April. I often find it with Hymenogaster a/bus 
and Hysterangiumfuscum. HarryThiers reports finding a large-spored variant under pine. 
EDIBILITY: Edible according to one source; I haven't tried it. 
CO MMENTS: The pinkish color (at least of the s pore mass) and round spiny spores of this 
false truffle are strongly suggestive of the agaric genus Laccaria, and it is very likely that 
the two are closely related. It is interesting to note that pinkish Laccarias are sometimes 
common in our area under acacia, eucalyptus, and other Australian imports. Thecommon 
Hydnangium of California has long gone under the names H. roseum and H. soeder- 
stroemii, but they are probably synonyms for the wide-ranging and variable H. carneum. 
One source of confusion is the presence or absence of a sterile base or "stalk." Though 
often present, it is very easily broken and consequently apt to be overlooked. 
Octavianina asterosperma group 
FRUITING BODY 1-3 cm broad, round or more often knobby and pitted (potato-like), 
firm, often with white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at the base. Outer surface whitish 
at first from a thin layer of cottony tissue which wears off in patches, revealing the dingy 
brown to grayish to yellowish-olive undersurface; discoloring pale greenish to faintly 
bluish or grayish-olive where bruised or rubbed. Peridium (skin) often wavy, whitish to 
buff, discoloring like the surface when cut. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of minute 
chambers, very firm, dark brown to blackish when mature, with whitish plates of sterile 
tissue sometimes visible; latex (fluid) present or absent (see comments). STALK absent, 
but a slight sterile base often present as a thickening of the basal peridium, and in some 
specimens this sterile base apparently giving rise to a thin columella. SPORES 13-18 
microns, round, covered with large, blunt spines; yellowish to brown under the 
microscope, not amyloid. 
745 
746 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus under trees in woods (usually buried); 
widely distributed but rare. Specimens tentatively identified as this species have been 
found near Santa Cruz, California, under redwood and Douglas-fir in June and July. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Most species of Octavianina are rare, and this one is no exception. It was 
originally collected in Europe and described as exuding a latex when cut. Local material 
seems nearly identical to the European version, but shows no sign of a latex. Var. potter;, 
described from Michigan, also lacks a latex, but has a paler spore mass and blackens when 
bruised. The large, relatively few, non-amyloid warts or spines on the spores are the out- 
standing feature of the species. Hymenogaster utricu/atus (see comments under H. sub- 
lilacinus) looks quite similar in the field, but has ridged or honeycombed spores. There 
are several Octavianinas with a paler (pallid to cinnamon-brown) spore mass, including: 
O. papyracea, with an abundant cream-colored latex and a papery peridium when dry, 
originally found in northern California under redwood; O. rogers;;, with smaller warts 
on its spores and no latex; and O. macrospora, with elliptical spores. All of these are rare. 
GAUTIERIA 
Small to medium-large woodlandfungi usuallyfoundunderground. FRUITING BODY roundish 
to oval to lobed or knobby (potato-like). Peridium (outer skin) absent orpoorly-developedinmany 
species. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of small to large cavities or chambers, usually ochre- 
yellow to yellow-brown, cinnnamon-brown, or dull brown; firm and tough or rubbery when 
fresh, often rubbery-gelatinous and strong-smelling in age. STALK absent or rudimentary; 
columella often present, well-developed, and branched. SPORES typically elliptical and yellowish 
to rusty-cinnamon under the microscope, longitudinally striate or ridged (or even "winged"), not 
amyloid. Basidia borne in a hymenium lining the walls of the chambers. Capillitium absent. 
TH E ochre to cinnamon to dull brown overall color and tendency of the outer skin to wear 
away (thereby exposing the inner cavities) are the main field characters ofthisdistinctive 
genus of false truffles. Those few species with a persistent peridium (skin) can be distin- 
guished from Hymenogaster and other false truffles by their brownish, longitudinally 
lined spores. Gautieria is a common genus (if you're looking for truffles), but the various 
species are difficult to distinguish from each other and several are still undescribed. One 
representative is described here. 
Key to Gautieria 
I. Peridium (skin) well-developed and persistent, i.e., the spore mass not exposed .......... 2 
1. Peridium absent or present only as a thin layer of tissue that soon wears away, i.e., the spore 
mass (spore-bearing chambers or cavities) usually exposed at maturity ................ 3 
2. Peridium whitish when young ................. G. gautierioides (see G. monticola. p. 747) 
2. Not as above ................................. G. parksiana (see G. monticola. p. 747) 
3. Spore-bearing cavities quite large (2-10 mm broad); columella typically absent or rudimentary; 
found under hardwoods .................. G. morchelliJormis{see G. monticola. p. 747) 
3. Not as above; spore-bearing ca vities often smaller and columella usually present; very common 
under conifers, but also occurring with hardwoods ................................. 4 
4. Spore mass yellowish to bright yellow-brown or ochre; spores appearing "winged" under the 
microscope................................ G.pterosperma(see G. monticola. p.747) 
4. Spore mass typically rusty-brown or darker or duller; spores longitudinally lined but not 
"winged" ............................................ G. monticola& others, p. 747 
 
-, 
. -. ....:: "i4 - 
I!I"" ",-, 
. 
,.! 
. 
....,. 
"Ii 
.. 
'" 
-.I 
.... '" Ii! 
..... 
,'" 
. , 
-.(' 
" 
\ ,'- 
....... i-;" 
,]' 
'I,.: 
'- 
,., 
... 
,. 
 
..' ...... .-" 
... "."" 
':. 
s.. " 
. .,  
..... , 
..","' 
.............> 
- , 
. . 
.. 
,'", " 
. 
. 
" 
.. 
Gaut;er;a mont;cola. Left: Exterior; note how there is practically no skin, i.e., the chambered spore 
mass is visible. Right: A specimen sliced open to show the interior. N otethethin branching columella. 
Gautieria monticola 
FRUITING BODY (I) 2-9 cm broad, round to elongated or irregularly knobby (potato- 
like), often with a mycelial cord (rhizomorph) at base. Outer surface pallid when very 
young, soon becoming light brown to ochre to rusty-brown or dull brown. Peridium 
(skin) very thin, soon wearing away to expose the spore-bearing cavities. SPORE MASS 
(interior) composed of numerous small (0.5-3 mm) round orelongated chambers, firm and 
rubbery (not fragile) and crisp when fresh, ochre-brown to rusty-brown to dull cinnamon 
to dull brown at maturity; odor often strong in age (sometimes reminiscent of decaying 
onions). STALK absent, but a distinct columella usually present and often penetrating 
to the center of the spore mass; columella whitish or translucent, thin, often branched. 
SPORES 10-15 )( 6-9 microns, elliptical, longitudinally grooved, rusty-brown to ochre- 
yellow under the microscope. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in duff under conifers (some- 
times partially exposed at maturity); common in western North America, particularly 
under mountain conifers in the late spring, summer, and early fall. I have seen large 
numbers in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades in June, and a similar species occurs in our 
area under hardwoods. The strong odor that develops in age presumably aids animals 
in locating them. The animals then help to disperse the spores. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, I am told, but rather rubbery. 
COMMENTS: The rubbery brown spore mass composed of numerous irregularly- 
shaped cavities plus the absence or near-absence of an enveloping peridium (skin) are 
characteristic of this species and its close relatives. Hysterangium species are somewhat 
similar, but have a persistent skin and are differently colored. Similar species include: G. 
graveo/ens, a larger-spored conifer-lover; G. pterosperma, fairly common in Oregon and 
California, with ..winged" spores and yellow-brown to ochre cavities; and G. candida, with 
melon-like spores. Other species: G. morchelliformis is a widespread hardwood-loving 
species with very large (up to 10 mm broad) spore-bearing cavities, no peridium, and 
little or no columella. I have sniffed it out under oak because, like G. montico/a, itdevelops 
a strong odor in age. Two small Gautierias with a persistent peridium should also be 
mentioned: G. parksiana, whose peridium is yellowish-orange to ochre at first; and G. 
gaut;er;o;des, whose peridium is whitish, at least initially. Both of these species occur on 
the west coast and are likely to be mistaken for a Hymenogaster or Martellia until their 
spores are examined. 
747 
748 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
HYMENOGASTER & Allies 
Small to medium-sized woodlandfungiusuallyfoundunderground. FRUITING BODY roundish 
to pear- or cushion-shaped to knobby (potato-like), variously colored. Peridium (skin) present. 
usually well-developed and persistent. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of numerous irregular 
chambers or tubelike cavities or at times nearly solid (i.e., the chambers very minute); typically 
some shade of brown (rusty- co blackish-brown) when mature; fragile to firm. rubbery, or slightly 
gelatinous. STALK absent or rudimentary, bUla well-developedcolumellaoftenpresent. SPORES 
ta wny to brown underthe microscope, elliptical to nodulose, usually warted or wrinkled. sometimes 
longitudinally ridged (Chamonixia) or in one species coarsely netted; not amyloid. Basidia borne 
in a hymenium (except in DeslUntzia); hymenium lining the chamber walls. Capillitium absent. 
THESE are small to medium-sized false truffles with an ochre to brown or blackish 
mature spore mass, a persistent peridium (skin), and warted or wrinkled, non-amyloid 
spores. Hymenogasler is a diverse genus that is gradually being split into smaller units 
such as Desluntzia. * A small "satellite" genus, Chamonixia, is also treated here; it inter- 
grades with Hymenogasler. All of these are thought to be related to the Cortinariaceae 
or possibly the Boletaceae. None are significant from an edibility standpoint unless you're 
a squirrel or aspire to be one. Three species are described; several others are keyed out. 
Key to Hymenogaster & Allies 
I. Peridium (skin) white when fresh but staining vinaceous to vinaceous-brown or blackish after 
handling (sometimes also with blue-green to yellow-green stains); columella and/ or short 
stalk usually present, often percurrent; mature spore mass dark brown to blackish; spores 
longitudinally ridged; known from California under oak ..... Chamonixia amb;gua, p. 751 
I. Not with above features ........................................................ 2 
2. Peridium typically whitish when young but becoming pale lilac or dull bluish, then yellowish to 
orangish and finally brownish in age; spores warted, not beaked; common under mountain 
and northern conifers (e.g., fir, spruce, lodgepole pine) ........... H. sublilac;nus, p. 749 
2. Not with above features ........................................................ 3 
3. Fruiting body staining blue or bluish-green when bruised or cut in half ................. 4 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
4. Peridium yellowish, often with reddish stains or becoming reddish to reddish-brown in age; 
spores smooth .................... (see Truncocolumella rubra under T. cilrina, p. 752) 
4. Not as above; spores longitudinally lined or ridged. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . .. . . . .. .. 5 
5. Columella short and thick, occupying only the base of the fruiting body .................. 
................................... Chamonixiabrev;columna(see C. ambigua, p. 751) 
5. Not as abvoe .................. Chamonixia caesp;tosa & others (see C. ambigua, p. 751) 
6. Peridium usually becoming pink, reddish, or vinaceous in age or when handled; chambers of 
spore mass often (not always!) gel-filled ............... Destuntz;a rubra & others, p. 750 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Spore mass (interior) dark brown at maturity (see photo on p. 749); fruiting body often 1.5 cm 
or more broad; mature spores somewhat honeycombed (i.e., with ridges and "pits"); found 
mainly under conifers, especially Douglas-fir; rare H. utr;culatus (see H. sublilacinus, p. 749) 
7. Not as above; common ......................................................... 8 
8. Spores longitudinally ridged, grooved, or "striped" ................................. 9 
8. Spores wrinkled or warted, but not as above ...................................... 10 
9. Spores 9-15 microns long, with an apical pore; peridium light brown to dark yellow-brown or 
maroon-brown ......................... Chamonixia caudata (see C. ambigua. p.751) 
9. Not as above; spores usually larger .............................. (see Gaut;er;a, p. 746) 
10. Associated with eucalyptus .................................................... II 
10. Not as above; found with oak and other trees H. parks;; & others (see H. sublilacinus, p. 749) 
II. Peridium and spore mass containing dirt; spore mass dark brown and gelatinous at maturity; 
rare ............................................................ Chondrogaster 
II. Not as above; peridium white to yellowish; common .. H. albus (see H. sublilacinus, p.749) 
*The genus Destuntzia and its species (see comments under D. rubra) are described in an article by Robert Fogel 
and James Trappe, now in press. The names are used here with their permission. 
HYMENOGASTER 
749 
Hymenogaster sublilacinus 
FRUITING BODY 1-3 (5.5) cm broad, round to irregularly lobed (potato-like). Outer 
surface often fibrillose, variable in color but typically whitish to lilac or dull bluish when 
young, becoming yellowish and then orangish and finally brown in age; often staining din- 
gy ochraceous when handled (if older) or bluish (if young). Peridium (skin) often sepa- 
rating rather easily from spore mass. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of small or 
minute chambers that give it a sponge-like appearance; pallid when very young but brown 
to cinnamon-brown at maturity; odor variable (mild, sweetish, farinaceous, etc.). ST ALK 
absent, but sterile tissue usually present as an expansion or thickening of the basal peri- 
dium, which mayor may not give rise to a thin, short, branching columella. SPORES 
8-13 (15»( 5-8 (9.5) microns, elliptical, warted-wrinkled, brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff under mountain conifers, especially fir, 
spruce, and lodgepole or ponderosa pine; fairly common in the Sierra Nevada and other 
mountain ranges of the West in the spring, summer, and early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species appears to be the most common conifer-loving Hymeno- 
gaster. at least in California. The confusing color changes it undergoes as it ages and dries 
out has led to the naming of several "new" species (e.g., H. brunneseens, H. d;abolus, 
H. suboehraeeus) where only one exists. The brown color of the mature spore mass plus 
the warted brown spores separate it from other genera of false truffles. Other species: 
H. parks;; is very common in our area under oak and other trees. It is small (5-15 mm 
broad) and whitish when fresh and has a grayish to ochre-brown or cinnamon-brown 
spore mass and prominently beaked spores (see photo at bottom of p. 750). H. g;lkeyae 
closely resembles H. parksii but differs microcopically. H. memurphy; also grows under 
oak, but ,yellows in age or when bruised. H. albus (=H. albellus, H. luteus) is a white 
or yellow-staining species that grows under eucalyptus (often with Hydnangium 
carneum). H. utr;eulatus (see photo below) is a conifer-lover with distinctive pitted- 
reticulate spores at maturity. Macroscopically it rather resembles the description of 
Octavianina asterosperma (dark spore mass, etc.). I have found it in large numbers under 
Douglas-fir and redwood in June and July, but it probably fruits throughout the mush- 
room season. Because of its distinctive spores it may deserve a genus of its own. Many 
other H ymenogasters occur, but most can only be identified with the aid of a microscope. 
Hymenogaster utriculatus has very unusual spores (see comments under H. subli/acinus). Note the 
dark spore mass (interior). 
? , 
... 
>" ... , 
\. ",' l' 
» 
..Jtt; 
, ,- 
. 
.. ,.. 
. ,;.1 I 
I .  
. 
" 
'., 
.., 
.... .....--:. > 
,t ,,- 
. ...L" 
.",.... ;', . ' 
\ ',"': . 
... 
.,'-':!t 
, ... 
" 
....-:>. 
.. '" , 
4-... 
,,'" 
. 
"of' 
..,." 
... ..,. "'.. 
".. -  
. <f'; 'f1\' _ 
....,..  . r-. 
 ..  - . f7 
 I;..A 
. 
.'\ \, 
.\ " 
.:" .. ' . 
... 
it 
.,. 
"" 
.... 
Deslunlz;a rubra is best told by its tendency to develop reddish or pinkish tonesasitagesoris handled, 
plus its dark, sometimes gelatinous spore mass (interior). 
Destuntzia rubra 
FRUITING BODY 1-4 cm broad, roundish to oblong or lobed (potato-like). Outer 
surface white when young, but staining pink, reddish, or vinaceous (or even bluish) in age 
or after handling. Peridium (skin) fairly thick, white when sectioned. SPORE MASS 
(interior) olive-brown to grayish-brown becoming darker (sometimes nearly black) in age; 
often speckled with white sterile tissue that separates clusters of minute chambers (use 
hand lens!); firm or gelatinous (chambers mayor may not be gel-filled). STALK and 
columella absent, but vinaceous mycelium sometimes attached to base or visible in 
humus. SPORES 8-12 )( 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, with striate conical warts, brownish 
under the microscope. Basidia borne in chambers but not typically forming a hymenium. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff (usually buried) in mixed woods and 
under conifers; fairly common in our area in the late winter, spring, and early summer(but 
probably more widely distributed). It seems to favor Douglas-fir. A similar species, 
D. saylor ii, is fairly common in the Sierra Nevada. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Hymenogaster ruber, this species and its relatives 
can be recognized by their dark, often somewhat gelatinous spore mass and pink- or 
reddish-staining exterior. The specimen shown in the photograph was pure white when 
collected and entirely vinaceous when I brought it home. Several Rhizopogons stain 
reddish, but usually have a more fibrillose exterior, paler interior, and/ or smooth spores. 
The spore mass of Destuntz;a may gelatinize somewhat, leading to confusion with M e/ano- 
gaster, but the chambers are much smaller than in that genus. Other Destuntzias include: 
D. saylorii(with I-spored basidia like D. rubra) and D.juscaofCalifornia;D.subborealis 
of Idaho; and D. solstitialis, an eastern species (see footnote on p. 748). 
Hymenogasler parks;; (see comments under H. sublilacinus on previous page). This small whitish 
false truffle is very common in our area, especially under oak. The distinctly chambered spore mass 
is grayish to brownish and usually lacks a well-developed columella. There are a number of closely 
related look-alikes, including H. a/bus. which commonly grows under eucalyptus. 
"', 
,,; 
,':..t{ . 
.. , 
\ -' 
{', 
 
"'" 
.. 
........., 
. 
 
\ 
. 
. 
..r 
.... . 
.., 
Chamonixia ambigua is a rare oak-loving species with a dark spore mass and whitish exterior that 
darkens when handled. Note presence of columella in sectioned specimen at center. 
Chamonixia ambigua 
FRUITING BODY (0.5) 1-5 cm broad, more or less pear-shaped to cushion-shaped (i.e., 
round or oval with a narrowed base) to somewhat lobed (especially if growing in clusters). 
Outer surface white when fresh, but discoloring vinaceous to dark vinaceous-brown to 
blackish-brown after handling or standing, and either staining yellow-green to bluish- 
green when bruised or showing such stains, especially near the base; smooth but rather 
soft or cottony. Peridium(skin) very thin. SPORE MASS dark brown to vinaceous-brown 
to deep grayish-brown when fresh, minutely chambered, the chambers empty so that they 
resemble small tubes. STALK absent or present as a white or greenish-stained sterile base 
which usually gives rise to a columella; columella branched or unbranched. usually 
percurrent. SPORES (9) II-IS (18) )( 8-12 microns, elliptical with a prominent "beak" 
at one end, longitudinally ridged and slightly warted, the inner wall with an apical pore; 
brown to dark brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small clusters in humus and soil (buried) 
under live oak; known only from California. Like many subterranean fungi, it is described 
as being "rare," but may very well be common once you know when and where to look for 
it. I have found it in June and July in Santa Cruz County. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The genus Chamonixia intergrades with Hymenogaster, but most of its 
species can be told in the field by their tendency to stain bluish or to exhibit natural bluish- 
green stains. The distinctly tubulose (spongelike) spore mass is reminiscent of a bolete, 
and it has been suggested that Chamonixia is related to the boletes (along with Trunco- 
columella). C. ambigua mayor may not stain bluish when bruised, but typically stains 
vinaceous to black when rubbed (within a few minutes) and usually has a percurrent colu- 
mella. C. caespitosa is a widespread species whose skin is white when fresh and rapidly 
stains indigo-blue when bruised; it also has larger spores. C. brevicolumna has an olive- 
ochre peridium that blues when bruised, plus a short broad rounded columella; it has been 
found under conifers in Idaho. Hymenogaster pyriformis is a small blue-staining species 
originally collected under oak in California. C. caudata has a yellowish-brown to brown 
or maroon peridium and a short whitish stalk, but does not stain blue; it occurs under 
oak and other hardwoods in California and Oregon. 
751 
752 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
TRUNCOCOLUMELLA 
THIS small but common genus is distinguished by its smooth spores, branched or stump- 
like columella, and yellowish to olive color. The columella may extend below the spore 
mass to form a short stalk (see photo), leading to possible confusion with the gastroid 
agarics, but it is not usually percurrent. Rhizopogon is somewhat similar, but lacks acolu- 
mella, while Hymenogaster and its allies have wrinkled, striate, or warted spores. Trunco- 
columella is thought to be closely related to the boletes, but it is not nearly as bolete-looking 
as Gastroboletus (p. 544), which has a cap, exposed tube layer, and percurrent stalk. 
At least two species of Truncocolumella occur on the west coast. One stains blue when 
bruised and is perhaps better placed in Chamonixia (see key to Hymenogaster & Allies); 
the other, described below, does not stain blue. 
Truncocolul7leHacurina 
FRUITING BODY 2-5 (7) cm broad, 1.5-5 cm high, irregularly rounded to oval, bulblike, 
lobed, or kidney-shaped, often with a stubby stalk. Outer surface sometimes whitish when 
very young but soon becoming yellow to ochre, greenish-yellow, or grayish-olive, smooth 
or sometimes cracking to form a few scales or patches. Flesh( in peridium and stalk) yellow 
to buff, firm. SPORE MASS (interior) yellow-brown to olive-gray, becoming darker 
(sometimes blackish) in age; composed of small empty tubular chambers, completely 
enclosed by the peridium; firm when young but often quite gelatinous in old age. STALK 
often (but not always) present as a short, thick, narrowed base; columella present also, 
either stumplike (i.e., a broad basal region of sterile tissue) or branched and extending 
into the spore mass for a considerable distance; yellow to buff. SPORES 6-10 )( 3.5-5 
microns, elliptical, smooth, yellowish to light brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious under Douglas-fir (and possibly other western coni- 
fers); common, especially in the summer and fall, but fruiting practically year-round in 
our area. Like most false truffles it develops underground, but often surfaces at maturity 
or is dug up by rodents. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no published information on it, but ethnomycologistJimJacobs 
had a bizarre experience after putting some in an omelet: although they had little or no 
Truncocolumella citr;na is particularly common under Douglas-fir. Note narrowed stalklike base 
in specimen at left and stout columella in sectioned specimen at right. 
-.... 
" . 
-.-. '\ - 
" .. 
.... 
 , 
., '" , 
') ..  
,. , ..... 
u 
.. , l 
.. . ): 
, 
. 
.. ... 
lit 
..Y'. ""- 
. . " . 
t 
TRUNCOCOLUMELLA 
753 
flavor at the time of eating, a strong licorice-like flavor began to permeate his mouth an 
hour or two later, and lingered for several hours! 
COMMENTS: The yellow to buff, stumplike or branched columella plus the yellowish 
to olive exterior make this a relatively easy species to identify. Other species: T. rubra has 
a reddish or reddish-staining exterior, a dingy yellowish spore mass that stains blue when 
cut, and larger spores. It was originally described from Washington but has been found in 
the San Bernardino Mountains of southern California. For other blue-staining false 
truffles, see comments under Chamonixia ambigua. 
RHIZOPOGON 
Small to medium-large underground orerumpentfungifound mainly under conifers. FRUITING 
BODY round to oval or irregular (potato-like), variously colored. Peridium (skin) present, often 
fibrillose, felty, or overlaid with rhizomorphs (mycelial strands). SPO RE MASS (interior) sponge- 
like, i.e., composed of minute chambers;firm. crisp. rubbery. or cartilaginous when young. some- 
times becoming soft or gelatinous in age; usually cinnamon-brown to dingy olive-brown or grayish 
at maturity (but often white when young). STALK and columella t)pically absent. SPORES 
hyaline (colorless) to yellowish or brownish under the microscope, typically smooth and elliptical 
to cylindrical. sometimes amyloid. Basidia forminga hymenium that lines the walls ofthechambers. 
Capillitium absent. 
THESE dingy, unattractive, potato-like fungi are the Russulas of the underworld- 
unappreciated except by squirrels, but ubiquitous. * The 100+ known species are dif- 
ferentiated primarily on chemical and microscopic features such as whether or not the 
spores are pronged and what color the hyphae of the peridium stain when mounted in 
potassium hydroxide. However, the sameness and mundaneness of the Rhizopogons 
make them relatively easy to recognize as a group. The fruiting body usually has a tough or 
rubbery ("better bounced than trounced") consistency and the interior is composed oftiny 
chambers that give it a spongelike appearance (use a hand lens!). Also, the exterior is often 
overlaid with mycelial strands (rhizomorphs), there is no stalk or columella (or rarely a 
rudimentary columella) inside the spore mass, and the spores are typically smooth. Finally, 
nearly all Rhizopogons are mycorrhizal with members of the pine family. (One unidenti- 
fied local species seems to grow only beneath cow patties or "meadow muffins," but may 
still be mycorrhizaL) In some species the spore mass becomes soft or gelatinous in old 
age, but the chambers are never filled with a gel as in Alpova and Melanogaster, nor are 
they separated by pallid veins, nor does the spore mass become powdery as in the puff- 
balls and earthballs. 
Rhizopogons are not only the most ubiquitous of all the hypogeous (underground) 
fungi, they are also among the most visible. Many are erumpent (i.e., they burst through 
the surface of the ground at maturity); others are excavated by squirrels. A few species, 
(e.g., R. occidentalis, R. smithii) are edible, but most have not been tested, and as already 
pointed out, identification is very difficult. My own experience with them is limited. Not 
only do I have an "allergy" to microscopes, but Ijust can't seem to get excited about these 
dingy, dumpy, dirty "small potatoes" of the mushroom microcosm when there are so many 
boletes to be picked and Russulas to be kicked. Over 200 species of Rhizopogon have 
been described, most of them from western North America, but my carefully cultivated 
ignorance of the subject permits only a very meager treatment here: a grand total ofthree 
species are described and several others are keyed out. For a much more extensive treat- 
ment, see How to Know the Non-Gilled Mushrooms by Alexander Smith (who has "the 
world's largest collection of unidentified Rhizopogons"), Helen Smith, and Nancy Weber. 
.Whereas the Russulas' brittle flesh is irresistible to those who like to trounce things, the Rhizopogons' rubbery 
texture is a blessing to those who like to bounce things. 
754 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
Key to Rhizopogon 
I. Peridium (skin) yellow to ochre or tawny beneath a coating of brown to reddish-brown rhizo- 
morphs (mycelial threads), but often developing reddish to brownish stains in age; common 
under pine ............................................. R. ochraceorubens, p. 755 
I. Not with above features; peridium often white or whitish when young .................. 2 
2. Fruiting body small(O.5-I.5 cm), bright yellow ... R. coker; (see R. ochraceorubens, p. 755) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Peridium and/ or spore mass (interior) staining pinkish, reddish, or distinctly vinaceous when 
cut or bruised (and often in age) ................... R. rubescens& many others, below 
3. Not as above (but may stain purplish-gray, bluish, fuscous, or black) .................. 4 
4. Common on west coast under conifers other than pine (e.g., Sitka spruce, Douglas-fir); exterior 
staining blue-black or purplish when bruised or in age .. _ R. parks;; (see R. e/lenae, p. 755) 
4. Not as above ........................................................... _ . . . .. 5 
5. Exterior usually staining or aging bluish ........ R. subcaerulescens (see R. e/lenae, p. 755) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Peridium staining yellow when cut open .... R. p;nyonens;s (see R. ochraceorubens, p. 755) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Fruiting body rather small (averaging 1-2 cm), vinaceous-tinged at least in age; spores not 
amyloid; found under coastal pines ......... R. maculatus (see R. ochraceorubens, p. 755) 
7. Not as above; fruiting body usually larger, often staining brown, gray, pinkish-gray, purple- 
gray, or black with age or handling; spores amyloid or not R. ellenae & many others, p. 755 
Rhizopogon rubescens (Blushing False Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 1-6 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat irregular (potato-like). 
Outer surface somewhat cottony or fibrillose, often sparsely overlaid with mycelial strands 
(rhizomorphs); white when young but staining pinkish to red or vinaceous when bruised 
or cut, and becoming yellow to greenish-yellow or reddish-stained in age. SPORE MASS 
(interior) minutely chambered, firm or rubbery to spongy or slightly gelatinous in age; 
white when young, but staining pinkish when cut and becoming tawny-olive to olive-buff 
to dark olive-brown or brown in age. STALK and columella absent. SPORES 5-10)( 3-4.5 
microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth, usually tinged yellow under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (usually 
buried or half-buried), especially pine; widespread and common. In our area this species 
and/ or its numerous look-alikes (see comments) can be found whenever it is damp. 
EDIBILITY: Delectable-if you're a squirrel! 
COMMENTS: The reddish-staining peridium (skin) is the outstanding feature of this 
Rh , izopogon but there are many other "blushing" species that can only be separated 
with certainty by using a microscope. Their ranks include: R. smith;;, an aromatic species 
that grows with Boletus edu/is in pine forests and is eaten by Italian-Americans as a white 
truffle substitute (it is whitish when young, reddens when bruised, and darkens consi- 
derably with age); R. v;n;c%r, a common associate of Douglas-fir that is white when 
young and becomes vinaceous-red in age; R. roseo/us, which becomes pinkish in age; R. 
subaustra/;s, which develops black stains in age; R. succosus, with a strong rotten egg 
odor in age; R. occidenta/;s, a common white to yellow, edible western species said to have 
a sweetish taste and skin that stains orange to reddish-brown when rubbed and reddish 
when sectioned; R. couch;;, widespread, with few or no rhizomorphs and a pink-staining 
spore mass when fresh; R. evadens, similar to R. smithii but with a disagreeable "metallic" 
(Smith) odor in age, very common with ponderosa pine;R. atrov;o/aceus, with strongly 
amyloid spores and a white fruiting body that stains pinkish, then develops grayish-purple 
to dark brownish tones in age; andR. subsa/mon;us, a diffcult-to-identify species "com- 
plex" that is white to salmon-pink with salmon- or vinaceous-tinged rhizomorphs on its 
exterior, especially common under mountain conifers (e.g., fir and spruce). 
'- 
;. 
, 
... 
, 
... 
.- 
t; 
. 
Rhizopogon ochraceorubens is one of many Rhizopogons with prominent mycelial threads (rhizo- 
morphs) on its exterior (specimen at right). The interior (left) is white when young, darker in age. It is 
also shown on p. 740. (Herb Saylor) 
Rhizopogon ochraceorubens 
FRUITING BODY 2-8 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat flattened or irregular 
(potato-like). Outer surface yellow to tawny or ochraceous when young, but usually over- 
laid with conspicuous brown to reddish-brown rhizomorphs (mycelial strands), often 
mottled with red or reddish-brown areas (especially in age), sometimes reddening some- 
what when bruised or discoloring brown to rusty-brown. SPORE MASS (interior) pallid 
to grayish becoming olive or olive-brown in age, firm or spongy becoming toughas it dries; 
minutely chambered. STALK and columella absent. SPORES 6-8)( 2-3 microns, oblong, 
smooth, hyaline or tinged yellow or greenish under the microscope. 
HABITAT: Scattered to gregarious or clustered (usually buried, sometimes erumpent) 
under pine; widely distributed in western North America and very common. It is often 
abundant in the Sierra Nevada as well as along the coast whenever it is damp enough. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The conspicuous brown to reddish-brown rhizomorphs that cover the 
exterior of the fruiting body are a distinctive though by no means unique feature of this 
species. It doesn't redden as much as R. rubescens, and is not white when young; there are 
several similar species which can only be differentiated microscopically. Other species: 
R. maculatus is a small (1-2 cm) vinaceous-tinged species with small rhizomorphs on its 
outer surface and a grayish mature spore mass that becomes quite hard as it dries; it occurs 
under coastal pines. R. coker; (=R. truncatus) is an infrequent but widely distributed 
species with a small (0.5-1.5 cm), bright yellow fruiting body that does not stain; it grows 
under conifers also, particularly white pines. R. p;nyonens;s has a peridium that stains 
yellowish when broken; it is one of several Rhizopogons associated with pinyon pine. 
R hizopogon ellenae 
FRUITING BODY 1-9 cm broad or long, oval to elongated to roundish, often somewhat 
flattened. Outer surface white when young but developing dingy pinkish-gray to purplish- 
lilac to fuscous (dark purple-gray or smoky) tones in age or after handling; smooth to 
fibrillose or with a few rhizomorphs (mycelial strands). SPORE MASS (interior) 
minutely chambered, firm and white when young, becoming gray to olive-gray in age. 
STALK and columella absent. SPORES 7-9)( 3-4 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth, 
hyaline (colorless) or tinged yellow under the microscope, weakly amyloid at maturity. 
755 
Rhizopogon ellenae is very common under pine in many parts of the West. Note relatively large 
size (for a false truffle) and dark stains. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (particu- 
larly pine), often erumpent (breaking through the ground); common in western North 
America. I have seen large fruitings under pine in the Sierra Nevada and along the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several medium-sized to rather large Rhizopogons that 
stain dingy purplish- or pinkish-gray (not reddish as in R. rubescens!) to fuscous when 
handled and/ or in age. Other species: R. idahoensis also has amyloid spores (a rather 
unusual feature for a Rhizopogon); it stains brownish to grayish-lilac when bruised and 
is especially common in the northern Rockies under Douglas-fir. R. amyloideus has 
strongly amyloid spores,. but is more prevalent in the coastal forests of northern Cali- 
fornia. R. colossus is a large species that is whitish when fresh but stains brown to blackish 
when handled or dried; it has non-amyloid spores and, like the others, occurs under 
western conifers. R. parksii is a very common coastal species, particularly under Sitka 
spruce and Douglas-fir. It is pallid to brown or pinkish, but stains dingy purple to bluish- 
black on its surface when bruised or with age. R. subcaerulescens tends to develop 
bluish or greenish stains when handled or in age and is widely distributed. It is white at 
first, dark vinaceous-brown in age. Also see the species listed under R. rubescens. 
ALPOV A & MELANOGASTER 
Small to medium-sized underground fungi. FRUITING BODY roundish to oval or knobby 
(potato-like). variously colored but not normally white. SPORE MASS (interior) yellow to 
greenish. brown. or black at maturity; composed" of numerous chambers filled with spore- 
containing gel. the chambers separated by paler. meandering veins. STALK and columella typically 
absent. SPORES elliptical to cylindrical and often truncate or cupped at one end, smooth. non- 
amyloid; thick-walled and brown to dark brown or purple-black, with a pore (Melanogaster). 
thin-walled, pore-less, and hyaline (colorless) to medium brown under the microscope (Alpova). 
Basidia and spores contained inside the chambers, not forming a hymenium. Capillitium absent. 
THESE false truffles. which comprise the family Melanogastraceae, are easily told by 
their chambered spore mass that is gelatinous and colored at maturity and marbled with 
pallid or yellow veins. Microscopically they are also distinctive by virtue of their smooth, 
lemon-shaped to cylindrical spores. In Alpova. the spores are colorless to brownish under 
the microscope and the spore mass ranges in color from yellow to brown when mature. In 
Melanogaster. on the other hand, the spores are darker and the most common species have 
a dark brown to black mature spore mass. The marbled interior can lead to confusion with 
756 
 
.. 
... 
« 
.. : '" 
.. " 
. 
" 
't 
Left: Close-up of an A/pova (A. o/ivaceolinclus), showing the numerous gel-filled chambers that 
comprise the spore mass. (Herb Saylor) Right: Me/anogasler species are easily told by their blackish 
interior marbled with white to yellow-orange veins. This is probably M. variegalus. 
the true truffles (e.g., Tuber), which, however, have a harder, non-gelatinous interior and 
bear their spores inside asci rather than on basidia. Hysterangium is also somewhat 
similar, but usually has a translucent columella instead of veins, while Leucogaster and 
Leucophleps have a whitish spore mass even when mature. 
Both Alpova and Melanogaster are widely distributed. Neither is worth eating (unless 
you're a squirrel or wood rat!), although the latter has been used in Europe as a cheap 
substitute for truffles. One representative of each genus is described here and several 
others are keyed out. 
Key to Alpova & Melanogaster 
I. Peridium (skin) bright yellow when young (but often mottled with reddish, orange, or brown 
in age); interior (spore mass) brownish-yellow to brownish-black but not truly black; asso- 
ciated with western conifers .................... A. trappe;(see A. dip/oph/oeus. below) 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Interior (spore mass) typically black, at least at maturity; spores strongly brown to dark brown 
under the microscope, usually with rather thick walls and a pore ....................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Me/anogaster euryspermus & others, p. 758 
2. Not as above (spore mass sometimes brownish-black, but usually paler and spores paler under 
the microscope) .............................................................. 3 
3. Typically associated with alder ............................... A. d;plophloeus, below 
3. Not as above ......."........................................................ 4 
4. Found in western North America ..... A. alexsm;th;; & others (see A. dip/oph/oeus. below) 
4. Found in eastern North America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5 
5. Peridium (skin) darkening when handled or bruised; associated with conifers ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A. olivaceon;ger(see A. dip/oph/oeus. below) 
5. Not as above; found mostly with hardwoods .... A. nauseosus(see A. dip/oph/oeus, below) 
Alpova diplophloeus (Alder False Truffle; Red Gravel) 
FRUITING BODY 0.5-3 (5) cm broad, oblong or oval to nearly round, or less commonly 
irregularly lobed. Outer surface pallid to pinkish-yellowish-buff when young, soon be- 
coming yellow-brown to cinnamon, reddish-brown, or brown, usually staining dark 
reddish-orange to reddish-brown where bruised; smooth or with only a very few rhizo- 
morphs (mycelial threads); odor usually fruity at maturity. SPORE MASS (interior) 
composed of small chambers separated by pale yellow or whitish veins; chambers 0.5-3 
mm broad, filled with a gelatinous substance, pallid to pale yellowish or olive when young, 
7,.., 
'It ;: 1, 
;f > 
. 
. 
., 
Alpova diplophloeus. Note somewhat gelatinous interior (specimen on left) and smooth exterior. 
becoming orange-brown to reddish-brown to dark vinaceous-brown at maturity. ST ALK 
and columella absent. SPORES 4-6 x 1.5-3 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth, hyaline 
(colorless) under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious in humus or soil (usually buried) under or near 
alder; widely distributed, but particularly common in western North America. I have 
found it in the fall and winter in coastal California and in the late summer, fall, and spring 
in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as A. cinnamomeus and R hizopogon diplophloeus, this false 
truffle can be distinguished by its cinnamon-colored exterior (when mature), fondness 
for alder (a tree not noted for its diversity of false truffles), and its spore mass composed 
of small, gel-filled chambers and pallid veins. At maturity the interior (spore mass) is 
reddish-brown and somewhat reminiscent of "red gra vel."ltcaneven turn dark vinaceous- 
brown, but never becomes black as in Melanogaster. Other species: A. trappei(=A.luteus) 
is a brilliant yellow species that becomes dull yellow to orange- or reddish-brown (or 
mottled with these colors) in age. It has a brownish-yellow to brownish-black spore mass 
and a garlicky to slightly fruity odor when mature. It grows with fir, Douglas-fir, and 
other western conifers; I ha ve found it locally in the winter and spring. A. olivaceotinctus 
is a yellowish-brown or olive-tinged western species that is apparently rare. A. alexsmithii 
is yellowish-brown to dark brown and grows with mountain conifers (especially hem- 
lock). Melanogaster parksii of California is said to have a brown interior. Alpovas in 
eastern North America include: A. olivaceoniger, a brownish-olive conifer-lover that 
darkens when handled and has a fruity odor at maturity; A. nauseosus, brown to reddish- 
brown, with a yellow-brown to blackish-brown interior and strong aroma of rotten fruit 
at maturity, favoring hard woods; and A. superdubius, whose stalklike rooting base causes 
false truffle expert James Trappe to be "superdubious" as to whether it isreallyanAlpova. 
Melanogaster euryspermus (Black Veined False Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 1.5-4 (6) cm broad, round to elongated or lobed (potato-like), often 
with rhizomorphs (mycelial threads) at base. Outer surface slightly fibrillose to downy 
or felty, rusty-brown to reddish-brown, warm brown, or dark brown (but often yellower 
when young), often blackening where bruised. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of 
large (up to 5 mm broad) blackish gel-filled chambers separated by whitish to yellow 
meandering veins; odor usually strong in age (sometimes like sewer gas, at other times with 
a pleasant citrus component). STALK and columella absent. SPORES 9-18 x 7-11 
microns, lemon-shaped (but with two small prongs at one end), thick-walled, smooth; 
dark brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups in duff or soil under both hard- 
woods and conifers; widely distributed and fairly common (for a false truffle), but rarely 
fruiting in large numbers. In California this species and M. variegatus occur throughout 
the mushroom season. I have found them under oak, tanoak, and madrone, and in the 
Sierra Nevada, under conifers. 
'7CO 
.. 
t. .' 
... 
.. 
.' , 
.. 
. \ . 
'. ,.. 
. 
,. 
"" 
l 
" 
\'1 
\ .. 
.- 
, 
., 
..'. 
"'t. 
...... 
.. 
; 
-. 
Melanogaster variegatus (see comments under M. euryspermus). Note brown exterior (right) and 
gelatinous black interior that is divided into chambers by paler veins (left). (Herb Saylor) 
EDIBILITY: According to European sources, M. variegatus (see comments) is edible 
when young. I can find no information on American material. 
COMMENTS: This species and its close relatives are easily distinguished from other 
false truffles by their blackish gelatinous spore mass composed of large chambers separ- 
ated by pallid to yellow veins. They might be mistaken for true truffles because of the veins, 
but they bear their spores on basidia and are much softer and stickier inside. The name 
M. variegatus has traditionally been used for our common species. However, the 
genus is being critically studied and species concepts may be revised. I t is very similar to 
M. euryspermus, but has elliptical spores that are usually less than 11 microns long. M. 
intermedius is also similar, but has spores intermediate in size between those of M. eury- 
spermus and M. variegatus. M. ambiguus has large, elongated spores and a spongy, more 
olive-colored exterior plus a somewhat metallic odor in age; I usually find it under Doug- 
las-fir. M. macrocarpus is a large ( up to 12 cm!) conifer-loving species with large spores. 
M. parksii of California is said to have paler brown spores and a brown rather than black 
spore mass. See also Alpova trappei and A. nauseosus (under A. diplophloeus). 
LEUCOPHLEPS & LEUCOGASTER 
Small to medium-sized underground woodland fungi. FRUITING BODY roundish to oval or 
knobby (potato-like), usually pallid in Leuwphleps and usually brightly colored in Leucogaster. 
Peridium (skin) sometimes overlaid with rhizomorphs. SPORE MASS (interior) white or pallid 
even when mature; composed of numerous chambers that are filled with a clear spore-containing 
gel and/ or exude a white latex when cut (unless old). STALK and columella absent or rudimen- 
tary. SPORES hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, round to elliptical, pitted-reticulate or 
spiny within a clear gelatinous outer wall. not amyloid. Basidia and spores contained inside the 
chambers, not forming a hymenium. Capillitium absent. 
THESE potato-like fungi can be told by their white or pallid interior which is composed 
of gel-filled chambers (which may, however, be very small). Fresh specimens often exude a 
white latex when cut, but the spores are not amyloid as in Zelleromyces. and there is no 
stalk or columella. The interior of most other false truffles is darker when mature and/ or 
has a different texture. 
In Leucophleps the exterior of the fruiting body is usually whitish, the chambers are 
tiny, and the spores are spiny (within their outer wall), while in Leucogaster the exterior 
is often brightly colored, the chambers are usually larger, and the spores are pitted or 
reticulate. Their evolutionary affinities are unclear, and modern taxonomists isolate 
them in their own order, the Leucogastrales. Both are fairly small genera, but relatively 
common, especially under conifers. As is commonly the case with false truffles, many 
of the species are poorly known and/ or difficult to identify. One representative is 
described here and several others are keyed out. 
.,,0 
760 
HYMENOGASTRALES & ALLIES 
Key to Leucophleps & Leucogaster 
1. Peridium (skin) white or at times pale yellowish, ochraceous, or grayish; spore mass chambers 
minute; spores prickly inside a clear gelatinous outer wall ........................... 2 
1. Peridi urn usually darker or more brightly colored than above; spore-bearing chambers relatively 
large (easily visible); spores reticulate or pitted within clear outer wall ................. 3 
2. Peridi urn white or whitish (or grayish in age), usually covered with conspicuous mycelial threads, 
at least near base .................................... Leucophleps spinispora, below 
2. Not as above ......................... Leucophleps magnata (see L. spinispora. below) 
3. Peridium pinkish to reddish or reddish-brown (often browner in age); found under western 
conifers .................... Leucogaster rubescens (see Leucophleps spinispora. below) 
3. Not as above ......... Leucogasterodoratus& others (see Leucophleps spinispora. below) 
Leucophleps spinospora (White Jellied False Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 1-3 cm broad, round to oval or irregularly lobed (potato-like). Outer 
surface white or whitish, often becoming grayish in age, usually wrinkled and typically 
covered with rhizomorphs(mycelial threads), but young specimens usually showing rhizo- 
morphs only at base. SPORE MASS (interior) white, often exuding a white latex when 
cut, composed of many tiny (less than I mm broad), clear, gel-filled chambers (unless old 
or late to develop); sterile veins absent. STALK and columella absent. SPORES 10-13 x 
10-11 microns, round or nearly so, with small spines inside a clear gelatinous outer wall. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff (usually buried) under western conifers. 
In the Sierra Nevada it is fairly common from spring through fall. The duff of our coastal 
forests is more apt to cough up species of Leucogaster(see below) when ruffled for truffles. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but the texture is hardly appealing. 
COMMENTS: This common whitish false truffle might be mistaken for a Rhizopogon 
because of its rhizomorphs, but the white gel-filled chambers and/ or presence of a latex 
distinguish it. Specimens which mature slowly, however, may lack a gel and latex or be 
hard and Tuber-like. Other species of Leucophlepsare best differentiated microscopically. 
One, L. magnata, can usually be told by its whitish to pale yellowish or ochraceous ex- 
terior with less conspicuous rhizomorphs, plus its larger spores with larger warts or spines. 
Leucogaster is also fairly common. Its ranks .include: Leucogaster rubescens, with large 
gel-filled chambers and an exterior that becomes pinkish to brick-red to brownish as it 
ages; L. odoratus, less common, with a yellowish-orange exterior, large chambers, and 
a pungent odor in age; andL. caro/inianus, one of several species in eastern North America. 
RADIIGERA 
Medium-sized woodland fungi usually found underground. FRUITING BODY typically round 
or slightly flattened. Peridium (skin) thick. composed of two or three layers of tissue. SPORE 
MASS (interior) with threads or plates that radiate from the columella, at first white and fleshy, 
then becoming gooey and finally powdery; brown to black at maturity. STALK absent. but a 
columella present; columella fairly thick. often rounded. white, unbranched, not percurrent. 
SPORES warted or spiny. round. brown under the microscope. Capillitium present. 
THIS small genus is easily recognized by its thick skin and rounded, unbranched columella 
(see photo). The multi-layered peridium (skin), warted or spiny round spores, powdery 
spore mass in old age, presence of capillitium, and rounded columella (or "pseudocolu- 
mella," to be technically accurate) indicate a close relationship to the earthstar genus 
Geastrum. and it is placed in the Lycoperdales by most taxonomists. However, the outer 
skin never splits into rays as it does in Geastrum. and the underground growth habit is 
also distinctive. It is not a particularly common genus. Three species are keyed below, but 
undescribed species also occur, at least in California. 
The interior of an immature Radiigera. showing the thick rounded columella and thick skin. This 
species was never determined because the spores had not yet matured; it was growing under an oak. 
Key to Radiigera 
I. Outer peridium (skin) splitting into rays when mature (look around for older specimens); ex- 
terior usually smooth (but often dirty); sometimes growing just below the ground, sometimes 
on top.............................. (see Geastrum, Astraeus, & Myriostoma, p.699) 
I. Peridium not normally rupturing or splitting; exterior smooth or felty; usually underground 2 
2. Mature spore mass blackish; outer layer of peridium rather heavy and felty R. atrogleba, below 
2. Not as above; mature spore mass brown to dark brown .................... _ . . . . . . . .. 3 
3. Fruiting body typically 2-4 cm broad; spores warted ... R. taylorii(see R. alrogleba. below) 
3. Fruiting body typically 3-8 cm broad; spores spiny. . R.fuscogleba(see R. alrogleba. below) 
R adiigera atrogleba 
FRUITING BODY 2.5-5 cm broad, round to slightly flattened or depressed, often im- 
bedded in white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs). Peridium (skin) three-layered. Outer 
surface tough and felty or fibrous-cottony, rough, white to grayish, often developing buff, 
pinkish, vinaceous, or brownish tints in age; usually separating readily from the two inner 
layers. Inner layers closely adhering to each other, whitish to rosy or pinkish when fresh 
(but may turn olive or buff when bruised), 3-5 mm thick, white when sectioned ( or with a 
greenish tinge). SPORE MASS (interior) composed of plate-like bundles ofhyphae which 
radiate from the columella to the peridium; white, fleshy, and rather soft at first, becoming 
gooey or inky and blackish, and eventually powdery (and blackish); odor often rather 
unpleasant in the inky stage. STALK absent, but the basal portion of peridium usually 
thickened slightly and giving rise to a prominent columella which is nearly round, cushion- 
shaped, or narrowed at the base and enlarged (rounded) at the apex; columella usually 
0.8 cm thick or more at the widest portion, usually penetrating the spore mass at least half 
way (never percurrent); white or tinged gray, sometimes disintegrating in old age. 
Radiigera alrogleba. maturing specimen. Interior (shown at right) is black and gooey in this stage, 
but eventually turns powdery. The top ofthe columella can be seen at the center, but its base has been 
obscured by the gooey spore mass. Note how thick the skin is. (Herb Saylor) 
'" 
., 
; 
., \ , . 
i\ \". 
.' t' t 
\ . 
;. 
". 
. 
, 
, 
... 
.. 
.- 
 
1;. 
.., 
.. 
.. 
. 
, 
. 
....  'lit*;. 
'\ 
" 
\ 
" 
"".. 
RadUgera fuscogleba, immature specimens. Note how lines radiate from the columella in sliced 
specimen. See comments below for more details. 
SPORES 5.5-6.5 microns, round, minutely warted, deep brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in groups or large, mycelium-incrusted clusters in soil 
or duff in woods and along old roads through the woods, usually buried or only partially 
exposed; not uncommon in the Pacific Northwest and California, but probably more 
widespread. Radiigeras occur mainly with conifers in the summer and fall, butI have found 
R. tay/orii (see comments) locally under oak and pine in the winter. 
ED IBILITY: Unknown; the gooey black spore "mess" of older specimens isn't appetizing! 
COMMENTS: The thick, often rounded or cushion-shaped columella plus the thick skin 
and blackish spore mass at maturity make this a most distinctive fungus. Scleroderma 
species also have a thick skin and dark spore mass, but lack a columella. The spore mass 
passes through a gooey stage before becoming powdery. In this stage (see photo) it looks 
like the "ink" from a shaggy mane and stains everything it comes into contact with. Other 
species: R .fuscog/eba is quite similar, but has an olive-brown to brown mature spore mass 
and spiny spores (see photo above). R. tay/orii, on the other hand, is smaller, with a 
smoother brownish to drab exterior, paler brown spore mass, and warted spores. Both of 
these species occur in California and the Pacific Northwest but may be more widespread. 
HYSTERANGIUM& Allies 
Small to medium-sized, mostly woodland fungi usually found underground. FRUITING BODY 
typically round to irreguarly lobed (potato-like), often with one or more mycelial threads orcords 
at base. SPORE MASS (interior) composed of small chambers, usually greenish to olive-brown to 
olive-gray (but not always); typically firm and tough when young but usually gelatinous or muci- 
laginous in old age; odor sometimes fetid at maturity. STALK typically absent. but a columella 
usually present; columella whitish or translucent. branched or unbranched, rarely percurrent. 
spa RES spindle-shaped to oblong or elliptical, smooth or encased in a wrinkledutricle{ outer sac); 
hyaline (colorless) to greenish-brown under the microscope. Capillitium absent. 
HYSTERANGIUM is closely related to the stinkhorns (Phallales). but is treated here 
with the false truffles because of its hypogeous (underground) tuberlike fruiting body. 
Like the stinkhorns, most Hysterangiums have a greenish to olive-brown spore mass that 
becomes slimy and stinky in old age. Those species with mycelial cords at the base are 
reminiscent of stinkhorn "eggs," but never hatch, i.e., a specialized spore-bearing structure 
never emerges. Hysterangium is a fairly sizable genus. Most of its 30+ species occur in the 
woods and are best differentiated microscopically. One very common and farflungspecies 
is described here. A related genus, Phallogaster. is included in the key. 
Key to Hysterangium & Allies 
I. Fruiting body with a stalk or distinctly narrowed and elongated base, pear-shaped or developing 
lobes on top; spore mass divided into distinct chambers; found on rotten wood, mainly in 
eastern North America ....... Phallogaster saccatus (see Hyslerangium separabile. below) 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
762 
Hysterangium separabi/e. immature specimens. In this stage the spore mass (shown in specimens on 
left) is odorless and quite firm or cartilaginous. Note presence of a branched, translucent columella. 
2. Fruiting body showing a thick gelatinous layer just under the peridium (skin) when sliced open, 
eventually "hatching" if old enough (i.e., a specialized spore-bearing structure emerging from 
it); one or more thick mycelial cords usually emanating from the base; often found in lawns, 
gardens, and other urban areas (but also in woods) ............... (see Phallales, p. 764) 
2. Not with above features; usually found in woods ................................... 3 
3. Columella typically percurrent (extending all the way through spore mass); often fruiting 
above the ground. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. darkeri(see H. separabi/e. below) 
3. Columella not typically percurrent; usually underground or only partially exposed ....... 4 
4. Associated with eucalyptus ....................... H.Juscum(see H. separabile. below) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Spore mass (interior) tough and pale pinkish when young; found under oak .. H. occidentale 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Fruiting bodies enmeshed in a copious mass of white mycelial threads; usually growing 
in rocky or gravelly soil ........................ H. crassum(see H. separabi/e. below) 
6. Not as above ................ _ .. ... ..... . '0' ..... . H. separabile& many others, below 
Hysterangium separabile 
FRUITING BODY round to somewhat flattened or lobed, 0.5-3 cm broad, sometimes 
with mycelial fibers at the base. Outer surface white to pinkish or sometimes buff, often 
becoming pinkish where bruised or handled. Peridium (skin) easily cracking or peeling 
away from the spore mass, at least at maturity. SPORE MASS (interior) olive-brown to 
greenish, composed of small chambers; at first firm and tough (cartilaginous), but be- 
coming slimy and stinky (putrid) at maturity or in old age. STALK absent, but a columella 
present; columella thin, translucent or whitish, arising from a rudimentary sterile base, 
often branched and typically extending about half way into the spore mass. SPORES 
12-19 x 6-8 microns, more or less spindle-shaped, smooth within a wrinkled utricle (sac), 
hyaline (colorless) to pale greenish-brown under the microscope. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in humus orsoil(usually buried) under both hardwoods 
and conifers; very widely distributed, but especially common in western North America. 
In our area it is abundant under oak and other trees practically year-round. In the Sierra 
Nevada and Cascades it's common in the late spring, summer, and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice-if you're a squirrel or chipmunk. 
COMMENTS: Once called H. c/athroides and also known as H. coriaceum, this subter- 
ranean fungus look like a stinkhorn "egg:' but never hatches. The greenish spore mass and 
translucent, branched columella distinguish it from most other false truffles, and the ten- 
dency of the peridium to crack and peel easily from the spore mass is also distinctive. 
There are a number of similar species that differ microscopically. A few can be recog- 
nized in the field, including: H. selche//ii and H. crassirhachis, with thick whitish septa 
(partitions) emanating from a scarcely branched columella (the latter especially common); 
H. aureum, with a golden-brown exterior; H. crassum, whose fruiting bodies are en- 
meshed in a copious mass of white mycelial threads, fairly common under western hard- 
woods and conifers, particularly in rocky or gravelly soil; H. darkeri, a slightly larger (1-5 
\. 
, 
Hyslerang;um separabile. Spore mass is putrid and gelatinous in old age (specimen on right), but rub- 
bery or tough when young, and skin is easily separable. Note mycelial cords emanating from base. 
cm) species that has a percurrent columella and often grows above the ground;H.juscum 
(=H. jischeri), associated with eucalyptus; and H. stoloniJerum, fruiting body anchored 
by a thick mycelial cord or "stolon" and spore mass sometimes bluish-tinged. 
Another stinkhorn relative, Phallogaster saccatus, is quite differen 1. It usually grows on 
decayed wood and has a more or less pear-shaped fruiting body with a tapered, stalklike 
sterile base. The peridium is white to pinkish or lilac, and typically develops lobes and 
shallow depressions at the top which rupture irregularly at maturity in order to expose 
the spores. The spore mass is mucilaginous, olive-colored, and fetid at maturity, and 
separated into several large chambers within the fruiting body. It is fairly common in 
eastern North America but absent in our area. Also see Rhopalogaster( in key on p. 724). 
Stinkhorns 
\)o 
spores 
PHALLALES 
STINK HORNS are among the most fascinating and highly specialized of the fleshy 
fungi. They differ from other Gasteromycetes in having a slimy or sticky, putrid spore 
mass (gleba) that is borne aloft at maturity. However, they begin as puffball-like "eggs" 
completely encased in a skin (peridium), and usually anchored by a thick mycelial cord(s). 
A sectioned stinkhorn "egg" reveals a differentiated interior with a gelatinous substance 
beneath the outer skin, a compressed stalk (and/ or arms), and a brown or olive-colored 
spore mass (see Color Plates 191-198). The superficial resemblance to a puffball is soon 
rudely-and forever-dispelled, however, as the enclosed stalk or other spore-bearing 
structure elongates rapidly, bursting out of its "shell" and into the world.* 
In the common stink horns (Phallaceae), the mature fruiting body is unbranched and 
ex plicitly phallic, with the spore slime coating the apex of the stalk or"head." In the ornate 
stinkhorns (Clathraceae), the fruiting body is branched or latticed and the spore mass 
generally coats the inside surfaces of the branches or latticework. In both families the rup- 
tured peridiumforms a sack (volva) at the base of the fruiting body, much as in Amanita. ** 
*This rapid elongation process, which can take as little as one hour, is possible because all of the stinkhorn's parts 
are fully formed (though greatly compressed) within the "egg." Its emergence is mainly an act of expansion 
(elongation of cells) rather than of growth or development. As a result, stinkhorn "eggs" can be "hatched" at 
home by keeping them in a humid environment. 
"Though their developmental stages are superficially similar, the stinkhorns differ from the Amanitas in several 
fundamental respects. Stinkhorns lack gills, and like other Gasteromycetes, do not forcibly discharge theirspores. 
The spores, although borne aloft at maturity, are produced internally (within the "egg"). Amanitas, on the other 
hand, do not form their spores until the cap has expanded. Their spores are produced on gills and are forcibly 
discharged when ripe. 
764 
PHALLALES 
765 
The stink horns' most outlandish feature, however, is the unpleasant or provocative 
odor of the mature spore slime, which has been variously characterized as "foul," "fetid:' 
"evil," "odious," "obnoxious," "cadaverous," "putrid," "maddening," "aggravating," 
"compelling," "intolerable," "filthy," ..vile," ..disgusting," ..distressing," ..disconcerting," 
..spermatic," ..garbageous," ..nauseating," ..like rotting carrion," ..like spent incense," 
..like the damp earthy smell we meet with in some of our churches on Sundays,"..enough 
to cause one to think that all the bad smells in the world had been turned loose," and most 
apt and understated of all: ..indiscreet." Lured from afar by the stench. flies and carrion 
beetles come to feast on the slime. and if the day is hot, roll around init. With their eventual 
reluctant departure, spore dissemination is accomplished (some spores stick to their feet, 
others are presumably passed through their digestive tracts). All in all, it is a rather 
ingenious method of spore dispersal more typical of the so-called ..higher" plants than 
of the ..lowly" fungi. 
Opinions on the edibility of stinkhorns range from ill-disguised disgust to idle specu- 
lation to passionate praise. The ..intolerable" odor of mature specimens would seem 
to be enough to discourage even the most ardent and confirmed toadstool-tester from 
sampling them. However, the odorless stink horn ..eggs" are considered a delicacy in 
parts of China and Europe, where they are pickled raw and even sold in the markets 
(sometimes under the name ..devil's eggs"). Captain Charles McIlvaine, of course, pro- 
nounces them delicious (see comments on edibility of Phallus impudicus). suggesting 
they be sliced and fried like a Wiener schnitzel. My own experience with them has left 
me nonplussed (see comments on the edibility of Clathrus archeri). None are known 
to be dangerously poisonous, but it is reported that a young person of twenty-two, ..having 
eaten a morsel. was seized with violent convulsions, lost the use of his speech, and ulti- 
mately fell into a stupor which lasted forty-eight hours; prompt attention was given to 
him, but it appears to have been some months before he was perfectly cured." (Note: one 
source described the victim as a ..young English girL") 
Stinkhorns are notoriously spontaneous and unpredictable in their habits-they are 
liable to pop up at almost anytime, anywhere, providing conditions are to their liking. 
They occur throughout the world but attain their maximum diversity in the tropics. 
Several of our species were probably introduced accidentally-surely no one would do it 
on purpose!-along with soil or plant material from exotic lands. They are not common 
in comparison to other fleshy fungi, but they command a degree of attention far dispro- 
portionate to their numbers because of their fantastic shapes and repugnant odors. For 
this reason I have keyed out the common North American species, plus several..aliens" 
that may turn up in greenhouses, botanical gardens, the backyards of stinkhorn 
specialists, or other hospitable places. They are, after all, among the most beautiful of all 
mushrooms-providing you hold your nose! 
Key to the Phallales 
1. S pore slime exposed or borne aloft at maturity; fruiting body variously shaped, emerging from 
an "egg" whose peridium (skin) forms a sack or volva .............................. 2 
1. Not as above; peridium either remaining intact or rupturing to form irregular holes at the top; 
volva absent .................................... (see Hysterang;um& Allies. p. 762) 
2. Fruiting body unbranched (but sometimes with a drooping lacy skirt or "veil"); spore slime 
coating the outer surface of the apex or .'head" (unless washed off) ..... Phallaceae, p. 766 
2. Fruiting body branched to form several arms (which mayor may not be fused at their tips), 
columns, or a lattice-like framework; spore slime borne on the inner surfaces of the arms 
or latticework (but if arms unfold, the inner surfaces become the upper surfaces) .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Clathraceae, p. 772 
766 PHALLALES 
PHALLACEAE (Common Stinkhorns) 
Medium-sized,foul-smel/ing (at maturity) fungi found on ground or rotten wood. FRUITING 
BODY emergingfrom a round 10 oval "egg" that has an inner gelatinous layer: rough(vc}'lindrical 
and unbranched when fully expanded, with or without a swollen head. STALK present asacolumn 
by which the spore slime is elevated: hollow, spongy, usually perforated at the tip. VEIL absent, 
or present as a drooping, netlike "skirt" (indusium) below the "head." VOL V A present as a mem- 
branous sack or pouch at base of stalk. SPORE MASS usually greenish to dark olive-brown, 
mucilaginous or slimy at maturity, coating the exterior of the "head" or lOp of the stalk. Spores 
more or less oblong (bacillus-like), smooth. Capillitium absent. 
THE common stinkhorns are unmistakable by virtue of their explicitly phallic fruiting 
body which is simple (that is, unbranched), but may terminate in an enlarged "head" on 
which the foul-smelling spore slime resides. Three genera are common in North America: 
Phallus. which has a well-defined cap or "head"; Diclyophora. which resembles Phallus 
but boasts a netlike veil or indusium that hangs from the lower edge of the "head"; and 
Mutinus (the so-called "dog stinkhorns"), which lacks a differentiated "head." (Diclyo- 
phora is incorporated into Phallus by some stinkhorn specialists, and Ilhyphallus is an 
outdated synonym for Phallus.) 
Whether or not stinkhorns are handsome or repulsive has been the subject of con- 
siderable debate. The verdict seems to rest largely on personal prejudice and one's ability 
to overlook their obnoxious odor and the swarms of blowflies that come to wallow in their 
spore slime. They are undeniably phallic. however, and as might be expected, their sug- 
gestiveness has given rise to a veritable "mother lode" of stinkhorn lore. For instance, 
German hunters believed they grew where stags rutted, and it is said that their putrid 
carcasses are burned outside houses in Thailand to discourage unwanted guests (a rather 
drastic practice that might discourage wanted guests as well!). They've been used in count- 
less ointments and potions, e.g., as a cure for gout, epilepsy, and gangrenous ulcers. 
They've been blamed for cancer and prescribed as a sure-fire remedy for it. And of course, 
they've been employed as aphrodisiacs, and are supposedly still given to cattle for that 
purpose in some parts of Europe. Alexander Smith tells of a remarkable encounter with 
an elderly gentleman who carried a mammoth specimen under his hat in the certain 
belief that it would cure his rheumatism! And, in an otherwise tedious book of Victorian 
reminiscences by Gwen Raverat, there is this astonishing passage: 
In our native woods there grows a kind of toadstool, called in the vernacular The 
Stinkhorn, though in Latin it bears a grosser name. This name is justified, for the 
fungus can be hunted by the scent alone; and this was Aunt Etty's greatest invention: 
armed with a basket and a pointed stick, and wearing special hunting cloak and gloves, 
she would sniff her way round the wood, pausing here and there, her nostrils twitching, 
when she caught a whiff of her prey; then at last, with a deadly pounce, she would fall 
upon her victim, and then poke his putrid carcass into her basket. At the end of the 
da y's sport, the catch was brought back and burnt in the deepest secrecy on the dra wing- 
room fire, with the door locked, because of the morals of the maids. 
One wonders how such an innocuous, splendid, upright organism could be so ruthlessly 
and unjustly maligned, and I submit that this particularly perverse brand offungophobia 
be christened phallophobia. ("Aunt Etty," incidentally, was Charles Darwin's daughter!) 
Attitudes change, however, and in the twentieth century the stinkhorns' impudence 
and imprudence have begun to be appreciated. Mycological literature is replete with 
wonderfully provocative accounts of close encounters (ofthe casual kind) with stinkhorns 
-as riddled with them, in fact, as an old Suil/us pungens is with maggots. When stinkhorns 
are discussed, the language makes a startling and unprecedented qualitative leap, from 
monotonous minutiae to half-baked hyperbole, as if the authors were suddenly taking 
 0 
'.. . 
'1,'" 
., 
, . .. 
*4 . 
!I .. 
\\;.  
, ' " 
'- 
.., ,;.... 
t.  
,, ." 
f . 
.. 1''' 
. ;. "".. , ,; 
, .'- ";:--. 
" ,.. '. .......' ,t 
f.   .. "... . 
. ,.., . .. ,," ,.:  .- 
" lie ".. ""'\,t,!._ 
. , t I. ,'........., \ ",,/',( . 
Il'  '. ..... \\ 
,,,,\... .' .. ..'\\ 
'" , " '"'  '-' 
'. · ,.c .... ') "t"'" '. 
.,....  :\ '"'. ., "I' 
'",:- # . 
\ 
t. 
, 
w. 
" 
. 
 
',t. · 
'-(\ 
\ 
.:,\ 
I 
Fruiting body development in the tropical basket stinkhorn, Diclyophora indusiala (p. 770). This 
sequence was photographed within a time period of thirty minutes! Note how the ridges on the cap 
become more visible in age (as the spore slime is carried away by flies and/ or rain). In old specimens 
completely bereft of spore slime the cap is whitish. (Keith M uscutt) 
an interest in what they were saying. They are lavish in their praise as they tread the fine 
line between double-entendre and forthright fungal fact: "The mischief-maker is a hand- 
some specimen, as its plate shows" . . . "This is a highly specialized type offungous fruiting 
body" . . . "It is one of the seven unnatural wonders of the natural world" . . . "Never have 
I seen such intricate lacework as on a Phallus" ... "It undoubtedly emerges from the depths 
for a single noble and grand purpose-that of disseminating its spores. All of its parts 
have been developed to accomplish this function in the most effectual manner possible" . . . 
"It is inconspicuous while encased in its skin, and unlikely to be noticed by anyone who 
is not looking for it. When fully elongated, however, it is pointedly, inescapably promi- 
nent" . . . "By extraordinary growth and expansion it carries the banquet of spores into 
the light-a naturalJack-in-the-box" . . . "When its expansion is complete, it beginsimme- 
diately to become limp, bent, sinks down, and undergoes putrefaction" . . . "Once while 
collecting fungi with other students we smelled a phalloid and tried to trace it down in 
order to learn the species, but it seemed to keep moving. Finallly, we noticed that an old 
man was also in the woods collecting fungi, and as I worked over toward him I realized 
that a phalloid of some kind was very close" . . . "One is curious to learn the mechanism 
by which so much is accomplished in apparently so short a time, and find in this instance, 
as in all others where great things are accomplished with ease, that many forces have been 
slowly at work to insure everything being in readiness for the success ofthe final flourish" 
. . . "The banquet is prepared underground and the table, with its viands ready, is pushed 
into the light while the invitation to guests is wafted swiftly on the breeze" . . . "It is a 
glorious fungus-an admirable specimen of herculean proportions pokes up periodically 
in my front yard." 
The common stinkhorns are more prevalent in temperate regions than their ornate 
cousins, the Clathraceae, but still attain their greatest diversity in the tropics. Species 
of Phallus are especially fond of populated areas, where they lurk in lawns, gardens, 
flower beds, along roads, in ditches, under bushes, hedges, porches, and houses, in the 
vicinities of churches and lumberyards, trash heaps, and old sawdust piles. Mutinus and 
Dictyophora species, on the other hand, are more frequent in forests and are largely 
restricted to eastern North America and the tropics. All of these fruit whenever 
conditions are conducive to development-that is, warm and moist-and none are 
known to be poisonous. One species from each genus is described here, and several others 
are mentioned and/ or keyed out. 
767 
768 
PHALLALES 
Key to the Phallaceae 
I. S talk with a latticed head, the spore slime coating the inside of the latticework ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Clathraceae, p. 772) 
I. Not as above; "head" absent or if present, then spore slime coating its exterior. . . . . . . . . . _ 2 
2. Lacelike or netlike skirt (indusium) present and usually prominent (hanging from the lower 
margin of cap) ............... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 
2. Skirt (indusium) absent or rudimentary ........................................... 5 
3. Fruiting body, or at least the skirt, yellow to orange-yellow or even orange-red; primarily 
tropical............................ Dictyophoramulticolor(see D. ;ndus;ata. p. 770) 
3. Fruiting body typically white (excluding the spore slime and volva); temperate or tropical . 4 
4. Skirt (indusium) large, often reaching the ground; tropical ... Dictyophora indusiata, p. 770 
4. Skirt smaller (3-6 cm long); fairly common in forests of eastern North America ............ 
..................................... Dictyophoraduplicata(seeD. ;ndus;ata. p. 770) 
5. Spore slime borne on a ring or "collar" beneath the tip ofthe fruiting body; fruiting body white 
except for the slime; tropical ................................. Staheliomyces cinctus 
5. Not as above; spore slime not borne on a sharply defined ring or collar ................. 6 
6. Spore slime borne on the upper portion ofthe stalk, i.e., a sharply defined "head" not present; 
stalk typically slender(up to 1.5 cm thick) ........................................ 7 
6. Spore slime borne on a differentiated (sharply defined), often swollen "head"; stalk sometimes 
slender, but usually at least 1.5 cm thick .......................................... 9 
7. Fruiting body entirely or partially red to pink or orange ............................. 8 
7. Fruiting body white except for spore slime Mutinuscaninusvar. albus(see M. can;nus. p.77I) 
8. Fruiting body 9-17 cm long, usually slightly thicker in the middle and tapered gradually toward 
the tip ..................................... M utinus elegans (see M. can;nus. p. 771) 
8. Fruiting body 5-10 cm long, usually more or less equal except for the very tip, which is bluntly 
and rather abruptly narrowed ............................... Mutinuscaninus, p. 771 
9. Fruiting body red to scarlet (at least in part), usually quite slender ....................... 
... . ... . .. ..... . .. .. . .. . ...... . .. . . . .. . .Phallusrubicundus(see P. ;mpud;cus. below) 
9. Fruiting body white to pale pinkish(except for spore slime), but volva may be pink to purple 10 
10. Cap or "head" reticulate (pitted and ridged) beneath the spore slime; widely distributed ..... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Phallus impudicus & others, below 
10. Cap or "head" not reticulate, pitted, or ridged, but often granular; found mainly in eastern 
North America ........................... Phallusravenelii(see P. ;mpud;cus. below) 
Phallus impudicus (Stinkhorn) Color Plates 193, 194 
FRUITING BODY beginning as an ""egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white to 
yellowish-white in one variety, lurid pinkish to purple in another (see comments), with a 
gelatinous layer beneath; rupturing to form a volva as the stalk elongates and thrusts the 
slimy, swollen ""head" upward. CAP (""head") 1.5-4 cm broad, coated with the putrid, 
copious spore slime which eventually drips off or is carried or washed away, revealing 
the whitish reticulate (pitted and ridged) surface beneath; top with a hole which is some- 
times covered by a clinging piece of the peridium (volva) and/ or by numerous flies. 
STALK 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered at both ends, entirely white or sometimes pinkish 
below; minutely honeycombed (spongelike), hollow, fragile. INDUSIUM (""veil") absent 
or rudimentary. VOL V A present at base of stalk as a white to pinkish or purple, loose, 
lobed sack formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with a thick, similarly-colored 
mycelial cord(s). SPORE MASS slimy or mucilaginous, olive-green to olive-brown, 
with an obnoxious odor at maturity (see p. 765). Spores 3-5 x 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical 
or oblong, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups or clusters in lawns, gardens, sandy or cultivated soil, 
under trees or shrubs, in rich humus, etc.; widely distributed and especially common in 
the West, fruiting whenever conditions are favorable. McIlvaine states that, ""its favorite 
'" 
 
.. .... . 
" . "I 
,."!'" 
,, 
. .It 
 
',.. . 
 .. t..,,;.. ,, 
- .... 
.. ,. \.' 
.... . 
... 
, .., 
\' ." ,; 
, .'", 1 f 
'\ 
'If 
.\-, 
t 
'i' 
 
. >t r<).. 
':'1.. .J 
-.$. <r'l:,-I" 
-I .' "S .!II 
. 
,,;'-. 
.. 
..... 
This purple-egged variety of Phallus impudicus is considered a distinct species, P. hadriani, by some 
stinkhorn specialists. Left: A round "egg" with telltale mycelial cord. Right: An "egg" just prior to 
hatching, and a malodorous full-grown (but rather small) specimen. Note how the spore slime coats 
the reticulate "head"; after it has been dispersed the "head" is whitish. See color plates for another 
full-grown specimen and a beautiful sectioned "egg." 
abode is in kitchen yards and under wooden steps where, when mature, it will compel the 
household to seek it out in self-defense," and his contemporary Nina Marshall says, "the 
distracted housewife searches in vain for a solution to the difficulty and the odor disappears 
as mysteriously as it came. If she is one of the initiated, however, she will search until she 
finds the haunt of the offender andthen destroy it on the spot to avoid further repitition of 
the nuisance." The largest fruitings I have seen were on the lawn of a school in Los Angeles, 
and in front of an old cathedrl in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Stinkhorn specialist William 
Burk recalls seeing massive clusters that apparently sprung from the foundation of 
a house in Salt Lake City, Utah. If the "eggs" are carried home and transplanted in 
cool, damp earth, more often than not they will continue to develop so that the fasci- 
nating elongation process can be observed firsthand. 
EDIBILITY: Not poisonous (see comments on p. 765), but as Alexander Smith says, 
"who would want to eat even the eggs?" Captain Charles McIlvaine (the plenipotentiary 
extraordinaire of turn-of-the-century toadstool testers), for one. He says, "(the eggs) are 
semigelatinous, tenacious, and elastic, like bubbles of some thick substance. In this 
condition, they demand to be eaten. . . cut in slices and fried or stewed, they make a most 
tender, agreeable food." 
CO MM ENTS: This is one "wild" m ushroo m that is truly unmistaka ble. In sha pe it resem- 
bles nothing so much as a slimy cigar, leaky pipe, malodorous thumb, putrid horn, hollow 
baton, spongy candle, or putrescent pencil. But the most distinctive thing about the stink- 
horn is its utter spontaneity. In the words of one founding member of the New York 
Mycological Society, "you never know when one is going to pop up right in front of you, 
so fast you can actually see it growing. And there is no way to predict or control them. It's 
the one thing in the world you can't push or hurry." The stinkhorn also hasa highly refined 
sense of poetic justice. One "going strong" is said to have appeared in the concrete floor 
of the newly built house greeting a newly married couple. To accomplish this instructive 
feat, the mycelial cords had to force their way into the foundation from an old stump in the 
garden! 
The stinkhorn is sometimes mistaken inexplicably for an old morel, perhaps because 
770 
PHALLALES 
of the pitted head and somewhat similar shape. However, the "indiscreet" odor and slimy 
spore mass (both of which may be gone in old age) and presence of a volva(andfrequently, 
a squadron of flies) leaves no doubt as to its identity. The common variety in California 
has a pinkish to purple peridium(see Color Plate 194) and is considered a distinct species, 
P. hadTiani (=P. impeTia/is, P. iosmus) but some authorities on the subject. Other species: 
P. Tavene/iiis very similar, but has a smooth to granular rather than reticulate "head." It is 
quite common in eastern North America, especially in lignin-rich humus and on old 
sawdust piles. The tropical "Devil's Stinkhorn," P. Tubicundus, is a rather long, slim, red 
to scarlet species. It might be mistaken at first glance for a dog stinkhorn (Mutinus), but 
has a clearly differentiated, detachable, more or less conical or bell-shaped "head." It 
occurs in southern and eastern North America (at least as far west as New Mexico), but 
is not common. See also Dictyophora duplicata (under D. indusiata). 
Dictyophora indusiata (Basket Stinkhorn) Color Plate 191 
FRUITING BODY beginning as an "egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white or 
sometimes tinged buff, gray, or reddish-brown, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing 
to form a volva as the stalk elongates. Mature fruiting body 7-25 cm tall, unbranched, 
consisting of a more or less conical to bell-shaped cap on a stalk, with a large lacelike veil 
or "skirt" flaring out from beneath the cap. CAP ("head") 1.5-4 cm broad, coated at first 
with the putrid olive-green to brown spore slime, which eventually drips off or is carried 
away by insects, revealing a white or yellowish, ridged and pitted (reticulate) surface 
beneath; top with a hole in it. STALK 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered at either end, white, 
hollw, fragile, sometimes curved, minutely chambered and porous (spongelike). INDU- 
SIUM ("veil") white, initially tucked under the cap margin but soon unfurling; skirtlike 
or basketlike when fully expanded and touching or nearly touching the ground (6 cm or 
more high); attached to the top of the stalk or just under the margin of the cap; composed 
of white strands that form an intricate chainlike or lacelike net whose "holes" are large 
and polygonal. VOLV A present at base of stalk as a white or pallid, loose, often lobed 
sack formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with a thick mycelial cord(s) attached. 
SPORE MASS slimy or mucilaginous, olive-green to olive-brown or brown, with a fetid 
odor at maturity that attracts flies, beetles, and other insects (but odor not always strong, 
and in one form somewhat sweetish). Spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2 microns, elliptical to oblong, 
smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in groups in humus or on rotten wood in tropical forests and at 
their edges; fruiting in wet weather, widely distributed. It is quite common in Central 
America and South America, as well as in Australia, the South Pacific, Africa, India, 
and Japan. 
EDIBILITY: Edible in the egg stage, but probably not choice (see comments on edibility 
of Clathrus archeTl)-in other words, it is better eyed than fried. In many parts of the 
world (e.g., New Guinea) it is worshipped for its beauty and/ or used as an aphrodisiac. 
COMMENTS: What's an indisputably tropical fungus doing in a reputedly topical field 
guide like this? Well, I could justify its presence on the f1imy pretext that it just might 
show up in somebody's hot house, sauna, or backyard bamboo forest. Or I could cite the 
popular but shamefully arrogant political notion that Central America is our "backyard," 
and that any stinkhorn found in one's backyard merits mention. However, the truth is 
that I've included it because I couldn't resist including it. In my opinion, such a piece 
de resistance of nature deserves a full-fledged description no matter where it grows (and I 
offer the color plate as prooO. The lacy or netlike "veil" which is responsible for the name 
"basket stinkhorn" is initially hidden (greatly compressed), but swells out soon after the 
DICTYOPHORA 
771 
stalk elongates (see photographs on p. 767). In its prime the veil touches-or nearly 
touches-the ground, and may be globelike or broadly skirtlike. Later, however, itshrinks 
or collpases somewhat and begins to droop. Aside from its spectacular skirt, D. indusiata 
resembles our common stinkhorn (Phallus impudicus) in shape, size, color, and texture 
(including the pitted head), and some phallologists consider it "a good Phallus." Other 
species: D. dupl;cata (the "Veiled Stinkhorn") is a robust temperate zone version that is 
fairly common in the hardwood forests of eastern North America. It resembles D. in- 
dusiata, but is not so spectacular, the skirt being smaller-meshed and only 3-6 cm long 
(it looks somewhat like the second photo on p. 767). D. mult;color is a colorful (yellow 
to orange-red) tropical species. D. rubrovolvata of China has a reddish volva. 
Mutinus caninus (Dog Stinkhorn) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as an "egg" up to 2.5 (4) cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white 
or occasionally with a faint pinkish or yellowish tinge, with an inner gelatinous layer; 
rupturing to form a volva at base of stalk. Mature fruiting body 5-10 cm high and 0.5-1.2 
cm thick, unbranched, slender, erect or curved slightly, roughly cylindrical (equal) or 
thicker near top; lacking a differentiated cap, but with a blunt, rounded or abruptly nar- 
rowed, often perforated tip. FERTILE PORTION covering the upper 2-3 cm of fruiting 
body (except the very tip), bright orange-red to red to pink, but covered at first with olive 
to olive-brown spore slime. STALK more or less equal, colored like cap (orange-red to 
orange or pink) or often paler or even white toward the base; hollow, fragile, spongy 
(minutely chambered). INDUSIUM ("veil") absent. VOLV A present at base of stalk 
as a white, lobed sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with one 
or more white mycelial cords attached. SPORE MASS mucilaginous, olive to deep olive- 
brown, coating the upper portion of stalk; odor fetid at maturity (but not as malodorous 
as some stinkhorns). Spores 3-7)( 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground and rotten wood in gardens, 
roadsides, woods, etc.; widely distributed and fairly common in eastern North America 
in the late summer and fall (along with M. elegans-see comments). It is apparently absent 
in the West, but a white variety (see comments) has been found in Oregon, and it seems 
only a matter oftime before the typical form and its longer look-alike, M. elegans, show up 
on the west coast, as several other erotic exotics have. 
EDIBILITY: Nonpoisonous. Mature specimens, of course, are hardly tempting, but Bill 
Roody of Elkins, West Virginia, says the "eggs" are excellent "peeled and rolled in flour 
seasoned with garlic salt and pepper, dipped into beaten egg and then once again in the 
flour mix before frying in butter or oil. They're great as is or served with crackers and 
cream cheese:' 
COMMENTS: The slim, cylindrical, pink to orange-red fruiting body capped with olive- 
brown spore slime is a unique and memorable-if suggestive-sight, and it is easy to see 
how this "phalloid" got its common name (see color plates of M. elegans). The odor of 
mature specimens can be rather feeble compared to that of Phallus impudicus or Clathrus 
ruber, but is obnoxious nevertheless. The stalk varies from orange or pink to white, and 
a variety that is entirely white (except for the spore slime) has been found in Oregon and 
Michigan. (It has been called M. can;nus var. albus, but may very well be a distinct species.) 
Another dog stinkhorn, M. elegans (=M. bov;nus, M. curtis;;) (COLOR PLATES 195, 
196) is sometimes called "Devil's Dipstick." It is also common in eastern North America, 
and is frequently mistaken for M. caninus. It can be distinguished, however, by its longer 
(9-18 cm) fruiting body that is usually thickest in the middle and tapered gradually toward 
the tip. Also, a larger area of the fruiting body( up to 6 cm) is smeared with spore slime. In 
my experience it favors the same habitats as M. caninus, but is more common. 
772 PHALLALES 
CLATHRACEAE (Ornate Stinkhorns) 
Medium-sized, foul-smelling (at maturity) fungi found on ground or rotten wood. FRUITING 
BODY emrgingfrom a round to oval or flallened"egg" that has an inner gelatinous layer; usually 
branched IOform arms. columns. tentacles. ora lallicedframework;often brightly colored. ST ALK 
absent or if present then hollow, spongy, fragile, and often perforated or open at the top. VEIL 
(indusium) absent. VOL V A present as a membranous sack or pouch at base of fruiting body. 
SPORE MASS usually greenish to dark olive-brown (or drying blackish), mucilaginous or slimy 
at maturity. coating the inner surfaces of the arms. tentacles. or lallicedframework. Spores more 
or less oblong (bacillus-like), smooth. Capillitium absent. 
THESE stinkhorns are more fantastic than-but not nearly as phallic as-the common 
or "true" stinkhorns (Phallaceae). Some have long ..tentacles" that make them look like 
starfish, others have stubby arms, still others boast two or more thick columns or an 
elaborate, lovely lattice-like framework. None look like "horns," but all of them stink 
(to a greater or lesser degree), and flies seem to find them just as desirable as members of 
the Phallaceae. Thus the label "stinkhorn," though not completely accurate, is amply 
deserved. In most cases the spore slime coats the inward-facing surfaces ofthe latticework, 
columns, branches, or tentacles (or the upper surfaces ofthe tentacles ifthey unfurl). As in 
the Phallaceae, the stalk (if present) is tubular, spongy, and fragile, and emerges from a 
membranous peridium (volva) which has an inner gelatinous layer. 
Most of the stinkhorns in this family are tropical, but several have established them- 
selves as "resident aliens" in the United States. The three most common genera are: Clath- 
rus, whose fruiting body is composed of columns, a latticed ball, or four or more tentacles 
(with or without a short stalk); Pseudocolus, with three or four tentacles and a short stalk; 
and Lysurus, which has several thick arms or a latticed .. head" atop a long stalk or column. 
Most of the ornate stinkhorns are edible in the egg stage, but in the words of Alexander 
Smith, "are unlikely to become popular as food" (for obvious reasons!). One species, 
Clathrus ruber, is said to be poisonous raw, but this reputation may rest on a single bizarre 
incident (see p. 765). Five species are described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to the Clathraceae 
1. Stalk typically much longer than the arms or fertile ..head"; arms (if present) typically short 
(less than 3 cm long) and thick .................................................. 2 
1. Stalk absent (but two or more fused columns may be present), or if stalk present then relatively 
long (2.5 cm or more) and slender arms or ..tentacles" also present; stalk when present usually 
short but sometimes fairly long ................................................. 4 
2. Fruiting body consisting of a rounded to somewhat flattened latticed ..head" or netlike frame- 
work mounted on a stalk ........................... Lysurus periphragmoides, p. 776 
2. Not as above; stalk with several short arms that mayor may not be fused at their tips ..... 3 
3. Arms usually bright red and fused at their tips to form a ..spire" (but sometimes breaking free 
from each other in age); stalk usually fluted or several-sided ..... Lysurus mokusin, p. 776 
3. Arms red to pinkish, flesh-colored, brownish, or white, their tips sometimes touching at first 
but not fused into a '.spire," and usually separating in age; stalk more or less cylindrical (i.e., 
round in cross-section) .................................... Lysurus cruciatus, p. 777 
4. Fruiting body with three or more slender arms or..tentacles" which arise from stalk (but stalk 
may be very short and hidden by the volva, or occasionally practically absent) .......... 5 
4. Fruiting body either a latticed ball or netlike framework or comprised of two or more thick 
columns which are usually fused at their summit; stalk absent or rudimentary .......... 7 
5. Fruiting body typically with 3-4 .'tentacles" that often remain joined at their tips. . . . . . . .... 
................................. .Pseudocolusfusiformis(see C/athrusarcheri. p. 774) 
5. Fruiting body typically with 4 or more "tentacles" that may initially be joined at their tips but 
which usually break free and sometimes bend back in age ........................... 6 
6. Arms or "tentacles" diverging from a flat disclike expansion of the stalk apex, often appearing 
divided or paired; spore slime mostly in center of fruiting body or coating bases of the arms; 
tropical.................................. Aseroerubra(see C/athrusarcheri. p. 774) 
6. Not as above; spore slime borne on inner or upper surfaces of arms . Clathrusarcheri, p. 774 
CLATHRACEAE 
773 
7. Fruiting body lantern-like, i.e., the spore slime borne in a specialized structure slung between 
2-4 red to orange or pink columns that merge at the top to form an arch; tropical (reported 
from Miami, Florida) ..... _ . . . _ . . . _ . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Laternea triscapa 
7. Not as above; fruiting body with columns or a latticed framework, but lacking a separate spore- 
bearing structure ............................................................. 8 
8. Fruiting body consisting of a latticed network of branches and "windows" (somewhat like a 
"whiffle balIn-see photo on p. 774) .................... Clathrusruber & others, below 
8. Fruiting body composed of 2-5 thick columns joined at their summit (the columns occasionally 
with one or two transverse branches, but not enough to form a lattice) ................ 9 
9. Fruiting body composed of two creamy to yellow to orangish columns at first pressed closely 
together but then bowing at the center; rare (native to Japan) ...... Clathrus bicolumnatus 
9. Fruiting body typically with (2) 3-5 red to pink or orange columns; widely distributed and not 
uncommon (especialIy in eastern North America) Clathruscolumnatus(see C. ruber. below) 
Clathrus ruber (Latticed Stinkhorn) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a round to somewhat flattened or knobby "egg" up t06 
cm broad. PERIDIUM (skin) white and membranous, smooth becoming wrinkled and 
grooved as it gets larger, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing to form a volva. Mature 
fruiting body 5-14 cm high, consisting of a round to oval latticed ball or netlike framework 
with large polygonal or elongated "windows." BRANCHES of the framework bright pink 
to red to orange or pale orange, and often paler toward the base; flattened, hollow, very 
fragile, minutely chambered (like a sponge) and transversely ribbed or wrinkled on the 
outer surfaces; inner surfaces covered with the sticky, putrid spore slime. STALK absent 
or rudimentary. VOLV A present at base of fruiting body as a thick, loose, white sack or 
pouch, usually with thick mycelial cord(s) attached. SPORE MASS coating the inside 
surfaces of the latticework; mucilaginous, olive to olive-brown or drying blackish, with an 
extremely obnoxious stench at maturity. Spores 5-6 x 1.5-2.5 microns, oblong, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to densely gregarious or clustered in soil, wood chips, rich humus, 
etc.; widely but erratically distributed, apparently fruiting most any time (providing con- 
ditions are favorable). It is said to be a native of southern Europe (its likeness appears on 
more than one postage stamp from that region), but has turned up in many localities in 
North America (Florida, Virginia, North Carolina, etc.), usually in landscaped areas or 
other places where exotic plants have been introduced. It is a common sight in the parks of 
San Francisco (especially in the late fall), and I have also seen it in Santa Clara County. 
ED IBILITY: Nonpoisonous according to some sources, harmful (at least ra w) according 
to others (see the quote on stinkhorn poisoning on p. 765). 
COMMENTS: Also known as C. cancellatus, this "wild" mushroom looks like a red or 
orange "whiffle ball" (see photograph). The white volva from which it emerges and the 
intolerable stench that develops at maturity are also distinctive. The color of the branches 
varies considerably-from bright red to very pale orange-apparently depending on the 
temperature and humidity. The putrid perfume attracts flies in large numbers and is, 
in my humble fungal opinion, the vilest of any stinkhorn.1t must be smelled to be believed! 
(According to Ramsbottom, the smell is "so fetid that more than one artist has related 
that it was impossible to paint it without discomfort. . . when the color photograph was 
taken it would have been pleasing to have shown one or"two flies at work, but they settled 
in such swarms that they had to be driven off. "). The "eggs," on the other hand, are quite 
odorless and very knobby or furrowed just prior to bursting. In this stage they are easily 
"hatched" at home. C. cr;spus is a similar but even more spectacular neotropical species 
hose "windows" are circumscribed by "coronas"; it has been found in Florida. A species 
of the Old World tropics, C. cr;spatus, is also quite similar, but the upper part of its lattice- 
work regularly breaks up into fragments in age. C. columnatus (=Laternea columnata) 
has 2-5 thick, orange to red columns which arise independently but are fused at the top and 
'\o". 
, . 
c 
.... .... ' 
"". 
.. \ 
. .  ;,1- 
,-.4,.. <.... 
':"'--- 
-\ . 
" 
.  
,. 
C/athrus ruber is easily recognized by its bright red to pink to pale orange latticework. Left Mature 
specimens; note absence of a stalk. Right Note how lumpy this "egg" is! 
may branch horizontally (but not enough to form a latticework). It is widely distributed 
and has been found in many localities in eastern North America (particularly the South), 
plus Hawaii. C. preuss;; and Ileod;ctyon cibar;um (=c. c;bar;us) are but two of many 
southern and/ or tropical stinkhorns with a delicate while latticework and large "win- 
dows:' The first is a native of Africa; the latter is common in the southern hemisphere. 
Clathrus archer; (Octopus Stinkhorn) Color Plates 197, 198 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a round to somewhat flattened "egg" up to 6 cm in dia- 
meter. PERIDIUM (skin) membranous, white to dingy buff, pinkish, or tinged purple, 
smooth or scurfy, with a gelatinous inner layer; rupturing to form a volva at base of stalk. 
Mature fruiting body 5-12 cm high, consisting of (4) 5-7 (8) arms or "tentacles" arising 
from a common stalk or "tube," or sometimes with up to 12 arms arising from two fused 
stalks. ARMS long and slender, 3-9 (12) cm long, tapered toward their tips, at first upright 
and roughly parallel and joined at their tips (often in pairs), soon opening outward like 
the petals of a flower and eventually curling back and under so that the tips often touch 
the ground (but sometimes one or more arms branched, and at other times the tips 
remaining joined to others). Inner (or upper) surfaces of arms bright red to pinkish-red, 
usually paler toward base, ribbed or reticulate and coated with spore slime. Outer sur- 
faces (undersides) pale pink, longitudinally grooved. STALK 1-3 (5) cm long, typically 
short and sometimes hidden by the volva (but a long-stalked form is also known); hollow 
and tubular (open at the top), detaching easily from the volva, white or pallid below, 
pinkish above. VOL V A present at base of stalk as a loose sack formed by the ruptured 
peridium; base usually with one or more mycelial cords (rhizomorphs). SPORE MASS 
coating the inner (upper) surfaces of the "tentacles," mucilaginous, olive to dark olive- 
brown when fresh, but usually blackening as it dries; odor obnoxious at maturity (some- 
what reminiscent of rotting crab). Spores 4-5.5 (7) x 2-2.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground (especially sandy soil) or rotten 
wood in various habitats; widely distributed (Tasmania, Russia, etc.), but rare in North 
America. It is fairly common in the riparian woodlands along the San Lorenzo River in 
Santa Cruz County, California (especially in the spring, but fruiting most any time). I 
have also found it under a rose bush growing on a mixture of compost and rice hulls. 
EDIBILITY: Nonpoisonous, and like most stinkhorns, edible in the egg stage. One spring 
evening a former friend and I decided to sample two "eggs," following a recipe for French- 
fried stinkhorn eggs (see comments on edibility of Mutinus caninus). The flavor wasn't 
bad, but we neglected to strip away the gelatinous outer layer. It proved to be so slippery 
that the "eggs" slid down our throats before we could savor them, leaving behind only the 
sticky spore mucilage (see Color Plate 198), which clung to our throats and tongues so 
tenaciously that we were still trying to wash it away several hours later! 
774 
.,. '." 
- 
c, , . 
) 
t r, :a 
.. 
-. ..:. 
. .. , 
 
#'""  
. .- 
'!' 
11. 
. , I> 
,: 
 ..... 
'- 
""\ 
...."* ... 
'. 
.' , 
,..... 
Clalhrus archer; is aptly called the "Octopus Stinkhorn" or"Stinkopus" because of its long, tentacle- 
like arms. They are intially joined at their ti ps (central specimen), but then separate and recurve (spe- 
cimen at left). Note cords emanating from the "egg" in foreground. Also see the color plates. 
COMMENTS: The octopus stinkhorn-or "stinkopus," as I am fond of calling it-is 
one of my five favorite fleshy fungal fructifications. It is a most attractive fungus when 
fresh, easily told by its long red "tentacles" which are initially joined at their tips but then 
unfold to form a slender-armed "star." It definitely looks more like a sea creature than a 
mushroom, but its obnoxious aroma-which attracts flies and jaded fungophiles from 
afar-identifies it as a member of the stinkhorn tribe. The arms are longer than those in 
Lysurus. and the stalk is proportionately shorter (or at times practically absent). It was 
formerly placed in the genus Anthurus (as A. archer; or A. aseroeform;s), but since the 
"tentacles" are sometimes branched to form a rudimentary latticework (when young), it 
is now classified as a Clathrus. A common tropical stink horn, Aseroe rubra (see photo 
below) is sometimes confused with C. archeri, but looks more like a starfish or sea anenome 
than an octopus. It has five to ten or more "tentacles" which are deeply divided lengthwise 
(so that they may seem to occur in pairs) and arise from a flattened, disclike expansion of 
the stalk apex. The spore slime rests in the center of the disc or coats only the very bases 
Top view of the tropical stinkhorn Aseroe rubra (see comments above). Note how arms are deeply 
divided and spore slime is concentrated at center. S talks are not visible in this photo. (Michael F ogden) 
"""""'- 
..... 
:;.. 
.. 
" 
- 
,," 
\ . 
't'. . 
." 
776 
PHALLALES 
of the "tentacles." Although strictly tropical, it may turn up, like so many other exotic 
fungi, in a greenhouse or similarly sultry e.nvironment. Also similar to C. archer; is the 
"s tinky Squid," Pseudocolus fusiformis(=P. schellenbergiae, P. javanicus). It is common 
in scattered localities in eastern North America (especially Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 
the home of stinkhorn specialist William Burk), as well as in Europe, Australia, Asia, and 
Tierra del Fuego. It has a white to brown volva and only three to four "tentacles" which 
are red-orange to orange or pinkish, arise from a common stalk, and are usually fused at 
their tips (see photo on p. 777) but sometimes break free in age. 
Lysurus periphragmoides (S talked Lattice S tinkhorn) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a round to oval "egg" up to 5 cm broad. PERIDIUM 
(skin) white to buff, with a gelatinous inner layer, rupturing to form a volvaat base of stalk. 
Mature fruiting body 6-16 cm high, composed of a small rounded latticed "head" ona long 
stalk. CAP or "head" 1.5-3.5 cm broad, round to somewhat flattened, comprised of a 
latticework of red to orange (or sometimes yellowish or white) branches which form rather 
small meshes or..windows"; outer edges of branches keeled. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.8-3 
cm thick, hollow, fragile, rather spongy, equal or tapered, usually red above and paler 
below, but yellow or white in some forms. VOLV A present at base of stalk as a loose, lobed 
sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium, 'usually with whitish mycelial cords at- 
tached to base. SPORE MASS coating the inside surfaces of the latticed.. head" and some- 
times spilling out, mucilaginous, dark olive to olive-brown or drying blackish; fetid at 
maturity. Spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious ( occasionally two arising from the same volva) in rich 
soil, lawns, gardens, open woods, on rotten wood, etc.; widely distributed. It is not uncom- 
mon in mild wet weather in the southern United States and Midwest (North Carolina, 
Texas, Nebraska, New Mexico, even New York). but has yet to be found in California. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible in the egg stage, but who wants to eat it? 
COMMENTS: Also known as Simblum sphaerocephalum and S. texense, this 
southern stinkhorn looks like a miniature Clarhrus ruber mounted on a long stalk. In 
some specimens the transverse (horizontal) branches of the network are reduced or even 
absent, making its relationship to other species of Lysurus more obvious. White and 
yellow variants are known, but the red one is the most common in North America. 
Lysurus mokusin (Lantern Stinkhorn) Color Plate 192 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a round to oval..egg" up t06cm high. PERIDIUM(skin) 
white and membranous, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing to form a volvaat base 
of stalk and sometimes also leaving a piece of tissue stuck to the top of fruiting body. 
Mature fruiting body (3) 5-12 (16) cm high, consisting of a stalk that is branched above 
into 4-6 (usually 5, rarely 7) arms which normally remain joined at their tips to form a 
..spire," but which sometimes break free from each other. ARMS 0.8-3 (4) cm long, short 
and thick, usually bright red, erect and only sightly separated, or bowed to form a lantern- 
like structure; 3-sided; outer surfaces roughened, with a central longitudinal ridge; sides 
at first coated with spore slime; ..spire" long or short (1-20 mm long), erect or bent down- 
ward. STALK 6-13 cm long. 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or more often tapered downward, flesh- 
pink to pik or reddish-pink above, paler below and usually white at base; hollow, tubular, 
fragile, minutely chambered and marked by longitudinal rows of V-shaped depressions; 
cross-section usually showing 4-6 (7) angles (same number as arms). VOLV A present 
at base of stalk as a loose, lobed, white sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium, 
usually with one or more white mycelial cords attached to base. SPORE MASS borne in 
LYSURUS 
777 
the vertical slits between the arms and coating their sides, mucilaginous, light brown to 
olive-brown becoming darker (blackish) as it dries, with an unpleasant odor at maturity. 
Spores 3.5-4.5 )( 1.5-2 microns, oblong, smooth. 
HABITAT: Solitary to densely gregarious or clustered in lawns, gardens, hard-packed 
soil, etc.; common in southern California and fruiting there year-round, but partial to 
warm weather. It is probably native to Asia, but is well established in California at least as 
far north as Fresno. It has also been found in Texas and Washington, D.C. 
EDIBILITY: Edible in the egg stage, but in my opinion, no better than Clalhrus archer; 
(I have fried it). However, it is considered a great delicacy in China. 
COMMENTS: This gaudy stinkhorn is easily recognized by its red to pink color and 
distinctive shape. In the words of Paul Rea (who wrote an extensive analysis of the deve- 
lopmental stages of this species), "the form of the expanded plant may be likened to a 
moat (the volval cup) surrounding the base of a tower (the polygonal stipe) bearing a 
belfry or lantern (the arms) surmounted by a spire"-a very apt description, except that 
the "belfry" is usually besieged by flies (see color plate)! Specimens growing in hard 
ground are apt to be larger than those growing in rich or loose soil, perhaps because they 
take longer to develop. The arms sometimes break free from each other, but the several- 
sided stalk and often brighter color distinguish it from L. crucialus. 
Lysurus cruciatus (Lizard's Claw Stinkhorn) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a round to oval "egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM 
(skin) white and membranous, with a gelatinous inner layer; rupturing to form a volva at 
base of stalk. Mature fruiting body 6-12 (16) cm high, composed of a stalk that is branched 
at the top to form 4-7 (usually 5) stubby arms. ARMS initially incurved and touching(but 
not permanently fused) at their tips, then separating at least slightly and remaining more 
or less erect (i.e., not unfolding); short and thick (1-2.5 cm long), hollow, 3-sided; outer 
surfaces pallid to brownish, flesh-colored, pinkish, orange, or red, with a longitudinal 
groove. Inner surfaces wrinkled and irregularly roughened or knobby, at first covered 
with spore slime. STALK 6-10 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, usually tapered downward, hollow, 
fragile, minutely chambered and faintly striate longitudinally; entirely white or tinged 
yellowish above and white below. VOL V A present at base of stalk as a thick, loose, lobed, 
white sack formed by the ruptured peridium; uually with one or more mycelial cords 
attached to base. SPORE MASS supported within the arms and coating their inner sur- 
faces, mucilaginous, olive to olive-brown becoming blackish as it dries, with an unpleasant 
(fetid) odor at maturity. Spores 3-4 )( 1-2 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. 
Left: Pseudocolusfusiformis (see comments at top of p. 776) has three or four long arms which are 
normally fused at their tips but may separate in age; stalk is not visible in this picture. (Joan Zeller) 
Right: Lysurus crucial us (=Anthurus borealis) has several shon. thick arms at apex. (Bob Tally) 
-\ 
. ., 
I 
.. 
l 
:. 
"\ 
· .:J" 
..r " 
.."I "..]I ,.. 
 r:" · .. .. 
.. .. '.- -.... .  ." 
: \ I .'1.,';: ... 
,\!. '''t.,'';'-" 1 .r... 
) " ;: <f,: .. '\ ;:..."..$ 
'..1'- -- ."1 " 
,. 
, '; 
. . 
...,"" 
778 
PHALLALES 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups or clusters in lawns, gardens, under trees, in rich soil, 
on rotten wood, etc.; apparently native to Australia and New Zealand, but now widely 
distributed and well established in various parts ofthe United States. It is not uncommon 
in southern California, but is not nearly as numerous as L. mokusin. It favors warm 
weather but can be found most anytime. I have not seen it north of Santa Barbara. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible, but see comments on the edibility of Clathrus archeri. 
COMMENTS: Better known asL. (=Anthurus) borealis, this stinkhorn is easily told byits 
short, thick arms which separate slightly but do not unfold a la Clathrus archeri. It can be 
dull or brightly colored, and the tips of its arms are never fused intoaspireasin L. mokusin. 
I t has often been confused withL. gardneri, a tropical species whose arms have sterile bases. 
Bird's Nest Fungi 
(/ 
spores 
NIDULARIALES 
Tiny fungi found on soil, wood, dung, and vegetable debris. FRUITING BODY usually rather 
tough, at first round to cylindrical or cushion-shaped, usually becoming cup- to mug-shaped (nest- 
like) at maturity. with several "eggs" f!nclosed (only one "egg" in Sphaerobolus). PERIDIUM 
(wall of "nest") conposed of 1-4 layers. PERIDIOLES ("eggs") usually flattened and lens- or 
lentil-shaped, white to gray, brown or black, sometimes with minute cords attached. STALK 
absent (but base of "nest" may be narrowed). SPORES borne inside the peridioles. typically 
smooth and hyaline. Capillitium absent. 
THESE minute Gasteromycetes look like miniature bird's nests. The fruiting body 
typically consists of a tiny vase or ..nest" (peridium) furnished with several spore capsules 
or ..eggs" (peridioles), and in most cases a protective membrane or ..lid" (epiphragm) 
that initially covers the top of the nest. As such there is very little that the bird's nest fungi 
can be confused with, though when very young they might be mistaken for minute puff- 
balls, and when old and bereft of eggs they look like tiny, tough cup fungi. 
The spores are dispersed with the aid of raindrops and animals. The force of a single 
raindrop will splash the eggs out of the nest and as much as seven feet away (hence they 
are sometimes called ..splash cups"). The outer wall of the egg then decays or is eaten a way 
by insects and the spores within are exposed. Whereas most fungi produce millions of 
spores, the bird's nest fungi need only a few-each egg contains the correct mating strains, 
so a fertile secondary (dikaryotic) mycelium develops directly, obviating the need for 
large numbers of spores. 
There are four common genera of bird's nest fungi. In Cyathus and Crucibulum, each 
egg is anchored to the nest by a minute cord or ..stalk" (funiculus), while in Nidula and 
Nidularia the eggs are imbedded ina sticky gel. Both thecordsand the sticky mucilage help 
the splashed eggs to adhere to whatever they land on. Also treated in this chapter is 
Sphaerobolus, a dynamic relative of the bird's nest fungi that is sometimes called the 
..cannon fungus." It features only one egg that is shot out with terrific force, accompanied 
by an audible ..pop." (The Latin name literally means ..sphere-thrower.") 
Bird's nest fungi are found on various types of organic or vegetable matter-rotting 
wood and sticks, herbaceous stems, humus, dung, and manure (the spores of dung- 
inhabiting individuals presumably pass through-and out of-grazing animals). They 
are gregarious creatures, but as they rarely attain heights of more than 15 mm, they are 
difficult to see and worthless as food. Most of the common North American species are 
keyed out here, but additional exotic types may turn up in greenhouses and flower pots. 
NIDULARIALES 
779 
Key to the Nidulariales 
1. Fruiting body containing only one peridiole ("egg"), round at first, then splitting open to form 
4-9 orange rays around the central "egg" ................. Sphaerobolus stellatus, p. 781 
1. Not as above; fruiting body cylindrical to mug- or cup-shaped when mature, containing more 
than one egg (unless all but one have been expelled) ............................... 2 
2. Fruiting body lacking a "lid" when young, at first round to cushion-shaped and more or less 
covered with a felty or powdery material that ruptures irregularly; nest soon disintegrating; 
eggs imbedded in a sticky mucilage which eventually dries out ....................... 3 
2. Not as above; fruiting body typically with a" lid" when very young, the nest usually well formed 
and persistent; eggs mayor may not be imbedded in a mucilage ...................... 4 
3. Eggs brown to reddish, round and flattened (lens-shaped); not common .... NidulariaJarcta 
3. Eggs grayish-brown and often irregularly-shaped; fairly common ... _. Nidularia pulvinata 
4. Eggs gray to brown or dark brown, imbedded in a sticky mucilage or jellylike substance which 
eventually dries out; eggs not attached to the nest by a small cord or stalk; sides of nest usually 
vertical (i.e., fruiting body more or less mug-shaped) ............................... 5 
4. Eggs white to gray, brown, or black, often (but not always) attached to side of nest by a minute 
cord or short stalk, not imbedded in a mucilage; sides of nest vertical to tapered ........ 6 
5. Exterior of nest white and shaggy when fresh Nidula niveotomentosa(see N. candida, p. 780) 
5. Exterior of nest scurfy or hairy, brown to cinnamon or at times grayish Nidulacandida, p.780 
6. Interior of nest longitudinally striate (with distinct radial grooves) ....................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cyathus striatus & others (see C. stercoreus, p.780) 
6. Interior of nest smooth or at least not striate or grooved ............................. 7 
7. Eggs typically white to buff; interior of nest not black ... Crucibulum laeve & others, below 
7. Eggs typically gray to brown or black; interior of nest variously colored (including black) . 8 
8. Fruiting body typically less than 5 mm high; exterior of nest smooth to fibrillose but not shaggy; 
found on sticks, dung, etc., in arid regions ... Cyathuspygmaeus(see C. stercoreus, p. 780) 
8. Fruiting body typically 5-15 mm high; exterior smooth or shaggy; cosmopolitan. . . . . . . .. 9 
9. Exterior of nest shaggy (with long hairs), at least when young; fruiting body averaging 5-10 mm 
high, the rim more Or less circular at maturity ................ Cyathus stercoreus, p. 780 
9. Exterior of nest fibrillose to smooth even when young (without long hairs); fruiting body 
averaging 10-15 mm high, the rim often wavy in age Cyathusolla(see C. stercoreus, p.780) 
Crucibu/um /aeve (Common Bird's Nest Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY tiny, at first nearly round, becoming cylindrical and then deeply 
cup-shaped (i.e., with a wide flaring mouth); 5-12 mm high and broad (at the top) when 
mature, the rim more or less circular and covered at first by a hairy lid. Peridium (wall 
of nest) one-layered, tough, persistent. Exterior velvety or shaggy, yellowish or tawny to 
cinnamon-brown, becoming nearly smooth in age and often darker or whiter. Interior of 
nest smooth, somewhat shiny, white to silvery, gray, or pale cinnamon. PERIDIOLES 
(eggs) 1-2 mm in diameter, several, whitish to buff or with a very slight brownish tinge, 
circular but flattened (lens- or disclike), usually attached to nest by long thin cords. Spores 
(4) 7-10 x 3-6 microns, elliptical, thick-walled, smooth, hyaline. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious on sticks, wood chips, nut shells, vegetable 
debris, humus, and manure; widely distributed. It is not as common locally as some of the 
other bird's nest fungi, but occurs year-round, sometimes in the company of Cyathus. 
EDIBILITY: Much too miniscule to merit being munched on. 
COMMENTS: Also known as C. levis and C. vulgare, this fetching and farflung little 
fungus is easily told by its whitish eggs that are initially attached to the nest by long, thin 
cords. It lacks the sticky mucilage of Nidu/a, and the eggs are never lead-colored or black 
as in Cya th us. Other species: Crucibulum parvulum is a similar but even more minute 
(24 mm high) species with a white to grayish or buff exterior. It grows on dead juniper 
and other organic matter in arid habitats. 
. 
 " 
-  .,, 
- ' ....... "- 
4 \ 
 
. ",'1(\ , \_ 
- . ..... 
.{ 
 ,(, 
\ 
. 
... 
... 
..","A 
""" . 
. .. 
.... -+"\f 
,. 
\ 
. <t"..t 
.... .. ;.- 
't. 
.- 
;. 
t\. 
.... 
-- 
l' .. 
.- 
,- " '>f 
.. 
-""' 
; ".'>. 
.. 
--,'.. 
 
. 
... 
)} 
""" 
t '\ 
'" 
... 
Left Cyalhus slercoreus growing on dung. The camera's strobe has made the "eggs" appear paler 
than they actually are. Note how rim of nest is circular. Right Cyalhus ol/a growing on wood. Note 
how rim of nest is often wavy. (Nancy Burnett) 
Cyathus stercoreus (Dung-Loving Bird's Nest Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY tiny, goblet- to vase-shaped orresemblinganinverted cone,5-1O(15) 
mm high and 4-10 mm broad at the top, the rim more or less circular when mature and 
covered at first with a thin pallid or whitish lid that soon disappears, Peridium (wall of 
nest) tough, persistent, 3-layered (but the layers not always distinguishable). Exterior 
tan to golden-brown, brown, grayish-brown, or reddish-brown and shaggy (but often 
smooth and blackish in old age); base often with a pad of brown to reddish-brown 
mycelium. Interior of the nest smooth, pale gray becoming dark gray or lead-colored and 
often blackish in age. PERIDIOLES (eggs) several, 1-2 mm in diameter, dark gray to 
black, flattened or lentil-like, hard, smooth, often with a short cord or "stalk" attached 
(especially the lower eggs in the nest). Spores large: 22-40 x 18-30 microns, variable in 
size and shape but mostly round to oval, thick-walled, smooth, hyaline. 
HABIT AT: Densely gregarious on dung, manure, and other organic debris; widely dis- 
tributed and common, but seldom noticed. In our area it can be found most any time. The 
largest fruiting I've seen was on a well-manured la wn in March. 
EDIBILITY: A meager morsel, much too puny to be of value. 
COMMENTS: The dark gray to black eggs, shaggy exterior (at least when young), and 
smooth interior are the principal field marks of this cosmopolitan bird's nest fungus. The 
cords by which the eggs are attached are not always evident, at least in my experience. 
Other species: C. olla is a similar but slightly larger species. Its nest is gray to brown with 
an often wavy (rather than circular) rim and a smooth to finely hairy (fibrillose) but not 
shaggy exterior. Its eggs are also larger (2-3 mm) and gray to brown or blackish, and its 
spores are much smaller (8-15 microns). It is widely distributed and common, but not as 
numerous in our area as C. stereo reus. C. pygmaeus is a miniature version of C. olla 
(fruiting body only 4-5 mm high) that commonly grows on sticks, dung, etc., in the drier 
parts of the West. Two other species are worth mentioning because of their beautifully 
pleated or grooved (radially striate) interiors: C. striatus, widely distributed and quite 
common, with a shaggy cinnamon-brown to grayish-brown or dark brown exterior plus 
slightly triangular eggs; and C. helenae, found mostly in arid or alpine habitats, with 
a grayer, thicker-walled nest that has tufted hairs on its exterior. The latter two species 
can grow in manure but are more common on sticks and other vegetable matter. 
Nidula candida (Jellied Bird's Nest Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY tiny, cylindrical or cushion-shaped becoming mug- or flower-pot- 
shaped at maturity (with vertical sides and a flaring mouth); 5-15 (20) mm high and 3-8 
mm broad at the top when mature, the rim more or less circular and covered at first by a 
,;,.., 
" 
'" 
, 
Nidu/a niveotomentosa(see comments under N. candida), young specimens in which the nest is still 
covered by the epiphragm("lid"). Note white exterior and mug-shaped fruiting body. (Herb Saylor) 
lid. Peridium (wall of the nest) tough, persistent. Exterior whitish beneath a gray to brown 
or dull cinnamon scurfy or shaggy layer that covers at least the basal portion and the lid. 
Interior of the nest smooth, white to yellowish-brown or brown. PERIDIOLES (eggs) 
several, 1-2 mm indiameter, pallid to gray or brown (but often darker on underside), 
flattened, without cords, instead imbedded in a sticky mucilage or gel which eventually 
dries out. Spores 6-10 )( 4-8 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, hyaline. 
HABITAT: In groups on rotting wood, berry canes, and herbaceous debris in gardens, 
woods, along streams, etc.; widely distributed. It is common in our area in the late fall 
and winter or even spring, but the empty nests persist for months without decaying and 
sometimes give rise to new ones. 
EDIBILITY: Academic; you'd ha ve to be slightly looney to bother with something so puny. 
COMMENTS: A common but frequently overlooked little fungus, easily told by the 
brownish to cinnamon scurfy exterior and the sticky gel in which the eggs are imbedded, 
plus the presence of a covering or lid when young. The species name, candida. which 
means "shining white," is a misnomer since the fruiting body is neither shiny nor white. 
However, a similar species with a shaggy white exterior( and numerous small brown eggs), 
N. niveotomentosa, is common in California and the Pacific North west, usually on sticks 
or in moss. See also the genus Nidularia (in the key) and Cyathus stercoreus. 
Sphaerobolus stellatus (Cannon Fungus; Sphere Thrower) 
FRUITING BODY minute, 1-3 mm broad, at first more or less round and white to dull 
yellow-orange or ochraceous, the outer wall (peridium) then splitting into 4-9 bright 
orange starlike rays or "teeth," exposing the single spore-containing peridiole ("egg"), 
which is then shot out like a cannonball as the entire structure turns inside out (leaving 
behind a translucent whitish ball perched on the rays). PERIDIOLE ("egg") chestnut- 
brown to olive-black, sticky or slippery, smooth, more or less round. Spores 7-10 )( 3.5-5 
microns, oblong, smooth, hyaline. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious on rotting wood, sawdust, plant debris, and dung or manure; 
widely distributed, but easily overlooked. I have seen it several times in nursery flats; it 
fruits whenever moisture is sufficient. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. Several hundred would be needed for a mouthful! 
COMMENTS: This cousin of the bird's nest fungi is easily recognized by its diminutive 
dimensions, bright orange star-shaped "catapult," and single central"egg" or spore ball. 
It makes a marvelous-albeit liliputian-laboratory pet: a small pop is said to accom- 
pany the ejection of the spore ball, which sticks to whatever it lands on. Its flight path 
has been measured at 14 ft. high and 17 ft. long--or more than 1000 times the size of the 
fruiting body! To equal such a prodigious feat, we puny humans would have to throw a 
discus over one mile high and far! It is also interesting to note that the "sphere thrower" 
does not "do its thing" in complete darkness-light is apparently needed to trigger the 
"cannon;' as well as a sufficient supply of moisture. 
781 
782 
Ascomycetes 
ASCOMYCOTINA 
THE Ascomycetes are the largest subdivision of the true fungi. With over 15,000 known 
species, they pose a challenge, in the words of one noted mycologist, to "an army" 
of students. They are also an exceedingly diverse group, ranging from the most econo- 
mically important of all the fungi, the single-celled yeasts, to powdery mildews to bread 
molds like Penicillium (the original source of penicillin) to prized edible mushrooms such 
as the morels and truffles. Their common bond is fundamental but microscopic: the 
sexually-produced spores are formed inside saclike mother cells called asci (singular. 
ascus). The ascus is roughly analagous to the basidium of a Basidiomycete, although 
fusion of the parent nuclei typically occurs in a separate cell, the ascogonium. Each ascus 
contains one to several thousand spores depending on the species. The most frequent 
number is eight. 
Only a small fraction of the Ascomycetes have fruiting bodies large enough to merit 
mention in this book. In the field they can usually be distinguished from Basidiomycetes 
by a process of elimination, i.e., if your fleshy fungal fructification does not fit one ofthe 
common categories of Basidiomycetes pictured on pp. 52-54 (agarics, boletes, puffballs, 
etc.), then chances are it's an Ascomycete. The fleshy Ascomycetes treated in this book 
fall into two broad categories, keyed below. 
Key to the Ascomycetes 
I. Fruiting body more or less round (spherical) to oval or knobby (potato-like), growing under- 
ground or inside very rotten wood ............................. Discomycetes, p. 783 
I. Not as above; growing on wood or on ground, on insects, other mushrooms, plants, etc. .. 2 
2. Growing on wood (but wood sometimes buried) .................................... 3 
2. Growing on ground or on insects, herbaceous plants, or other mushrooms .............. 4 
3. Fruiting body usually black or very dark brown (but often covered with white or grayish pow- 
der), rounded to irregularly knobby and charcoal-like or fingerlike to clublike or antlerlike 
and very tough or hard; asci borne in flasklike nests (perithecia) which often give the fertile 
area of fruiting body a minutely pimpled appearance ............. Pyrenomycetes, p. 878 
3. Fruiting body cuplike or variously shaped but not as above, or if colored as above then texture 
usually different (fragile, fleshy, rubbery, gelatinous, etc.); asci typically borne in a palisade 
(hymenium), not in perithecia ................................. Discomycetes, p. 783 
4. Growing on insects (adults, pupae, larvae), spiders, or on other mushrooms (but hosts are often 
buried, so dig up carefully!); asci typically borne in flasklike "nests" (perithecia) .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Pyrenomycetes, p. 878 
4. Growing on ground or plant material, but not on insects or other mushrooms; asci typically 
borne in a palisade (hymenium), not in perithecia ................. Discomycetes, p. 783 
Left: Fruiting body of a cup fungus (a 
common type of Discomycete), showing 
how the paraphyses (sterile cells) and asci 
are arranged in a palisade on the upper 
(inner) surface. In reality there are thou- 
sands more asci than shown here. Right: 
An ascus containing eight spores (the most 
common number). 
783 
DISCOMYCETES 
DISCOMYCETES are not Ascomycetes that like to dance, nor are they necessarily disc- 
shaped. Discomycetes are Ascomycetes in which a palisade of asci line an exposed surface 
of the fruiting body much as a palisade of basidia line the gills of an agaric. This palisade 
of asci (see drawing at bottom of p. 782) is called the hymenium, and the fruiting body of 
a Discomycete is called an apothecium (as opposed to the perithecium of a Pyreno- 
mycete). All but a handful of the Ascomycetes treated in this book are Discomycetes. 
Examples are the morels, false morels, elfin saddles, cup fungi, and earth tongues. Truffles 
are also Discomycetes, but they have specialized underground fruiting bodies in which 
the hymenium is infolded and internalized, or in some cases, non-existent (see p. 841 for 
more details). The Discomycetes have been divided here into three orders (large groups), 
keyed below. To facilitate identification, the key is based largely on the shape and size 
of the fruiting body rather than on more critical (i.e., microscopic) characteristics. Excep- 
tions to the generalizations put forth in the key are then keyed out individually under 
the various orders, families, and genera. 
Key to the Discomycetes 
1. Fruiting body nearly always underground (or inside very rotten wood), round to oval or knobby 
(potato-like), i.e., stalk absent or extremely rudimentary; spores nearly always borne inside 
the fruiting body, the interior usually (but not always) with channels, veins, or one or more 
cavities ........................................................ Tuberales, p. 841 
1. Not as above; fruiting body occasionally buried but usually above the ground at maturity or on 
wood, moss, etc.; spore-bearing surface exposed (external) at maturity ......... _ . . . . .. 2 
2. Fruiting body cup- to ear-shaped, spoon-shaped, disclike (flat), cushion-like, top-shaped, or 
sometimes contorted; stalk absent or present only as a narrowed base (but fruiting body some- 
times growing erect like a rabbit's ear); asci operculate (i.e., with "lid" at tip) Pezizales, below 
2. Fruiting body erect, with a stalk and often a cap, cup, or "head" ...................... 3 
3. Fruiting body with a well-defined cap or splitting into rays at maturity; cap cuplike, disclike, 
wrinkled, brainlike, saddle-shaped, pitted, honeycombed, or thimble-like (i.e., usually with 
a sterile undersie or sterile hollow interior) ...................................... 4 
3. Not as above; fruiting body c1ublike or with an enlarged or flattened "head," but lacking a 
distinct cap with a sterile underside; "head" not cuplike, brainlike, saddle-shaped, disclike, 
or honeycombed, and not splitting into rays; fruiting body usually small; asci inoperculate 
(i.e., tip usually thickened, with a pore but no "lid") .................. Helotiales, p. 865 
4. Flesh gelatinous or semi-gelatinous (slice open fruiting body lengthwise); surface of fruiting 
body often viscid; cap rounded or wrinkled, often brightly colored but not dark brown to 
black; asci inoperculate ......................................... Helotiales, p. 865 
4. Not as above; asci operculate ....................................... Pezizales, below 
Morels, Elfm Saddles, and Cup Fungi 
PEZIZALES 
THIS large order includes most of the familiar fleshy Ascomycetes and nearly all of the 
prominent ones: the fabulous morels, grotesque false morels, elegant elfin saddles, and 
lowly cup fungi. All of these fungi typically have an exposed spore-bearing surface (hy- 
menium) and their asci have "lids" which open when the spores are forcibly expelled. 
The asci usually discharge their spores simultaneously. The discharge can easily be 
triggered by tapping, breathing on, or otherwise disturbing the fruiting body, with the 
result that it will sometimes "smoke" (spew out clouds of spores) when picked! 
784 
PEZIZALES 
The fertile surface ranges from concave or flat in the cup fungi to convex or convoluted 
in the false morels and elfin saddles to deeply pitted in the true morels. A stalk is present 
in the latter forms but often absent in the cup fungi. 
Members of the Pezizales can be found almost anywhere at any time, but are most 
numerous and diverse in forests, in the spring. This means that in regions with mild winters 
they usually peak after most of the Basidiomycetes have fruited, while in regions with cold 
winters they are among the first fungi to appear after the snow has melted. Excluding the 
truffles (which are treated separately in this book), there are seven major families in the 
Pezizales, five of which are cup fungi. These are keyed below. 
Key to the Pezizales 
I. Fruiting body an irregularly cabbage-like, cauliflower-like. contorted. brainlike, or pitted mass 
of tissue, with or without a stalk; flesh not gelatinous ............................... 2 
l. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
2. Stalk absent or rudimentary, or if stalk present then stalk long (15-30 cm!) and solid and brown. 
and often buried and restricted to eastern North America; fertile portion of fruiting body 
whitish to yellowish-brown, beige, pinkish, or lilac-tinged; rare . Pezizaceae & Allies, p. 817 
2. Not as above; stalk present, long or short, usually hollow or partially hollow or complexly 
folded or chambered in cross-section; fertile portion of fruiting body colored as above or 
often darker; very common and widely distributed ................................. 5 
3. Fruiting body cup-shaped (concave) to disclike (flat). cushion-shaped, or sometimes top- 
shaped or splitting into rays; stalk present or absent; flesh gelatinous, fragile, or tough ... 4 
3. Fruiting body with a cap and stalk; cap convex to conical to bell-shaped, round, lobed, brainlike, 
saddle-shaped, or pitted but not cuplike (or cuplike only when very young); flesh fragile or 
tough but not gelatinous ....................................................... 5 
4. Stalk absent, or if present then often (but not always!) short or merely a narrowed, downward 
extension of the cup; stalk when present usually Jacking distinct ribs; fruiting body fleshy, 
fragile, rubbery, or gelatinous, sometimes brightly colored, large to minute; tips of asci amy- 
loid or not amyloid ...................................... Pezizaceae & Allies, p. 817 
4. Stalk present, clearly differentiated from cap; stalk usually longer than width of cup orif shorter 
then usually ribbed or fluted; fruiting body fleshy or fragile but not gelatinous and not brightly 
colored, large to fairly small but not minute; tips of asci not amyloid .. Helvellaceae, p. 796 
5. Cap honeycombed with ridges and pits, the pits usually fairly deep, or if not then the ridges 
with a strong vertical orientation; cap intergrown with stalk (or in one case, only upper part 
of cap intergrown with stalk) .................................. Morchellaceae, below 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Flesh gelatinous; fruiting body often viscid and brightly colored .... (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
6. Not as above; flesh not gelatinous ................................................ 7 
7. Cap roughly conical to bell-shaped, like a thimble on a finger (i.e., attached only to very top of 
stalk, the sides hanging down freely like a skirt) .................. Morchellaceae, below 
7. Not as above; cap lobed, brainlike, saddle-shaped, etc. and/ or attached to stalk differently 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Helvellaceae, p. 796 
MORCHELLACEAE 
6'a 
spores 
Morels and Allies 
THIS is a small but famous family with only three genera: M orchella. Verpa. and Disciotis. 
M orchella (the true morels or "sponge mushrooms") has a pitted cap that is intergrown 
with the stalk (see p. 785 for more details). Verpa also has a well-developed stalk, but 
differs in having a smooth to wrinkled or somewhat pitted, thimble-like cap. Disciotis 
lacks an obvious stalk and is likely to be mistaken for a veined Peziza; consequently it is 
keyed out under the cup fungi. All three genera have non-amyloid asci and smooth ellip- 
MORCHELLACEAE 
785 
tical spores. The spores lack large oil droplets but typically have ..crowns" of minute 
droplets at both ends. 
Key to the Morchellaceae 
I. Fruiting body cuplike or spreading (flat); stalk very short or absent ........ D;sc;ot;s, p. 796 
I. Not as above; fruiting body with a cap or "head" and well-developed stalk .............. 2 
2. Cap with pits and ridges; at least the upper part of cap intergrown with stalk Morchella, below 
2. Cap smooth to wrinkled or shallowly pitted, sitting on the stalk like a thimble (i.e., attached only 
to very top of stalk, the sides hanging free like a skirt) .................... Verpa, p. 793 
MORCHELLA (Morels) 
Medium-sized to large, mostly terrestrial fungi. FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk; interior 
hollow. CAP honeycombed with ridges and pits (chambers). allached 10 the stalk/orall a/its length 
(or in one case. for J / 3-2/ 3 a/its length). STALK well-developed, smooth to scurfy or wrinkled 
below. SPORES typically elliptical, smooth, without large oil droplets. Asci lining inside surfaces 
of pits; 8-spored, operculate, not amyloid. 
THESE prized delicacies are among the best-known wild mushrooms in North America, 
and they are so esteemed in Europe that people used to set fire to their own forests in hopes 
of eliciting a bountiful morel crop the next spring! Luckily, morels are among the most 
unmistakable of all fungi by virtue oftheir hollow, pitted or honeycombed ..heads"(they 
are also known as ..sponge mushrooms"). False morels (Gyromitra) are vaguely similar, 
but have a wrinkled or convoluted (not pitted) cap, while thimble morels (Verpa) have a 
smooth to wrinkled or shallowly pitted cap with free (skirtlike) sides. Morels have also 
been confused inexplicably with stinkhorns (Phallus), perhaps because of their similar 
shape. The head of a fresh Phallus, however, is coated with a sticky, stinky spore slime and 
there is a sack or volva at the base of the stalk. * 
Much has been said about where and when to find morels, but no self-respecting morel 
hunter will divulge any truly crucial information unless he or she is planning to per- 
manently leave the country (and then only for a stiff price!). Morel hunters are so 
protective of their favorite ..patches," in fact, that they regularly disseminate misleading 
-if not downright erroneous-information, and they practice a presidential evasiveness 
when asked: ..Where did all those morels come from?" Thus any ..tips" or ..secrets" you 
manage to squeeze out of morel hunters should be taken with a grain (better make that a 
bucket!) of salt. Having said this, I will now tell you where and when to find morels. . . 
Morels usually grow outdoors: in forests( under both hardwoods and conifers) and open 
ground, in abandoned orchards, gardens, landscaped areas, under hedges, on roadcuts 
and driveways, near melting snow, in gravel, around wood piles or tree trunks, and in 
sandy soil along streams. In other words, morels grow wherever they please! They will 
even fruit in barbecue pits and on scorched ground in the wake oHorest fires-sometimes 
in awesome quantities, but only if conditions are favorable! 
Morels are almost universally associated with the spring ("May is morel month in 
Michigan"), but occasionally appear in the summer, fall, and winter. In the Midwest, 
where they are particularly abundant, the various species appear in a definite succession 
from late April through early June, and the annual morel festivals are a major tourist 
attraction. The state of Minnesota, in fact, recently declared the morel its official ..state- 
mushroom.... Morels seem to respond to a warming trend following a cold spell. This 
explains why they are particularly abundant in regions with cold winters-which is only 
right, because the people who survive those winters deserve a delicious spring! Alas, in 
tepid coastal California morels are not nearly as common as one would wish. In our area, 
in fact, finding them is largely a matter of luck, i.e., being in the right place at the right 
* Don't feel too embarrassed should you manage to confuse them-Morchella esculenta was originally classified 
as a Phallus by Linnaeus! 
, 
 
I, ''I- ' 
1 '1 " :,'. 
 , i. 
,. I' , 
I  f, t 
'';,, : 
. . \, 
\ 
t, 
, ' / 
'\ 
" 
't, 
J f  
J _ 
.... 
::.:: 
. 
.. 
tt' 
..... "- 
',. 
Springtime bounty: A basket of black morels (Morchella elala group, p. 790). 
time. In the Sierra Nevada and Cascades, however, they can actually be hunted-and 
sometimes harvested in large quantities, particularly if there are spring rains. Although 
timing is of critical importance because of competition from other morel hunters, it has 
been shown that morels develop and age more slowly than most mushrooms, overa period 
of three to four weeks! They have resisted all attempts to raise them commercially, but one 
ambitious entrepeneur tells me that success is j ustaround the corner. The spores germinate 
readily in culture and the mycelium flourishes, but getting it to fruit has been the major 
stumbling block (perhaps it needs to be chilled to simulate a cold winter?). 
Although the genus Morche//a is unerringly distinct, the disposition of species is largely 
a matter of opinion. Dozens have been described based on differences in color, shape, and 
orientation of the pits and ridges. However, each "species" seems to intergrade with the 
next, leading some morelizers to recognize only three or four species. To most people the 
"true" identity of a morel is academic anyway-what counts is that it is edible, and 
incredible! 
Raw morels often cause digestive upsets, so to stay on their good side, always cook them. 
They are delicious sauteed (providing you don't drown them in butter and herbs), and you 
can serve them over toast or in soup. Because they are hollow, morels are easy to stuff, 
but it is even easier to stuff yourself with morels! Before cooking, always split them length- 
wise to check for millipedes, slugs, and other critters that like to hide inside. Transfer all 
such tenants to the compost pile or some other comfortable spot Gust because you're 
evicting them from their home doesn't mean you have to kill them!) and carefully remove 
all grit or sand, using water if necessary. If you are lucky enough to stumble on a large 
batch of morels and are unwilling to share the surplus with me, you can preserve them by 
canning or sauteeing and freezing. Or you can string them into beautiful necklaces and 
hang them up to dry (I will accept them in any form). 
Four "species" of Morche//a are described here, and several others are discussed. As 
I am meticulously mapping their variation and distribution, I request you, generous 
reader, to deliver any and all morels you find to my doorstep. Then, while I am savoring 
the superb flavor of croules aux morilles a la normande (having first, of course, studied 
them thoroughly), you can bask in the altruistic satisfaction that comes from contributing 
to science.* 
*The least you can do is invite me over for dinner. 
MORCHELLA 
787 
Key to Morchella 
l. Volva (sack) present at base of stalk (dig up carefully!); odor often fetid (see Phallales, p. 764) 
l. Volva absent ................................................................. 2 
2. Cap usually brainlike and irregularly lobed (as well as pitted), brown to reddish-brown; stalk 
complex (i.e., cross-section halfway up stalk revealing numerous internal folds), often massive 
(up to 20 cm thick!) ......................................... (see Gyromitra, p. 799) 
2. Not as above; cap not conspicuously lobed; upper stalk or mid-portion more or less simple in 
cross-section (but base often folded or complex) ................................... 3 
3. Lower 1,3-2/3 of cap free from stalk (only the upper part intergrown) 1\1. semilibera, p. 791 
3. All or nearly all of cap intergrown with stalk (lower edge may be creased) ............... 4 
4. Ridges of cap dark (dark gray to olive-brown to black) at maturity and sometimes dark when 
young.................................................... M. e/atagroup, p. 790 
4. Not as above (but ridges may blacken when they dry out and shrivel up) ................ 5 
5. Ridges white or markedly paler than the pits when young, but often becoming same color as 
pits in age; pits usually large and often elongated vertically; fruiting body small to medium- 
sized (not large); common in suburbia, orchards, etc., less often in woods M. de/iciosa, p.789 
5. Not with abovefeatures (but may have some ofthem) ............................... 6 
6. Fruiting body pale (whitish to bufO, not darkening in age; pits usually vertically elongated; 
mostly found in woods (especially montane) M. sp. (unidentified)(see M. deliciosa, p.789) 
6. Not as above; if pale then pits roundish to irregular ................................. 7 
7. Fruiting body medium-sized to large (11-30 cm tall or more), not reddish-tinged; stalk often 
swollen at base and sometimes massive in age; base usually wrinkled, folded, or buttressed 
(like a tree trunk); found mainly with hardwoods ... M. crassipes(see M. escu/enta, below) 
7. Not as above; fruiting body usually small to medium-sized or reddish-tinged; stalk often 
somewhat wrinkled at base but not normally buttressed; found in many habitats. . . . . . .. 8 
8. Fruiting body reddish to reddish-brown or with a reddish tinge and/ or pits arranged in definite 
rows..................................................... M. e/atagroup, p. 790 
8. Fruiting body not reddish-tinged; pits usually rounded or irregular .... M. escu/enta, below 
M orchella esculenta 
(Morel; Yellow Morel) 
Color Plate 203 
CAP 3-11 cm high, 2-6 cm broad, round to oval to bluntly conical or irregular; margin 
attached to the stalk (but often with a crease at point of attachment); overall color tan to 
yellow-brown to warm buff or even buff. Pits roundish to irregular in shape and not nor- 
mally arranged in well-defined rows; often quite small but sometimes large, yellowish 
to brown or tan. Ridges typically meandering rather than in lines, usually quite narrow, 
same color as pits or paler (or occasionally slightly darker). Interior hollow, whitish, 
roughened. Flesh often rather thin. STALK 1-5 (10) cm long, 1-2.5 (3.5) cm thick, usually 
minutely granular or scurfy, equal or enlarged at the base, usually relatively short and 
narrower than cap, the base often somewhat wrinkled or pitted; white to buff, sometimes 
with brownish or cinnamon stains; typically hollow in cross-section. SPORES 16-25 
)( 9-14 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to widely scattered, gregarious, or clustered in a variety of habitats 
(woods, streamsides, old orchards, cultivated or disturbed ground, burned areas, etc.); 
very widely distributed, but especially common in eastern North America and the Mid- 
west. Like other morels, it fruits in the spring but will occasionally turn up at other times. 
In eastern North America it i:. most often found under oak, maple, beech, hickory, elm, 
ash, fruit trees. and other hardwoods, especially in May (or in the words of Ingrid Bartelli, 
"when the oak leaves are as big as squirrel's ears"). Large crops can also be found around 
the bases of dying (but not quite dead) elms attacked by Dutch elm disease. In the West I 
look for it under deciduous oaks and in sandy soil or riverbottoms where there is willow, 
cottonwood, or alder, from February to Mayor June depending on the elevation 
and clima te. It also occurs in burned areas, but not as commonly as the black morels, and 
it is not as frequent as the latter at higher elevations. 
. . 
..... 
 
. ) 
iii 
.. 
:". 
 
, 
''\ 
, 
, 
. '. 
... 
.. 
. 
.\ . 
I " 
\: 
'" . \ 
.. 
Left: Morche//a crassipes (see comments below). This morel varies considerably in shape but is 
always large and has a wrinkled, buttressed stem. A sliced specimen is shown at top ofp. 792. Right: 
Morche//a de/iciosa (p. 789), young specimens from eastern North America with very white ridges. 
The form in coastal California is not usually as white (see photo on p. 789). (Alan Bessette) 
EDIBILITY: Edible and one of the most avidly hunted of all wild mushrooms (see 
comments on pp. 785-786). 
COMMENTS: This, the common morel or "sponge mushroom," is one of the most readily 
recognized of all edible fungi. It can be told from other morels by its modest size, warm 
brown to tan or yellowish color, and irregularly-arranged pits (see color plate), and from 
the poisonous false morels (Gyromitra species) by its pitted or honeycombed rather than 
brainlike or lobed cap. It could also be confused with the stinkhorn (Phallus impudicus), 
but does not have a volva and lacks the foul-smelling spore slime of that species. It is typi- 
cally a denizen of low hardwood forests, riparian woodlands, and fruit orchards, whereas 
the black morels are more common in northern latitudes or at higher elevations under 
conifers. The ranges of the two overlap, however, and they can sometimes be found 
growing in the same area. Like other morels, M. esculenta varies considerably in shape 
and appearance. In most cases the pits are quite irregular-looking, but in some forms 
the transverse ridges are not as well-developed as the vertical ones, giving the pits an 
elongated, slotlike appearance. The ridges never blacken as in the M. elata group, but 
conical forms intergrade with M. deliciosa (see comments under that species). Pale 
forms can also be confused with M. deliciosa, but usually have smaller, paler pits that 
are not as vertically elongated. A giant morel with irregularly arranged pits occurs in 
the same habitats as M. esculenta, but usually a little later. This is M. crassipes (or 
M. esculenta var. crassipes). It measures 6-20 or more cm high and usually has a massive 
stalk with an enlarged, wrinkled and folded or buttressed base (hence its nicknames, 
"Thick-Footed Morel," "Big-Foot," and "Tree Trunk Morel"). It also tends to have 
grayer pits when young with paler or even whitish ridges, but like M. esculenta, becomes 
tan in age. Many morel connoisseurs in eastern North America prize it above all others. 
In the West, unfortunately, it is relatively rare. I have found it under cottonwood in 
Oregon, among forget-me-nots in an old orchard in California (see photo above), and 
in landscaped areas. 
788 
MORCHELLA 
789 
M orchella del;c;osa 
(White Morel) 
Color Plate 201 
CAP 1.5 cm high, 1-3.5 cm broad, round to oval or conical, the margin attached to the 
stalk but sometimes creased at its juncture Pits usually vertically elongated and quite 
large at maturity, but not necessarily arranged in rows; dark gray to dark brown to grayish- 
tan, brown, or tan (usually darker when young and paler in age). Ridges usually widely 
spaced and mostly vertical (the horizontal ones often few or not as prominent), white 
to creamy (lighter than pits) when young, usually becoming tan or same color as pits 
in age but not blackening unless shrivelled up. Interior hollow, the surface pallid or 
whitish, roughened. Flesh rather thin. ST ALK 1.5 cm long, 0.5-2 (3.5) cm thick, equal or 
thicker below, the base often somewhat wrinkled, pitted, or irregular; white to creamy or 
buff, usually scurfy or minutely warted; typically hollow in cross-section. SPORES 
18-25 )( 10-15 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in gardens and other suburban habitats, under fruit 
trees, in old orchards, in woods and at their edges; etc.; widely distributed, fruiting mainly 
in the spring. In eastern North America its appearance marks the beginning of the end of 
the morel season. In coastal California it is not uncommon in the spring, especially in 
sandy soil, but occurs practically year-round. One couple I know gets a small crop under 
their plum tree every Christmas! Another "white morel" occurs in the Sierra Nevada and 
Cascades (see comments). 
EDIBILITY: Delectably delicious, as the species epithet implies. Like all morels, it 
should be cooked (see comments on pp. 785-786 for more details). 
COMMENTS: As already pointed out, morels are perplexingly polymorphic and resist 
our obtrusive attempts to categorize them. The name M. deliciosa has been applieq to 
more than one kind of morel, and the above description has been broadened to include a 
number of confusing and intergrading, small to medium-sized morels with white or pallid 
ridges al/easl when young and pits which are usually large and often vertically elongated. 
In age the pits and ridges often become the same color(yellowish-tan to brown) as shown 
in the color plate, but the shape and size of the pits helps distinguish it from M. escu/enla. 
The name M. conica has also been used for this species, but is more properly applied to 
morels with blackening ridges (see the M. e/ala group). Other species: Another "white 
morel" occurs in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades about the same time as the black morels. 
It has a whitish to buff cap that does not darken appreciably in age. The pits are usually 
elongated vertically but the ridges often form vertical lines as in the black morels. I do 
not know the identity of this morel, but I do know that it is delicious! 
The coastal Californian form of Morche//a de/iciosa (or what I have identified as that species). Note 
how the ridges are whitish when very young but become colored like the pits in age. Also note how 
large and elongated the pits are, and how the ridges on dried-up specimen at left have darkened. Two 
mature specimens are shown in the color plate. 
.. 
, 
" 
, t11 ,"' 
i 
\. 
" ," 
.i ,1 
..'.f , 
" , 
r 
, 
.... 
". , 
.." 
,,;w,. -" 
"- 
., 
.. , 
.. 
1It 
, 
., 
Black morels (Morchella elala group). This narrow-headed variety has also been called M. angusl;- 
ceps and M. con;ca( see comments on p. 791). Note the conical head and strong vertical orientation of 
the ridges. They were found in a mountain meadow-a favorite haunt ofthe narrow-headed variety. 
M orchella elata group 
(Black Morel) 
Color Plates 199,202 
CAP 2-6 (10) cm or more broad and 2-10 (18) cm or more high; usually conical to oval or 
somewhat irregular in shape; margin joined to the stalk but often with a crease at its point 
of attachment; overall color usually quite dark, especially in age. Pits usually vertically 
elongated and/ or arranged in vertical rows, but in some forms meandering (see com- 
ments); yellow-brown to brown, grayish, olive-brown, or even reddish-brown, sometimes 
becoming blackish in age. Ridges vertically aligned in some forms, colored like the pits 
at first, usually darker (olive-brown to smoky-brown to black) before or by maturity 
(and sometimes dark from the beginning). Interior hollow, the surface pallid or 
whitish or tinged cap color, roughened. Flesh fragile in some forms. STALK 1.5-10 (20) 
cm or more long, (0.5) 1-4 cm or more thick, slender in some forms, as thick as the cap in 
others (often proportionately longer and thicker in age); equal or enlarged at either end, 
often grooved and/ or wrinkled, especially toward base; sometimes nearly smooth, more 
often entirely or partially scurfy from a coating of small granules or warts; white to creamy, 
buff, pinkish-tan, or sometimes with a reddish tinge; typically hollow in cross-section. 
SPORES (18»( 20-25 (30»( 11-15 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups, clusters, or troops on ground in woods and 
at their edges (especially under conifers and aspen) and in burned areas, less commonly 
in urban and suburban settings; very widely distributed (Japan to the Himalayas, Europe, 
etc.), but especially common in northern and western North America. Like other morels, 
its season is the spring( or early summer at higher altitudes), but" freak" fruitingscan occur 
in the fall, particularly if a warm wet spell follows cold weather. In coastal California, 
where the seasons are not strongly defined. black morels occur year-round. but seldom in 
quantity. In colder regions they are often abundant, usually two to five weeks after the 
snow melts. Look for them in the Sierra Nevada when the snow plants (bright red sapro- 
phytic plants) have fully emerged, and in the Cascades when the calypso orchids are in 
bloom (see Color Plate 199). Don't expect to find them everywhere, however. For one 
thing, you face fierce competition from other collectors; for another, ttrey are devilishly 
difficult to see, because they look just like fallen pine or fir cones (see Color Plate 202). 
Also, they show a definite preference for semi-disturbed areas, e.g., campgrounds, along 
roads, and in logged and burned areas. Bushels can be harvested one to two years after a 
forest fire, providing the spring weather is favorable. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delectable (see comments on pp. 785-786). However, some 
people are apparently "allergic" to it. Like all morels, it should never be eaten raw. 
. . I 
, 
.. f 
1 . 
r 
L; 
Black morels (Morchella e/ata group). Left: This fat-headed specimen has the radially-arranged pits 
of the narrow-headed variety (see comments below). Right: Typical examples of the fat-headed form. 
COMMENTS: The above description covers a number of black morels (the so-called 
"M. elata-M. angusticeps-M. conica" complex). Many of the morels in this category 
are black or at least dark in age, but some are brown, reddish, or pinkish-tinged and/ or 
have pits that are usually more or less radially arranged (that is, arranged in rows). 
Others are quite dark and may have pits that are not arranged in obvious rows. Excluded 
are those morels with a "half-free" cap (see M. semilibera), brown or tan to yellowish- 
capped morels with irregularly arranged pits (see M. eseulenta), and morels with 
dark pits and pale ridges when young (see M. deliciosa). There are at least two common 
kinds of black morels in North America. The first variety, sometimes called the "Fat- 
Headed Black Morel," is probably the "true" M. elata. though it has gone under the name 
M. angustieeps and has also been called M. eoniea. It has a roundish to oval or conical 
"head" that is relatively large in comparison to the stalk, pits which are often elongated 
but not necessarily radially arranged, and ridges that are gray to black before maturity 
(and are often dark while very young). This variety is shown above and in the color plates. 
The second variety, sometimes called the "Narrow-Headed Black Morel," is shown in 
the photo on p. 790. Its cap is often more conical or elongated and often spongier or 
more fragile than the first variety. Its pits are usually arranged in rowsand its ridges usually 
blacken, but not as quickly or as consistently as the fat-headed variety. Its stalk is often 
long and relatively thick (often as thick as the base of the cap), and is typically more 
furrowed or wrinkled toward the base than the fat-headed variety, and also wartier or 
scurfier. According to "morelizers," this second variety, if distinct from the first, is 
probably the "true" M. angustieeps, but it has also been called M. eoniea. A giant form of 
this variety is shown on the back cover of the book. 
These two black morels grow in the same regions, but the fat-headed one seems to be 
the commoner of the two. Sometimes they seem distinct, at other times they intergrade or 
"hybridize." A third variety, often called the "Red Morel," is shown on p. 31.lt resembles 
the previous two (especially the narrow-headed one), but a distinct reddish or pinkish 
tinge pervades its stalk and/ or cap. This variety, which may simply be a growth form, 
has a particularly fine flavor. Still another variety has a whitish to buff cap. It may be an 
albino form, or a separate species entirely (see comments under M. deliciosa). Whew! 
M orchella semilibera 
(Half-Free Morel) 
CAP 1.5-5 cm high and broad, bluntly conical to round or oval when young, usually conical 
in age; margin (lower edge) free from stalk for about one half( 1/3-2/3) the distance to the 
apex of the cap, often flared outward away from the stalk in age. Pits large and elongated, 
yellowish-brown to brown or grayish-brown. Ridges vertically oriented (with few if 
791 
 
- I 
c 
Left: In most species of Morche//a the cap is completely intergrown with the stalk, as shown in this 
sliced M. crassipes. Right: In Morche//a semi/ibera. however, the lower part of the cap hangs free 
from the stalk. These are mature specimens. 
any transverse ribs), yellowish-brown to brown or olive-brown (usually slightly darker 
than the pits), often becoming blackish in old age or as they dry out. Underside (interior) 
whitish or pallid, roughened. Flesh rather thin and fragile. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-2.5 
cm thick at apex, equal or thicker below in age, fragile, white to yellowish; surface usually 
noticeably rough or with scurfy granules that may form ribs (as in Verpa); usually hollow 
in cross-section. SPORES 22-34 x 15-21 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods and under trees (mainly hard- 
woods); widely distributed, fruiting in the spring. In our area it occurs in sandy soil along 
streams with cottonwood and alder, but is not as common as Verpa bohemica, which 
favors the same habitats. Farther north (e.g., in Idaho) it is more frequent. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but more fragile and not quite as flavorful as other Morchellas. 
COMMENTS: Also known as M. hybrida and Mitrophora semi/ibera, this is a dis- 
tinctive species because of its "half-free" cap that is intermediate between Verpa bohemica 
(whose cap is attached to the stalk only at its apex) and other Morchellas (whose cap is 
completely intergrown with the stalk). It is also intermediate in its fruiting behavior, for 
it typically appears shortly after the Verpas and shortly before the other Morchellas. 
The stalk may be quite short when young and the "head" relatively large, but in age the 
"head" shrinks and the stalk lengthens considerably, giving it the aspect of a Verpa. 
M orche//a semi/ibera. prime specimens. Note "half-free" cap and roughened stalk. Compare the cap 
to the completely free, thimble-like caps of the Verpas (pp. 793-795). 
\ 
MORCHELLA 
793 
The roughened stalk surface is, in the words of mycologist Orson K. Miller, "the texture 
of a cow's tongue:' Typical M. semilibera is unlikely to be confused with other morels, 
but it sometimes intergrades with the black morel (M. e/ata group). 
VERP A (Thimble Morels) 
Medium-sized to fairly large terrestrial fungi. FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP bel/- 
shaped to conical and thimble-like. i.e..free from the stalk except at the very top' surface smooth 
to deeply wrinkled or sometimes pilled. Flesh rather fragile and thin. STALK well-developed, 
smooth or roughened by granules but not fluted; usual/y stuffed with a pith. SPORES elliptical, 
smooth, without large oil droplets. Asci lining outer surface of cap; asci 8-spored or 2-spored, 
operculate, not amyloid. 
A V ERP A looks like a thimble stuck on a finger, i.e., its smooth to wrinkled or pitted cap 
is attached only to the very top of the stalk so that its sides hang free like a skirt. The true 
morels (M orchella), in contrast, featured a pitted cap that is entirely or partially inter- 
grown with the stalk, while the false morels and elfin saddles (Gyromitra and He/vella) 
have lobed, brainlike, or saddle-shaped caps. 
Verpas are edible, but are more fragile than the true morels and not as flavorful. At 
least one species, V. bohemica, is poisonous to some people, so it is advisable toeat Verpas 
sparingly if at all. You can find them in woods and under trees and shrubs, particularly in 
well-drained soil along rivers and creeks. They are most abundant in the spring about a 
week to a month before the true morels (they are sometimes called "early morels"), but in 
coastal California they also occur in the winter. Two farflung species are depicted here. 
Key to Verpa 
I. Upper portion of cap intergrown with stalk; cap pitted ... (see Morchella semilibera, p. 792) 
I. Not as above; cap free from stalk except at very top (like a thimble on a finger) .......... 2 
2. Cap strongly wrinkled, the wrinkles usually oriented vertically and sometimes branched to 
form pits; asci 2-spored ........................................ Y. bohemica, below 
2. Cap smooth or at times irregularly wrinkled; asci 8-spored ........................... 3 
3. Stalk often rather spongy and usually stuffed with a cottony pith (but may be hollow in age); 
spores without oil droplets ........................................ Y. conica, p. 794 
3. Not as above; spores usually with one oil droplet at maturity ......... (seeHelvella, p. 805) 
Verpa bohemica Color Plate 205 
(Early Morel; Wrinkled Thimble Morel) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad and 2-5 cm high (but sometimes much larger-see comments), bluntly 
conical to somewhat bell-shaped. squarish, or irregular, attached to the stalk only at 
the apex, the sides hanging down freely like a skirt; margin often touching(but not joined 
to!) stalk when young, sometimes flaring or upturned in old age. Fertile surface pale 
to dark yellow-brown or tan, often becoming darker brown in age; deeply wrinkled by 
branching folds or ribs which are often vertically oriented and sometimes branch to form 
pits. Underside whitish to brownish. Flesh rather thin and fragile. ST ALK 6-15 cm long, 
0.8-3 thick (or sometimes much larger), equal or tapered slightly in either direction; 
whitish to creamy or becoming tan or ochre in age, smooth or often roughened by small, 
orangish to brownish granules which may form transverse belts or "ribs"; more or less 
round in cross-section, usually stuffed loosely with a cottony white pith. SPORES huge: 
54-80 x 15-18 microns, elliptical-elongated, smooth, without oil droplets. Asci 2-spored. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to gregarious in woods, thickets, and forest edges, etc., 
especially in sandy or well-drained soil in stream valleys and ravines; usually fruiting in 
the early spring, widely distributed. It typically appears one to three weeks before the true 
, 
Verpa bohemica. Note how the cap is strongly wrinkled vertically, and may even be pitted (as shown 
in old specimen at center). Note also how cap is attached only to very apex of stalk, and how the stalk 
is stuffed with a cottony white pith, at least when young. 
morels (Morchella species), sometimes in the same places. It is abundant in parts ofthe 
Pacific Northwest. In our area I have seen large fruitings under cottonwood and alder. 
EDIBILITY: Edible with caution. Although eaten by many people, it can cause severe 
stomach cramps and loss of muscular coordination, particularly when consumed in large 
amounts or on several successive days. The flavor is strong but not on a par with the true 
morels. A/ways cook it, and beware: some of the "morels" sold in markets are Verpas! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Ptychoverpa bohemica because of its two-spored asci, 
the early morel is easily told by its conspicuously wrinkled or pitted, thimble-like cap and 
smooth to roughened but not fluted stem. The cap is not as lobed as that of Gyromilra and 
He/vella. and the sides ofthe cap are not intergrown with the stalk as in Morchella. Med- 
ium-sized specimens are the norm, but as in some of true morels, a giant form also occurs. 
Typical V. bohemica is most likely to be confused with Morchella semilibera. whose cap 
is "half-free" (intergrown with the stalk over its upper portion), and with V. conica. which 
has a smoother or more irregularly wrinkled cap and 8-spored asci. When in doubt, you 
can quickly resolve the issue by examining the spores. Those of V. bohemica are the 
largest of any stalked Discomycete! 
Verpa conica (Thimble Morel; Bell Morel) 
CAP 1-4 cm broad and high, usually more or less thimble-shaped (broadly conical to bell- 
shaped), but sometimes lobed (see comments) and sometimes developing a depression at 
the top in age; attached to stalk only at its apex, the sides free like a skirt; margin inrolled 
or incurved at first and sometimes touching the stalk (but not joined to it!), often lobed, 
often flaring out Or turning up in old age. Surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, or in one 
form irregularly wrinkled (see comments), ochre-brown to brown or dark brown. Under- 
side pallid. Flesh thin and rather brittle Or fragile. STALK (2.5) 4-12 cm long, (0.4) 0.5-1.5 
cm thick, equal or tapered upward (or occasionally downward), white to yellowish, tan, 
or tinged ochre-orange; smooth or with granular or minutely scaly transverse bands or 
ribs (granules often browner or oranger than background); often rather spongy and 
usually stuffed with a loose cottony pith (but often becoming hollow in age); more or less 
round in cross-section. SPORES (20) 22-30 (34) x 12-17 (19) microns, elliptical, smooth, 
without oil droplets. Asci 8-spored. 
794 
.... 
..... 
. 
,,; 
t 
. 
II '.. 
\ 
Verpa conica, typical specimens. Cap is relatively smooth and thimble-like, i.e., it is attached only to 
the apex ofthe stalk and it pops off easily. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, widely scattered, or gregarious in soil or humus in forests, riparian 
woodlands, under shrubbery and fruit trees, etc., usually in the spring; widely distributed 
but not particularly common. In our area I have found it as early as February and as late 
as May, but it usually peaks a week or two after V. bohemica. I have seen fairly large 
fruitings under redwood, oak, and cottonwood; in southern California it sometimes fruits 
in great quantity under chaparral shrubs. I have also seen it in Yosemite. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when cooked, but rather fragile and not often occurring in enough 
quantity to warrant collecting. 
COMMENTS: The thimble-like cap with a free margin is the principal field mark of this 
farflung fungus. A rather strongly wrinkled, irregularly lobed form sometimes occurs, 
however (see photo below). The shape of the typical form is somewhat reminiscent of a 
stinkhorn, but it lacks a volva and its cap is never coated with putrid spore slime. Since 
the cap is attached to the stalk only at the very top, it pops off easily, and the entire mush- 
room is rather fragile. The strongly wrinkled form does not have the vertical ridges 
characteristic of V. bohemica, and is actually reminiscent of a small Gyromitra. The 
spongy stalk with a cottony pith inside plus the free cap margin that is inrolled when young 
are sufficient to distinguish it. Morchella semilibera is also somewhat similar, but has a 
pitted cap that is artially intergrown with the stalk. 
Verpa conica, a gyrose (lobed and wrinkled) form (see comments above). The cap is reminiscent of a 
small Gyromitra, but is attached only to the apex of the stalk and has a strongly inrolled margin at first. 
Note how stalk is stuffed with a cottony pith. This form is quite different from the typical form shown 
at top of this page, but is microscopically identical. 
( 
" 
796 
MORCHELLACEAE 
DISCIOTIS 
THIS genus includes one farflung species, described below, with a brown, more or less 
cuplike fruiting body. Consequently, it is keyed out under the cup fungi. Microscopic 
features, however, relate it to the morels. 
Disciotis venosa (Veined Brown Cup Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY (3) 5-20 cm broad, at first more or less cup-shaped, but usually 
flattening out in age. Fertile (u pper or inner) surface reddish-brown to brown, dark brown, 
or at times ochre-brown, sometimes smooth when young but usually becoming radially 
wrinkled or veined to reticulate, corrugated, or pebbled by maturity {at least toward the 
center); margin often wavy and/ or splitting. Exterior scurfy, roughened, or minutely 
warty, whitish to buff or tinged brown, often fluted or wrinkled at base (i.e., appearing 
"gathered") to form a short stalk. Flesh fairly thick and brittle. STALK when present 
short, thick, usually buried. SPORES 19-25 (30»( 12-15 (17) microns, elliptical, smooth, 
without large oil droplets; asci lining upper surface of fruiting body, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in damp soil or humus under or near 
trees or occasionally in the open; widely distributed, fruiting mainly in the spring. I usually 
find it on well-drained soil in riparian woodlands (cottonwood, willow, etc.), but in my 
experience it is not very common. 
EDIBILITY: Edible, but not recommended. Although the flavor is said to be like that of 
morels, people without a microscope can easily confuse it with other brown cup fungi 
(Peziza. Discina. etc.) which mayor may not be edible. One source lists it as poisonous 
unless cooked. 
COMMENTS: Until it is seen several times, this prominent brown cup fungus can be dif- 
ficult to identify in the field. It is often quite large and conspicuously veined or reticulate, 
but several other brown cup fungi can mimic it. Microscopically it is quite distinct, how- 
ever, for the smooth, elliptical spores lack oil droplets and the asci do not blue in iodine. 
It used to be called Peziza venosa, but because of these microscopic differences it has 
been rewarded with its own genus and placed in the morel family. 
False Morels and Elfin Saddles 
tJ , : 
HELVELLACEAE 
MOST of the fungi in this family have a well-developed cap and stalk, but a few are cup- 
like or disclike. In some species of He/vella (the largest genus in the family), the cap is 
concave (cup-shaped), with the hymenium (fertile tissue) lining the upper or inner surface 
of the cup. In other Helvellas the cup turns inside-out as it matures and becomes lobed 
or saddle-shaped, while in still others it is saddle-shaped or irregularly lobed from the 
beginning. In Gyromitra the cap is often brainlike, but not deeply pitted as in the morels. 
Microscopic features that unite the family include the non-amyloid asci and smooth to 
roughened spores that typically contain one to three large oil droplets. 
Several species of Gyromitra contain a deadly poisonous rocket fuel called MMH 
(see p. 893). Although these species are usually harmless when cooked or dried, it is safer 
to avoid them and to treat all members of the family with extreme caution (i.e., a/ways 
cook them, don't eat large amounts, and be certain of your identification). 
HELVELLACEAE 
797 
Key to the Helvellaceae 
I. Fruiting body flattened and spreading {often undulating}, attached to substrate by numerous 
"roots" {rhizomes}; stalk absent; fertile {upper} surface dark reddish-brown to brown or even 
blackish, the margin often paler; growing under conifers, especially in recently burned areas; 
widespread but not very common ...................... Rh;z;na undulata (=R. ;nflata) 
I. Not as above; fruiting body differently shaped, or if similar then not attached by"roots" .. 2 
2. Fruiting body shallowly cup-shaped to flattened, disclike, umbilicate, or with a slightly down- 
curved margin; stalk absent, or if present then short and rather thick; fertile {upper} surfact: 
smooth or wrinkled but not brainlike, yellowish to tan, brown, or reddish-brown but not nor- 
mally gray, grayish-brown, or black; underside lacking prominent hairs or ribs {but stalk may 
be ribbed or base of fruiting body may appear "gathered"}; found mainly in spring and early 
summer when or soon after snow melts; spores often apiculate at maturity .. D;scina, below 
2. Not with above features {but may have some of them} ............................... 3 
3. Fruiting body an erect club or column that lacks a distinct cap, up to 12 cm tall; interior of 
fruiting body with large chambers or compartments; exterior white to creamy or brownish, 
usually fluted or furrowed lengthwise; found in eastern North America and Midwest, usually 
under hardwoods; not common ............................ Underwood;a columnar;s 
3. Not as above; fruiting body with a cap {or cup} and stalk .............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4 
4. Fruiting body small {cap up to 3cm broad but usually less than 2 cm};cap usually round or con- 
vex, but sometimes compressed or broadly saddle-shaped, the margin usually tucked in toward 
stalk; usually found in groups or clusters; spores often needle-like .. {see Helotiales, p. 865} 
4. Not with above features; usually larger or differently shaped; spores not needle-like ...... 5 
5. Stalk very thin {less than 3 mm}; cap hollow and bladderlike, whitish to yellowish; found in eas- 
tern North America, usually clustered; spores borne on basidia (see Aphyllophorales, p. 548) 
5. Not as above; spores borne on asci; widespread .................................... 6 
6. Cap {or ,. cup"} gray to black or white ............................................. 9 
6. Cap {or "cup"} some shade of brown or tan ........................................ 7 
7. Cap brainlike to irregularly convoluted or wrinkled {at least at maturity}, or if saddle-shaped 
then spores with two oil droplets .................................. Gyrom;tra, p. 799 
7. Cap saddle-shaped, lobed, cup-shaped, plane, etc., but the surface only slightly wrinkled if at 
all; spores typically with one oil droplet .......................................... 8 
8. S talk arising from a s wo lIen tuber like s truct ure {scleroti urn }; cap cu p-sha ped to disclike; f rui ting 
body small ................................................ (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
8. Not as above; stalk not normally arising from a sclerotium ........................... 9 
9. Fruiting body minute; cap usually cup-shaped or disclike and less than 1.5 cm broad; stalk very 
thin {usually 1-2 mm thick}; growing mostly on plant tissues {living or dead}; asci not operculate 
{i.e., without "lids"} ......................................... {see Helotiales, p. 865} 
9. Not as above; fruiting body small to fairly large, not minute; cap variously shaped {including 
cuplike or disclike}; growing in soil, humus, or rotten wood; asci operculate Helvella, p. 805 
DISCIN A (Pig's Ears) 
Medium-sized fungi found on ground or rotten wood, usually in the spring soon after the snow 
melts. FRUITING BODY shallowly cup-shaped to disc-shaped (flat). umbilicate. or slightly 
convex, with or without a short stalk. Fertile (upper) surface yellowish to tan or brown (or less 
commonly reddish-brown), smooth to somewhat wrinkled; underside not normally ribbed. 
ST ALK when present short and thick, usually ribbed or appearing"gathered." SPORES elliptical 
to spindle-shaped, smooth to roughened or reticulate, the ends typically pointed or with short 
projections (apiculate). Asci lining upper surface of fruiting body, typically 8-spored, operculate, 
not amyloid. 
THESE are springtime cup- or disc-shaped fungi with a yellowish to brown fertile sur- 
face and a thick, short stalk or none at all. As such they are likely to be mistaken for cup 
fungi (and are keyed out under that group), but microscopic features such as the non- 
amyloid asci and ?piculate spores relate them closely to Gyromilra of the Helvellaceae. 
.1,- ... 
"' 
. 
Discina per/ala. This common "snowbank" mushroom looks like a cup fungus, but usually has a 
short stalk and is often umbilicate (i.e., with a "navel," as shown here). The fertile surface can be 
smooth or quite wrinkled. Microscopic features relate it to Gyromilra. 
Pig's ears (a common name also applied to Gomphus clavalus, a member of the chan- 
terelle family) are a common feature of our western springtime or "snowbank" mushroom 
flora. They are said to be edible, but because of their close relationship to the poisonous 
Gyromitras, it is best to eat them in moderation (if at all) and always cook them. The dozen 
or so species of Discina are distinguished primarily on microscopic features such as the 
shape and ornamentation of the spores. As only one is described here, a key hardly seems 
necessary. 
Discina per/ala (Pig's Ears) 
FRUITING BODY (2)3-10 (20) cm broad, at first cup-shaped but soon becoming saucer- 
like, then wavy or flattened (disclike) to very broadly convex (with the margin turned 
down) or umbonate, or umbilicate (with a central depression); outline round to irregular 
or somewhat angular in old age. Fertile (inner or upper) surface some shade of brown: 
tan to yellow-brown to brown, cinnamon-brown, or dark brown( usually paler or yellower 
when growing in or near snow); usually wrinkled, veined, or convoluted, especially toward 
the center, but sometimes smooth. Exterior (underside) more or less smooth, paler or 
whitish or somewhat translucent when moist. Flesh rather thick but brittle. ST ALK some- 
times absent but more often present as a short ( up to I cm long), thick (I -3 cm), narrowed 
base; white or tinged tan to brown, usually appearing "gathered" (i.e., with broad ribs 
and/ or pits). SPORES 25-35 )( (8) 11-16 microns, spindle-shaped with an apiculus(knob 
or short projection) at each end, smooth or becoming minutely roughened at maturity, 
with one large central oil droplet and two or more smaller ones at the ends. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground or around old stumps or occa- 
sionally on rotten wood in forests; widely distributed and common, fruiting mainly in the 
spring or early summer under conifers. It is one oft he characteristic "snowbank" fungi of 
western mountains and often occurs with Gyromitra gigas, G. esculenta, and morels. 
Sometimes it begins developing while still under the snow! 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. Some people eat it, but care must be taken to cook it 
thoroughly and identify it correctly. 
DISCINA 
799 
COMMENTS: This common springtime fungus is best told by its saucerlike to flattened, 
umbilicate, or slightly downturned, yellowish to brown fruiting body that frequently has 
a short, thick stalk. Like many of the larger Discomycetes, it develops quite slowly, and 
since spores are not produced until the fruiting body is fully grown, "sterile" specimens are 
often encountered. D. ancilis is apparently a synonym. There are several similar species of 
Discina that are best differentiated microscopically. These include: D. apiculatula andD. 
macrospora (the latter often with a reddish-brown fruiting body when mature); D. 
olympiana, a smaller species found in the Pacific Northwest; and D. leucoxantha, a yel- 
lowish, sometimes stalkless, truncate-spored species found under both hardwoods and 
conifers, particularly in eastern North America. Also very similar is Gyromitra mela- 
leucoides (=Peziza melaleucoides, Paxina recurvum), with a somewhat waxy-looking 
underside when moist, a sometimes slightly longer and narrower stalk, and much shorter 
(10-14 microns), non-apiculate spores. See also Disciotis venosa and Peziza species. 
GYROMITRA (False Morels) 
Medium-sized to large fungi found on ground or rotten wood. FRUITING BODY with a cap and 
stalk. CAP usually contorted. lobed. wrinkled or brainlike(but sometimessaddle-shaped);margin 
free from stalk or attached. Fertile surface some shade ofbrown. Flesh often rather brittle. ST ALK 
smooth or ribbed, simple (round) or complex (folded or chambered) in cross-section. SPORES 
typicalIy elIiptical or elongated, smooth or roughened, usually with two oil droplets. Asci lining 
outer surface of cap; typically 8-spored. operculate, non-amyloid. 
THIS is a small but prominent and infamous genus whose grotesque fruiting bodies have 
inspired a number of fanciful nicknames: brain mushrooms, elephant ears, lorchels, beef- 
steak morels, and of course, false morels. Despite the latter name, Gyromitras are unlikely 
to be mistaken for morels(M orchella and Verpa) because their cap is neither deeply pitted 
nor conical or thimble-like. They are easily confused with Helvellas, however, and several 
species have been shuffled back and forth between Gyromitra and He/vella because of 
their "in-betweenness:' As currently defined, forms with a brown brainlike cap belong 
to Gyromitra, while those with a differently colored and/ or saddle-shaped cap (with 
the exception of G. infu/a and its look-alikes) are placed in He/vella. 
Gyromitras are particularly common under northern and mountain conifers in the 
spring, often at the same time as morels. G. infu/a, however, fruits in the summer and fall 
(or the winter in coastal California). Several species, notably G. esculent a, G. infula, and 
G. ambigua, are dangerously poisonous( even deadly!) raw, yet are eaten without ill effect 
by many people. This apparent contradiction can be explained by two facts: (1) The toxin, 
MMH (monomethylhydrazine), is extremely volatile, i.e., itis usually removed by cooking 
or drying, and (2) there is a very narrow threshold between the amount ofM M H the human 
body can "safely" absorb and the amount that will cause acute poisoning and even death. 
It seems foolhardy to risk eating the MMH-containing species, yet many people do and 
dried G. escu/enta is sold in many European markets. If you must try them, then 
a/ways either dry them out (then rehydrate and cook them) or parboil them first and 
throw out the water, being sure not to inhale the cooking vapors (which contain MMH), 
then saute them. Never eat them raw and never eat a large amount. MMH, incidentally, 
is also carcinogenic and is used as a rocket fuel. See p. 893 for more details on its effects. 
Gyromitra is a much smaller genus than He/vella, but the fruiting bodies are usually 
larger. Four species are fully described here and several others are discussed. 
Key to Gyromitra 
1. Cap shallowly cup-shaped to flattened, disclike, or with the edges turned down slightly; under- 
side of cap nol ribbed .................... G. melaleucoides (see Discina per/ala, p. 798) 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
800 
HELVELLACEAE 
2. Stalk smooth or indistinctly grooved; cross-section of mid-stalk round to somewhat flattened 
(i.e., with one round hollow or two flattened ones) ................................. 3 
2. Stalk with very distinct vertical ribs and/ or complex (i.e.. folded, chambered, or convoluted 
in cross-section-but make the cross-section above the base); stalk usually thick ........ 6 
3. Cap usually saddle-shaped or "winged" (with 2-3 lobes), the surface usually wrinkled in central 
portion (directly above stalk), but usually smooth toward edges; lower edge of cap usually free 
from stalk; stalk stout, thick; typically found under hardwoods in eastern North America. 
mostly in the spring. .. . . . ... . . . ..... ... ..... . . .. ... G. brunnea(see G. in/ula. p.802) 
3. Not as above; either more conspicuously brainlike at maturity or found elsewhere or surface 
not wrinkled; stalk often relatively slender; common and widespread ................. 4 
4. Stalk whitish or pale-colored, often rather spongy and usually stuffed with a cottony pith (but 
may be hollow in age); cap joined to stalk only at very top, the margin usually inrolled when 
young; spores without oil droplets ................................ (see Verpa, p. 793) 
4. Not with above features ........................................................ 5 
5. Cap lobed and brain like (intricately folded and wrinkled) at maturity, but surface usually 
smoother when young; found in spring or early summer ............. G. esculenta, p. 80 I 
5. Cap lobed (saddle-shaped, hoodlike, etc.) but not brainlike, the surface smooth or only slightly 
wrinkled, even in age; found mostly in late summer, fall. and winter G. infula & others, p. 802 
6. Stalk with deep, widely-spaced ribs that continue onto underside of cap; cap thin and spreading 
(umbrella-like) or appearing "puffed up"; margin usually free from stalk .............. 7 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
7. Stalk often reddish- or purplish-tinged near base; spores elliptical; found in western North 
America ................................................... G. cali/ornica, p. 804 
7. Not as above; spores round; eastern ........... G. sphaerospora (see G. californica. p. 804) 
8. Cap usually yellow-brown to ochre to tan or occasionally darker brown; stalk massive (nearly 
as thick as cap), often short; entire fruiting body with a chunky, almost cubical stature; found 
in spring and early summer when or soon after the snow melts ... G. gigas & others, below 
8. Not as above; cap usually brown to reddish-brown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 9 
9. Cap brainlike to irregularly wrinkled or even pitted at maturity, not strongly lobed ........ 
. . . . . . .... . . . . .. .. . . . ..... . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. G. caroliniana(see G. esculenta. p.801) 
9. Cap often saddle-shaped or "winged" (with 2-3 large lobes), surface not wrinkled or wrinkled 
mainly at center (in area directly above stalk) .......... G. brunnea (see G. infula, p,802) 
Gyromitra gigas 
(Snow Mushroom; Snowbank False Morel;.Bull Nose; Walnut) 
CAP 3-10 (25) cm broad, 3-6 (15) cm high, brainlike or strongly and deeply convoluted 
and wrinkled, but typically compact (i.e., without strongly projecting lobes); fertile 
surface typically yellow-brown to butterscotch-brown or tan when fresh, but at times 
darker brown or even reddish-brown (especially in age); attached to the stalk at or near 
the margin. Interior chambered; underside (sterile surface) usually whitish. Flesh thin and 
fairly brittle. ST ALK massive (usually as thick or almost as thick as the cap) and usually 
short (sometimes completely hidden by the cap margin!), 2-10 cm long and thick, white or 
whitish, often rather irregular in shape or thicker at base; ribbed or wrinkled and grooved; 
strongly channelled or folded in cross-section. SPORES 24-36 x 10-15 microns, elliptical, 
the ends lacking projections or with only very short, blunt ones, smooth or finely rough- 
ened, typically with one large central oil droplet and smaller ones at the ends. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or rotten wood in coniferous 
forests (occasionally under hardwoods); common throughout the mountains and colder 
parts of western North America in the spring and early summer, typically near melting 
snow or soon after the snow disappears. In our area, where the winters are mild, it seems 
to be absent. However, I have seen enormous fruitings in the Sierra Nevada and Cascades. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and popular. Apparently it can be eaten safely without parboiling 
(e.g., sauteed like a morel), but should never be eaten raw. Some people prefer it to the 
true morels-but be sure you identify it correctly! 
'- 
- 
'\ 
 
..... .. I 
'* 
. 
\ \, 
. 
"'. 
,. 
Gyromilra gigas. This edible ..snowbank" species does not have the bad reputation of other Gyro- 
mitras. Note the chunky. almost cubical stature and thick stalk that is folded or chambered within. 
COMMENTS: The chunky or almost cubical stature (see photo). strongly wrinkled cap. 
and internally folded stalk are the telltale traits of this common ..snowbank" fungus. 
G. montana and Neogyromitra gigas are synonyms. It sometimes grows with the dan- 
gerous G. esculenta, but can be distinguished by its yellower cap color, chunkier stature, 
and complex stalk. G. californica has a ribbed stalk, but usually has a strongly spreading 
(umbrella-like) or puffed-up cap. G. gigas shows considerable variation in size. Specimens 
weighing more than two pounds have been reported, but the normal size range is walnut- 
or softball-sized. G. korfii (called G. fastigiata in some books) is a very similar vernal 
species. It is more numerous in eastern North America than in the West (under both 
hardwoods and conifers) and has spindle-shaped spores with prominent projections at 
both ends. For other complex-stalked species, see G. caro/iniana (under G. esculent a) 
and G. brunnea (under G. infula). 
Gyrom;tra esculenta (False Morel; Brain Mushroom) Color Plate 206 
CAP 3-12 cm high and broad or occasionally larger, sometimes cup-shaped when very 
young but soon becoming lobed or even saddle-shaped and at maturity intricately wrinkled 
and folded (brainlike) but not pitted. Fertile surface nearly smooth when very young but 
becoming more wrinkled as it matures, deep reddish-brown or purplish-brown to bay- 
brown, dark brown, or brown, or in some forms yellowish-brown; typically attached to 
the stalk at several points. Underside usually paler; interior hollow or chambered. Flesh 
rather thin and brittle. STALK 2-10 (15) cm long, 1-2.5 (4) cm thick, white to tan, flesh- 
colored, reddish, or sometimes colored like the cap (but often paler); equal or sometimes 
thicker at either end, smooth or grooved vertically but not ribbed; stuffed or hollow (or 
with two narrow hollows) in cross-section. SPORES 17-28 x (7) 9-13 (16) microns, ellip- 
tical, smooth, usually with two oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered. or in groups under both hardwoods and conifers; fruiting 
in the spring (or early summer in colder climates) and very widely distributed, but espe- 
cially common in northern and montane coniferous forests. It is not very common in our 
area (perhaps the winters aren't cold enough), but is often abundant in the Sierra 
Nevada, Cascades, and other mountain ranges of the West. It is often encountered while 
morel hunting. The fruiting bodies persist for several weeks before decaying. 
801 
, ; 
" 
.. 
l 
Gyromitra esculenta. Note how younger specimens at center have a relatively smooth cap, and older 
(but smaller) one at right is intricately convoluted or brainlike. 
EDIBILITY: Dangerously poisonous, at least raw! Although eaten without ill effect by 
many people, this species has caused numerous deaths in Europe (see p. 799 for more 
details). Far fewer cases of poisoning have been reported from North America, suggesting 
that the American version is safer than the European one, or that certain ecological 
variants are less toxic. However, the paucity of poisonings may also indicate that fewer 
Americans eat it, or that those who do treat it with more caution. I certainly don't think it's 
worth the risk. In the words of mycophagist Charles McIlvaine, who was famous for his 
willingness to eat almost anything: "It is not probable that in our great food-giving country 
anyone will be narrowed to G. escu/enta for a meal. Until such emergency arrives, the 
species would be better left alone." 
COMMENTS: The brown cerebral cap and smooth to slightly grooved stalk plus its 
occurrence in the spring are the hallmarks of this infamous fungus. Despite the moniker 
"false morel," it can scarcely be confused with the true morels, for the brainlike cap is 
never deeply pitted or honeycombed. California specimens are more often reddish-brown 
than yellowish-brown, but regional variation can be expected. The stalk is often slightly 
grooved or compressed, but does not show the intricate folds in cross-section that are 
typical of G. gigas. Other species: G. caro/;n;ana is a springtime species that favors low 
hardwood forests in eastern North America, but has also been reported from scattered 
localities in the West. It has a brainlike to irregularly wrinkled or even pitted, brown to 
reddish-brown cap, but has a massive stalk (up to 20 cm thick!) that is deeply furrowed 
and complex (folded) in cross-section. It can attain weights of several pounds each, and is 
said to be edible if prepared properly (parboiled, etc.). Like G. escu/enta. however, it is 
best avoided, particularly if there are morels out and about! 
Gyromitra infuta (Hooded False Morel) 
CAP 3-12 (15) cm broad and high, sometimes cup-shaped when very young but soon 
developing projecting lobes; at maturity with 2-3 (rarely 4) lobes, saddle-shaped to hood- 
shaped to irregularly lobed but not intricately wrinkled or brainlike; fertile surface usually 
reddish-brown to dark brown, but in some forms yellow-brown, smooth to uneven but not 
intricately folded; cap typically attached to stalk at several points, the margin usually 
incurved (toward stalk). Underside (sterile surface) paler, minutely velvety; interior 
hollow or chambered. Flesh rather thin and brittle. STALK 1-8 (12) cm long, 0.8-3 cm 
thick, equal or tapering upward, smooth or minutely velvety, sometimes indistinctly 
grooved but not ribbed; colored like the cap or paler (in some forms whitish); hollow (or 
with two narrow hollows) in cross-section.SPORES(15) 17-23(26)x(6)7-1O(12) microns, 
oblong-elliptical, smooth, typically with two large oil droplets. 
802 
. .f" 
r 
., 
... 
'41; 
Gyromitra infuJa, rather old specimens. Note how stalk darkens with age and how the shape of the 
cap is quite variable but never brainlike. See next page for a distinctly saddle-shaped specimen. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious under both hardwoods and conifers, usually on rotten 
wood but also on soil, humus, along roads, in burned areas, etc.; widely distributed. In 
most regions it fruits in the late summer and fall-a feature that helps distinguish it from 
G. escu/enta and other vernal species. In coastal California, however, it fruits in the winter 
and early spring and is the most common Gyromilra (especially under oak and pine). 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous! It contains MMH and should never be eaten raw! For more 
details, see comments on p. 799 and p. 893. 
COMMENTS: The saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed cap which is usually reddish-brown 
to dark brown plus the more or less smooth (non-fluted) stem are the distinguishing 
features of this false morel, which is also known asH elvella infula. Its penchant for grow- 
ing on rotten wood is also distinctive, but by no means consistent or definitive. Saddle- 
shaped specimens are apt to be confused with H elve//a, and it is keyed out under that genus. 
The color is quite distinctive, however, and the stalk is thicker than that of most non- 
fluted Helvellas. The surface of the cap can be smooth to uneven or slightly wrinkled, 
but is not pitted as in the true morels nor intricately folded or brainlike as in G. escu/enta. 
Smooth specimens of the latter species can usually be distinguished by their growth in the 
spring soon after the snow melts. Other species: G. ambigua is a "dead ringer" for G. 
in/u/a. Although it sometimes has a slight lilac or purplish tinge to the fruiting body, it 
can only be differentiated with certainty by its spores, whicharelonger(22-33 microns) and 
have blunt projections at both ends. It has a northern distribution, fruits at the same time, 
and is also poisonous. G. brunnea(=G. underwoodiiand now called G.fastigiata, a name 
which has also been applied to G. korfil) is a springtime species found principally under 
hardwoods in eastern North America. It has a pale to dark reddish-brown cap that is 
usually saddle-shaped or "winged" (divided into 2-3 lobes-hence its common name, 
"Elephant Ears"). The cap surface is often wrinkled above the stalk but relatively smooth 
near the margin, and the undersides of the lobes are free from the stalk but often fused to 
Gyromitra infu/a. Note the relatively smooth spore-bearing surface. It can be confused with young 
specimens of G. escu/enta, but fruits at a different time, often on rotten wood. 
-, , 
I 
't, 
. \ ')!I 
.11 "I 
;...;; ...:' ' 
" 
...... .;.. 
\.... 
" 
. 
Left: A dark, saddle-shaped example of Gyromilra infula. Right: Gyromilra californica. Although 
dried out, this specimen shows the widely spaced ribs on the stalk which fan out on underside of cap. 
each other. The stalk is usually white and fairly thick (2-5 cm) and ranges from hollow to 
complex (folded) in cross-section. It has finely warted spores and is edible with caution. 
Gyromitra californica (Umbrella False Morel) 
CAP 4-12 (25) cm broad, convex to umbrella-like or undulating or occasionally broadly 
saddle-shaped (usually strongly spreading and often appearing "puffed-up"); fertile 
surface uneven to somewhat convoluted but not brainlike, tan to brown, olive-brown, or 
light to dark grayish-brown; margin typically free from the stalk and incurved toward it. 
Underside ( sterile surface) whitish or creamy, ribbed, minutely hairy to smooth. Flesh very 
thin and fragile, almost papery when dried. ST ALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 2-5 (6) cm thick, 
equal or narrowed at base, often rather short, deeply and irregularly fluted or with several 
widely spaced ribs that extend onto the underside of the cap, where they fan out and con- 
tinue to or nearly to the margin; white or sometimes aging grayish, buff, or yellowish, the 
base (or sometimes the entire stalk) usually with a pinkish, rosy, vinaceous, or purplish 
tinge; typically not internally chambered in cross-section. SPORES 13-19 x 7 -10 microns, 
elliptical, smooth; ends often apiculate at maturity, with small oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woods and at their edges, along streams, 
or often in somewhat disturbed soil (e.g., along old skid roads); widespread in western 
North America, fruiting mainly in the late spring and summer, but sometimes in the fall 
or even winter. I have not found it in our area, but it occurs in the Sierra Nevada. As the 
species epithet implies, it was originally collected in California, but seems to be more 
common in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains. Alexander Smith says he could 
have collected "several bushel baskets" of it on the Olympic Peninsula one year. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. It is edible according to some reports, poisonous according 
to others. The presence of MMH (see p. 799) would account for this contradiction. 
COMMENTS: Also known as Helvella cali/ornica, this species can be told from other 
Gyromitras by its thin, strongly spreading or umbrella-like cap and distinctly ribbed stalk, 
and from Helvella maculata by its pinkish- or vinaceous-tinged stalk(a fairly reliable but 
not foolproof feature). The cap color is rather variable, but is not typically as yellow as that 
of G. gigas. nor as red as that of G. esculenta. Other species: G. sphaerospora is its eastern 
North American counterpart. It is quite similar but has round spores, and occurs at least 
as far west as Montana. 
804 
805 
HELVELLA (Elfin Saddles) 
S mall to medium-large fungi found on ground or rotten wood. FR U ITIN G BO DY with a cap and 
nearly always a stalk. CAP cuplike to plane. saddle-shaped. or irregularly lobed but not usually 
brainlike; margin usually free from stalk ( except H. lacunosa). Fertile surface white to brown. gray. 
or black. Flesh often rather brittle and thin. STALK usually well-developed ( occasionally practi- 
cally absent), smooth or ribbed or deeply fluted and pitted; simple or complex (folded) in cross- 
section, fragile or tough. SPORES typically elliptical and smooth with one large central oil drop- 
let. Asci lining exterior of saddle or interior of cup, typically 8-spored, operculate, not amyloid. 
HELVELLA is a common, distinctive, and attractive genus with a wide range of shapes 
and sizes. Some species are cuplike (and are more aptly called "elfin cups"); others look 
like miniature saddles (hence the popular name" elfin saddles"); still others are irregularly 
lobed. The cap, however, is not brown and brainlike as in Gyromitra, nor thimble-like as 
in Verpa, nor prominently pitted as in Morchella. 
Helvella( spelled Elvela in some older books) splits nicely into four groups: those species 
with a cuplike cap and a ribbed (or practically absent) stalk (e.g., H. acetabulum); those 
with a more or less saddle-shaped cap and smooth or non-ribbed stalk( e.g., H. compressa); 
those with a cup-shaped cap and smooth, well-developed stalk (e.g., H. macropus); and 
those with a saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed cap and a deeply ridged or fluted stalk 
(e.g., H. lacunosa). Some authorites elevate some of these groups to genus rank (e.g., 
Leptopodia, Cyathipodia. Macropodia. Macroscyphus, Paxina), but their characters 
intergrade to some extent and microscopically they are very similar. 
The cup-shaped Helvellas are apt to be mistaken for cup fungi, but tend to have more 
markedly ribbed and/ or longer stems. The convoluted species, on the other hand, can 
be confused with Gyromitra. but are usually smaller and/ or differently colored. 
Helvellas do not have the sinister reputation of the Gyromitras, but should be treated 
with extreme caution. H. lacunosa is definitely edible, but many of the species have not 
been adequately tested. Others are too small or rare to be of value. If you really must eat 
Helvellas, always cook them thoroughly (in case they contain M M H) or dry them out. 
Helvellas, like other Ascomycetes, are most numerous in the spring, but a few species 
fruit in the summer and fall, and in mild climates such as ours they can be abundant in the 
winter. They grow under trees and shrubs, along streams, and in the woods, or less com- 
monly in the open. Over 30 species have been reported from North America. Most of these 
are keyed out or mentioned in this chapter; eleven are fully described. 
Key to Helvella 
.1. Cap typically concave (cup-shaped) to plane, occasionally becoming convex or saddle-shaped 
in old age (examine several specimens if possible) .................................. 2 
I. Cap typically convex (umbrella-like) to miter-shaped. hoodlike, saddle-shaped, irregularly 
lobed, or brainlike, but sometimes with an upturned orinrolled margin when young that makes 
it appear somewhat cup-shaped (examine several specimens if possible) .............. 14 
2. Fertile (upper or inner) surface of cup black or blackish; stalk and base of cup not whitish . 3 
2. Fertile surface not black, or if so then stalk or base of cup white or significantly paler than fertile 
surface ..................................................................... 5 
3. Stalk and exterior (underside) of cup or cap black or very dark, sometimes with ribs; fertile 
(upper) surface not fading appreciably ........................................... 4 
3. Stalk usually grayish (paler than fresh fertile surface); fertile surface often fading to grayish- 
brown in age ................................... H. villosa(see H. macropus. p.81O) 
4. Stalk well-developed (1-4 cm long, 2-5 (7) mm thick); fertile (upper) surface black or sometimes 
narrowly margined with white; cup fleshy or brittle; spores elliptical, with one large oil droplet; 
found in many habitats but not with melting snow ... H. corium (see H. macropus. p. 810) 
4. Not with above features; stalk merely a narrowed base or if well-developed then fruiting bOdy 
tough or at least not breaking easily and/ or growing in or near melting snow ............. 
. .. . .. ., .... . . ... . . . .. . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .... ... . . . . . . (seeSarcosoma& Allies, p. 826) 
806 HEL VELLACEAE 
5. Stalk well-developed and slender, without prominent ribs, usually less than 6 mm thick (or if 
thicker than fertile surface yellow-brown to olive-brown and underside blackish or fertile 
surface more or less pinkish-brown with a scalloped or lobed margin) ................. 6 
5. Not as above; stalk thicker and stouter than above and/ or with prominent longitudinal ribs 9 
6. Upper stalk and exterior or underside of cup usually hairy or densely scurfy; stalk well-defined, 
usually 1 cm or more long; fertile surface of cup grayish-tan to gray or grayish-brown or dark 
brown; exterior same color or paler (not black) .................................... 7 
6. Not with above features .............................. (see Pezizaceae & Allies, p. 817) 
7. Underside of cup (sterile surface) often whitish, at least toward base; stalk often whitish also; 
rather rare ................................ H. cupu/iform;s(see H. macropus, p.81O) 
7. Not as above; upper stalk and underside of cup usually grayish or colored like fertile surface 
(but base of stalk may be whitish); fairly common ................................. 8 
8. Cap often becoming plane or even convex in age, the margin sometimes splitting to form lobes; 
upper surface quite dark (grayish-brown); spores elliptical H. villosa(see H. macropus, p.810) 
8. Cap usually remaining cup-shaped (not often plane in age); upper or inner surface gray to 
grayish-brown to grayish-tan or paler; spores often elongated H. macro pus & others, p. 810 
9. Cap often spreading or flattened in age and/ or center often wrinkled; fertile (upper) surface 
yellowish to tan or brown (not normally gray or black); stalk usually short; usually found in 
spring shortly after snow melts ................................. (see D;scina, p. 797) 
9. Not with above features ....................................................... 10 
10. Ribs on stalk extending onto underside of cup, often nearly to the margin ............. 11 
10. Ribs on stalk terminating at or near base of cup ................................... 12 
11. Cap gray to grayish-brown. . . . . . . . H. gr;seoa/ba& H. costifera(see H. acetabulum, p. 807) 
11. Cap light to dark brown or occasionally tinged violet .............. H. acetabulum, p. 807 
12. Stalk (1) 3-7 cm or more long, usually well-developed, markedly ribbed; cap shallowly cup- 
shaped with opposite sides rolled up when young, often nearly plane in age H. que/etii, p. 809 
12. Stalk short (usually less than 2.5 cm long) or poorly developed; cup usually deeper or more 
regularly shaped than above .................................................. 13 
13. Interior of cup usually tan to pale brown to yellow-brown; exterior with brown hairs; texture 
rather tough ....................................... (see Pezizaceae & Allies, p. 817) 
13. Not as above ...................................... H. leucomelaena & others, p. 808 
14. Stalk distinctly fluted, ridged, or ribbed longitudinally, often showing folds or chambers in 
cross-section ............................................................... 15 
14. Stalk not as above, but may show a few indistinct grooves, especially near base; stalk simple and 
round to slightly compressed in cross-section .................................... 21 
15. Cap typically spreading, undulating, or appearing puffed-up or umbrella-like, tan to brown or 
grayish-brown, dark brown, or brownish-black (but not truly gray or black); margin of cap 
usually free from stalk; stalk with widely spaced ribs that fan out on underside of cap and often 
extend nearly to margin; stalk at least 1 cm thick (usually 2 cm or more), sometimes pinkish- 
or reddish-stained at base. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . (see Gyrom;tra, p. 799) 
15. Not with above features (but may have some of them); base of stalk not normally reddish- or 
pinkish-stained; cap usually differently shaped or colored or stalk thinner ............ 16 
16. Cap white to buff, creamy, or pale tan ........................ H. cr;spa& others, p. 816 
16. Cap darker (dark tan to brown, gray, or black) or sometimes pale gray or covered with a whitish 
fungal parasite .............................................................. 17 
17. Cap typically gray to black (occasionally dark grayish-brown) ....................... 18 
17. Cap typically some shade oCtan, brown, or grayish-brown .......................... 20 
18. Cap usually convex or umbrella-like; stalk slender, usually lacking external holes or pits .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. phlebophora (see H. lacunosa, p. 815) 
18. Cap usually saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed or brainlike; stalk often with external holes 19 
19. Cap irregularly lobed or brainlike to saddle-shaped, the surface often wrinkled; stalk with 
external pits and/ or chambered in cross-section; very common, especially in western North 
America ..................................................... H. lacunosa, p. 815 
19. Cap usually more or less saddle-shaped, surface not wrinkled; stalk ribbed but usually lacking 
pits; more common in eastern North America than West H. sulcata(see H. lacunosa, p. 815) 
HELVELLA 
807 
20. Cap brown to pale or dark reddish-brown or chocolate-brown; spores finely warted at maturity; 
found mainly under hardwoods in eastern North America ........ (see Gyrom;tra, p. 799) 
20. Cap brown to grayish-brown but not reddish-brown; spores smooth; found in western North 
America ............................................. H. maculata & others, p. 814 
21. Stalk white to creamy or buff (significantly paler than cap unless cap is also pale-colored) 22 
21. Stalk darker (brown, dark gray, or blackish), at least above (may be whitish toward base) 27 
22. Stalk typically 0.8-2.5 cm thick; cap reddish-brown to dark brown or yellow-brown but not 
grayish-brown or black; found on ground or rotten wood; spores with two oil droplets .... 
. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . (see Gyrom;tra, p. 799) 
22. Stalk typically less than I cm thick, or if thicker then cap grayish-brown to blackish but not 
yellow-brown or reddish-brown; spores with one oil droplet; usually on ground ....... 23 
23. Sterile surface (underside of cap) without hairs (use hand lens if unsure!) .............. 24 
23. Sterile surface minutely hairy, at least when fr.esh .................................. 26 
24. Fertile surface of cap not usually very dark (i.e., yellow-brown to tan to brown or sometimes 
grayish-brown or violet-tinged) ................................... H. elast;ca, p. 813 
24. Fertile surface of cap darker than above (grayish-brown to very dark brown to black) ... 25 
25. Cap 3-7 cm broad and stalk 0.5-2 cm thick; margin of cap not significantly upturned when 
young ....................................................... H. leucopus, p. 812 
25. Cap 1-2.5 cm broad and stalk 2-6 mm thick; margin of cap often upturned when very young 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. H. albella(see H. compressa, p. 811) 
26. Cap buff to tan, light brown, or cinnamon-buff ..... H. stevens;; (see H. compressa, p. 811) 
26. Cap typically darker than above, at least when fresh ........ H. compressa & others, p. 811 
27. Cap irregularly lobed, or if saddle-shaped then stalk typically at least 8 mm thick; cap 3-15 cm 
broad, yellow-brown to reddish-brown or dark brown but not gray-brown or black; spores 
typically with two oil droplets ................................ (see Gyrom;tra, p. 799) 
27. Not as above; cap usually rather small, 1.5-4 (5) cm broad, usually more or less saddle-shaped, 
gray-brown to dark brown to black; stalk typically 2-7 mm thick (occasionally thicker) . 28 
28. Underside of cap (sterile surface) minutely hairy, at least when young and fresh. . . . . . . .. 29 
28. Underside of cap hairless (use hand lens if unsure!) ................................ 30 
29. Cap grayish ...................................... H. ephipp;um (see H. atra, p. 813) 
29. Cap dark brown to grayish-brown to blackish. ... . ... .. . H. pez;zo;des (see H. atra, p. 813) 
30. Cap dark sooty-gray to black ......................................... H. atra, p. 813 
30. Cap usually paler (brown to gray but not black) ......... H. subglabra(see H. atra, p. 813) 
Helvella acetabulum (Brown Ribbed Elfin Cup) 
CAP 2-8 cm broad and up to 4 cm deep, cup- or bowl-shaped. Fertile surface (interior) 
light to dark brown ( or in one form tinged violet), smooth; margin even or irregularly split 
in age. Exterior (underside) brown above, paler (white or creamy) at base, conspicuously 
ribbed, the ribs blunt or sharp-edged, branching, usually creamy and typically extending 
at least half way up the cup and often nearly to the margin; smooth or minutely hairy. 
Flesh thin, rather brittle. ST ALK sometimes absent but usually present as a stout, deeply 
ribbed base, 1-5 (9) cm long and 0.5-3 cm thick; equal or thicker below, white or creamy 
(or sometimes brown if very short); convoluted or chambered in cross-section. SPORES 
16-20 x 11-14 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods and at their edges; widspread and 
fairly common. It is usually listed as a spring and early summer species, but in our area it 
fruits in the winter and early spring. I find it once or twice a year, usually under oak. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Pax;na acetabulum, this species looks like a cross 
between a cup fungus and an elfin saddle. (If the cup were inverted, you'd have an elfin 
saddle!) The well-developed ribs that extend far up the underside of the cup help to 
separate it from H. leucomelaena and H. queletii. Other species with ribs extending up the 
." 
J 
:.... 
' . 
, 1 
He/vella acetabulum. Note how prominent whitish ribs on stalk extend onto underside of cup (left), 
and how stalk is complex in cross-section (bottom); upper surface of cup is brown or tan. 
underside of the cup include: H. gr;seoalba, similar in size but with a gray cup; and H. 
costifera, smaller and grayish-brown. 
Helvella leucomelaena (White-Footed Elfin Cup) 
FRUITING BODY cup- or bowl-shaped, with a short stalk or base, (1) 2-5 (7) cm broad 
and high. Fertile surface (interior of cup or"cap") smooth, dark gray to dark brown, dark 
grayish-brown, or blackish, the margin often finely scalloped, lobed, or split, especially 
in age. Exterior colored like the interior above, shading into white or creamy below, 
minutely roughened, not ribbed or only ribbed basally (i.e., appearing "gathered"). Flesh 
thin, rather brittle. ST ALK short and stout to practically absent, 0.5-2 (4) long,0.5-1.5 (3) 
cm thick at apex, with distinct, broad, low, rounded, whitish ribs that terminate at the base 
of the cup; usually white but at times dingy grayish; channelled in cross-section (especially 
the upper portion). SPORES 20-23 (25»( 10-14 microns, elliptical to somewhat oblong, 
smooth, with a single central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered ( occasionally solitary) on ground, 
usually near or under pine and other conifers; widespread, but particularly common in 
western North America. In our area it fruits in the winter and early spring, but is infre- 
quently encountered ( or easily overlooked because of its dark color). Farther north and at 
higher elevations it is quite common in the spring and early summer. In all regions it 
favors bare, grassy, or hard-packed soil along roads and paths. The fruiting bodies begin 
their development underground, and their stalks are often buried until maturity. 
He/vella /eucome/aena. Left: Side view showing the short whitish ribbed stalk. Right: View of dark 
inner surface and finely scalloped margin; note how short stalk is covered by dirt. 
.......... 
"' 
. 
: --< 
,.., '., 
,. , 
'. 
" 
t 
, 
HELVELLA 
809 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
CO MMENTS: Formerly known asPaxina leucomelas, this species is likely to be mistaken 
for a cup fungus. However, the dark "bowl" and whitish, distinctly ribbed stalk plus the 
fairly fragile flesh place it in He/vel/a. The stalk is sometimes so shortas to be non-existent, 
in which case the base ofthe bowl appears "gathered" (folded or ribbed).H. crassitunicata 
and H. solitaria are two very similar western species that differ microscopically. The 
first, however, usually fruits in the late summer and fall and has a northern distribution 
(the Pacific Northwest and Alaska), while the latter has a more distinct stalk and usually 
develops above the ground. None of these species have ribs which extend up the exterior 
of the cup as in H. acetabulum and relatives, nor is their stalk as long as that of H. que/etii, 
nor as slender as that of H. macropus and relatives. 
Helvella queletii (Ribbed Elfin Saucer) 
CAP 2-8 (12) cm broad, usually concave with opposite margins rolled up and in (in- 
curved) at first, becoming shallowly cup- or saucer-shaped to plane or even with a down- 
curved margin in age. Fertile (upper) surface blackish to grayish-brown to brown (often 
darker when young) or in one form pale brown to buffy-brown, smooth; margin often 
splitting in age. Exterior (underside) same color or more often paler or grayer, minutely 
roughened (granulose) to nearly smooth, without ribs. Flesh thin, rather brittle. ST ALK 
(I) 2.5-7 (12) cm long, 0.5-2 (5) cm thick, equal or thicker below, deeply ribbed longi- 
tudinally, the ribs extending only to the base of the cup (cap); white (including the ribs) 
or sometimes tinged buff, tan, or ochre. SPORES (17) 19-22 )( 11-14 microns, elliptical 
to oblong, smooth, with a large central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in forest humus or occasionally on 
rotting wood, usually under hardwoods; widely distributed but not particularly common. 
In most of North America it is a late spring and summer species, but in coastal Cali- 
fornia it fruits, like most Helvellas, in the winter and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: This is a most distinctive species, as the photograph shows. The concave 
to plane, grayish-brown to nearly black fertile surface plus the prominently ribbed or 
fluted stalk are the principal field marks. The stalk is much longer than that of H. /euco- 
melaena and H. solitaria, and the ribs do not extend onto the underside ofthe cup ("cap") 
Helvella queletii. This beautiful species has a well-developed stalk whose ribs do not extend to margin 
of cup. Note how opposite sides of "cup" are inrolled when young (specimen at right). 
t 
 , 
, , 
"\ 
\. 
810 
HELVELLACEAE 
as in H. acetabulum, H. griseoalba, and H. costifera. The peculiar way in which opposite 
sides of the "cup" are often rolled up when young (see photo on previous page) is sug- 
gestive of a young H. compressa, but that species does not have a ribbed stalk. 
Helvella macropus 
(Scurfy Elfin Cup) 
CAP 0.8-3 (6) cm broad, sometimes closed up when young but soon opening to become 
shallowly cup-shaped, rarely becoming plane in old age; margin at first incurved. Fertile 
(upper or inside) surface usually gray to grayish-brown, varying to grayish-tan or grayish- 
olive or grayish-buff, smooth. Exterior( sterile surface) colored like the interior or slightly 
paler or grayer, hairy or minutely fibrillose-scaly or dandruffy. Flesh thin. STALK 1-5 
(7) cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or often thickened at the base, not ribbed but sometimes 
with wrinkles or pits at the base; colored like the exterior of cup above and hairy or scaly- 
dandruffy, usually paler or whitish at the base; round or flattened but not chambered in 
cross-section. SPORES (18) 20-25 x 10-12.5 microns, more or less spindle-shaped. finely 
roughened or smooth, with one large oil droplet and a smaller one at each end. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground or rotten wood under both hard- 
woods and conifers; widely distributed. It is one of the commoner summertime Helvellas 
of eastern North America, but in our area it fruits in the winter and spring and is not 
very numerous (or at least not often collected because it is so inconspicuous). 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too small to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This cute little elfin cup is best told by its overall grayish color and hairy 
or scurfy-scaly sterile surface and stalk. The stalk is not ribbed as in H. leucomelaena or 
H. acetabulum, and the elongated spores are unusual for a Helvella. Both short- and 
relatively long-stemmed varieties are known. H. vil/osa is a very similar and widespread, 
slightly darker species with a slightly less hairy stalk and a shallower cup that usually 
becomes plane or even slightly convex in age (see photo below). I have found it several 
times in our area, also in the winter and spring. H. cupuliJormis is quite similar in shape, 
but has a paler (often whitish) exterior or underside. H. corium is similar in shape but is 
entirely black, and the lower portion of its stalk is often somewhat ribbed. It seems to have 
a circumpolar( northern) distribution and often occurs in sandy soil ordebris.H. pallidula 
of eastern North America is a pale tan to pale grayish-brown, cup-shaped species. None 
of these have the markedly ribbed stalks of H. queletiiand H. acetabulum, and all have the 
elliptical spores typical of most Helvellas, rather than the elongated spores of H. macropus. 
Left: He/vella macropus, a young specimen with hairy-scurfy underside. Center: He/vella macro pus, 
mature specimen with a broader cup. Right: He/vella vil/osa (see comments above) resembles H. 
macropus, but its cap or "cup" is often plane in age, as shown here. 
.. 
. 
""- 
.... 
" 
He/vella compressa. Left: Young specimens in which opposite sides of the cap are rolled up and in, 
making the cap somewhat cuplike and hiding the fertile surface; sterile surface is whitish and minutely 
hairy. Right: A mature saddle-shaped specimen which has faded somewhat (to brown). 
Helvella compressa (Compressed Elfin Saddle) Color Plate 204 
CAP 1.5-5 cm high and broad, saddle-shaped to somewhat irregularly lobed (with 2-3 
lobes) when mature, typically with a well-developed sinus (cleft), but opposite margins 
rolled up and over the fertile surface when young; margin unrolling and often flaring in 
age, free from the stalk. Fertile surface brown to dark brown or grayish-brown, smooth. 
Underside (sterile surface) white or creamy to grayish-white, minutely hairy. Flesh thin, 
rather brittle. ST ALK 3-10 cm long,0.3-1.2 (1.7)cmthick, equal or thicker below, smooth 
or finely downy, not ribbed; white to pale cream-colored; round or somewhat flattened 
in cross-section, but not chambered; base sometimes pitted. SPORES 19-22 (25) x 12-15 
microns, broadly elliptical. smooth, with a large central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods and at their edges, under trees, 
etc.; known only from western North America. In our area it usually fruits in the late 
winter and spring under redwood, oak, and various other trees. It seems to be the most 
common of our non-fluted Helvellas. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
He/vella compressa, mature specimens. Note deep cleft (sinus) in the saddle-shaped cap. These small, 
dark specimens could just as easily be referred to H. a/bella (see comments on next page) 
') 
t  
812 
HELVELLACEAE 
COMMENTS: This attractive elfin saddle is best identified by its combination of brown 
to grayish-brown cap with a finely hairy underside and slender, white, non-ribbed stem. 
The transformation in the shape of the cap as it matures is apt to cause some confusion 
unless intervening stages are found. When young the margin is curled over the fertile 
surface so that the whitish underside is most visible and the cap is almost cuplike( see photo 
at top of p. 811). In age, however, the margin unfurls and the saddle shape is more apparent 
(see other photos on p. 811).H. alhella is a very similarbutsmaller(cap 1-2.5cm broad and 
high, stalk up to 5 cm long and 2-6 mm thick) species with a grayish-brown to blackish cap. 
Some authors describe its underside as hairless while others maintain it is minutely hairy 
when young. If the latter is true then its small size is the principal point of departure from 
H. compressa. A small form meeting this description is not uncommon in California in 
the winter and spring, usually under oak. Another closely related species, H. stevens;; 
(=H. conn;vens) is small to medium-sized but has a paler (tan to yellowish- or cinnamon- 
buff) cap and slightly smaller spores. It has a wide distribution and also occurs in our area. 
Both H. compressa and H. stevensii are distinguished from H. elastica by their upturned 
cap margin when young, deeper and narrower cleft (sinus), and minutely hairy sterile 
surface (see color plate), and from H. atra and relatives by their whitish stalk. 
Helvella leucopus (Elfin Miter) 
CAP 3-7 cm broad and high, often with three or more lobes but sometimes with only two; 
shape variable: miter-shaped or appearing saddle-shaped from three different angles, but 
sometimes irregularly contorted or occasionally suggestive of an elephant head (one 
longer lobe with two "ears"); margin nearly straight when young (not conspicuously 
inrolled), the lower edge of each lobe typically joined to the stalk at one point. Fertile 
surface typically more or less smooth and very dark (dark brown to dark grayish-brown to 
blackish), occasionally mottled with lighter brown areas. Underside (sterile surface) white 
or tinged faintly with the cap color, not minutely hairy. Flesh thin, rather brittle. ST ALK 
4-12 cm long, 0.7-2 cm thick, equal or thicker below, often flattened or compressed but 
not ribbed or deeply fluted; smooth (not hairy), often with hollows or holes at the base; 
white or sometimes developing slight smoky-brown stains in age, often curved (giving it 
the appearance of a bleached rib); hollow in cross-section. SPORES 20-23 )( 14-15 
microns, elliptical or slightly oblong, smooth, with a large central oil droplet. 
He/vella /eucopus. Note dark cap which often has three or more distinct lobes. Stalk is whitish, 
usually hollow, and fairly thick (over 5 mm). 
\ 
() 
" 
, 
HELVELLA 
813 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious on ground under trees, usually in the spring; widely 
distributed. In our area I have found it under cottonwood in the late winter and spring, 
but it grows in other habitats as well. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. The European version is said to be edible, but I can 
find no information on North American material. 
COMMENTS: The above description is based on several dozen specimens that grew in 
sandy soil under a cottonwood near Santa Cruz, California. It agrees perfectly with 
European descriptions of H. monachella, a name now considered synonymous with H. 
leucopus; H. albipes is yet another synonym. No matter what you call it, the dark cap 
contrasts nicely with the white, unribbed stalk, making it a most attractive elfin saddle. 
It is most apt to be confused with H. compressa and H. albella, but is usually larger and 
stouter, with a more irregular, multi-lobed cap whose underside is hairless. 
Helvella elastica (Brown Elfin Saddle) 
CAP 0.54 (6) cm broad and high, typically saddle-shaped or miter-shaped with a broad, 
shallow sinus (cleft) between the lobes, but sometimes convex (with little or no sinus). 
Fertile surface smooth, brown to tan or grayish-tan, the margin straight or somewhat 
incurved toward the stalk; lobes free from the stalk or sometimes partially attached to it 
or to each other. Underside (sterile surface) whitish to buff or pale tan, smooth, not hairy. 
Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK (2) 4-8 (14) cm long, (0.2) 0.4-1.2 cm thick, equal or 
tapered upward, sometimes curved, smooth or indistinctly grooved at the base but not 
fluted or ribbed; white to buff or pale yellowish-buff; round to slightly flattened in cross- 
section, not chambered. SPOR ES 18-22 (24) x 10-14 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth 
or warted, with one central oil droplet. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious in woods or at their edges, particu- 
larly near streams and paths; widely distributed. It occurs in our area in the fall, winter, and 
early spring, but is not as common as H. compressa. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: Many authors (myself included) have applied the name H. elastica indis- 
criminately to a slew of smallish Helvellas with slender white, non-ribbed stems and 
brownish, saddle-shaped caps. However, in the "true" H. elastica the cap is smooth(hair- 
less) on its underside and usually has a broad, shallow cleft and a straight to slightly down- 
curved margin, whereas in species such as H. compressa and H. stevensii the cleft is nar- 
rower and the lobes more upright, the underside is minutely hairy, and the margin is often 
curled up and in (thus hiding the fertile surface) when young. 
Helvella atra (Dark Elfin Saddle) 
CAP 0.7-2 cm high and broad, distinctly saddle-shaped or occasionally 3-10bed when 
mature, with a narrow sinus (cleft); margin free from the stalk or occasionally attached. 
Fertile surface deep sooty-gray to black, smooth. Underside (sterile surface) pale gray to 
blackish, hairless. Flesh thin, fairly brittle. ST ALK 1-3.5 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or 
slightly thicker below, not fluted but occasionally with shallow pits at the base; dark 
sooty-gray to black (often palest at base), round or flattened in cross-section but not 
chambered. SPORES 17.5-20 x 10.5-12.5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, with a 
large central oil droplet. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotten wood under both 
hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed but rare (at least in North America), fruiting 
mainly in the summer and fall. I have found it only once-in New Mexico under pine. It is 
also reported from Alaska, Montana, and Washington. 
8]4 
HELVELLACEAE 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This diminutive elfin saddle is easily recognized by its black, distinctly 
saddle-shaped cap and non-ribbed, blackish stalk. H.lacunosaissimilarincolorbutlarger 
and much more common and it has a fluted and pitted (lacunose) stalk; H. corium (see 
comments under H. macropus) is black but has a cuplike cap. H. alra has several close 
relatives with a dark saddle-shaped cap and dark, non-ribbed stalk, including: H. sub- 
glabra of eastern North America, which has a brownish to gray ( never black) cap, and two 
widespread species with a minutely hairy or downy underside (sterile surface): H. eph;p- 
p;um, which is the same size as H. alra, but grayish; and H. pez;zo;des, which is slightly 
larger and dark brown to grayish-brown or blackish. N one of these are worth eating. 
H elvella maculata (Fluted Brown Elfin Saddle) 
CAP 1.2-6 cm broad and high, saddle-shaped or irregularly lobed at maturity, the margin 
free from the stalk and at first rolled up (thus obscuring the fertile surface), but unfurling 
or flaring out with age and sometimes splitting. Fertile surface brown to grayish-brown 
or buffy-brown, often mottled with darker and lighter shades, smooth or slightly wrinkled. 
Underside (fertile surface) creamy to yellowish, buff, or grayish, minutely hairy, some- 
times with a few ribs extending a little way up from the stalk. Flesh thin, rather brittle. 
ST ALK 2-10 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered above, deeply ribbed and sometimes 
lacunose (pitted), white to pale buff, sometimes with grayish or brownish stains in age; 
convoluted or chambered incross-section. SPORES(18)20-23 x 12-13.5 microns, bluntly 
elliptical or oblong, smooth, with one central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in mixed woods and under conifers; widespread in 
western North America. I've seen large fruitings locally in the winter and early spring, but 
it is not nearly as common as H. lacunosa. In many regions it fruits in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This showy elfin saddle can be identified by its grayish-brown to brown 
mottled cap and deeply ribbed stalk. It is reminiscent of H. crispa and H. lacunosa, but is 
darker than the former and paler than the latter. It might also be confused with Gyromilra 
californica, but is less fragile and lacks the strongly spreading or umbrella-like cap ofthat 
species. H. fusea is said to be quite similar, but has distinct ribs on the underside of the 
cap and lacks a flaring margin. I have not seen it. 
He/vella macu/ata. Cap is brown to grayish-brown but never black. Note deeply fluted stalk. 
 
. . 
. 
 
 
. 
 
',. . 
\.) '\. 
,:',. 
.  
\ 
. 
""t 
..,; 
." 
If: 
. 
f 
,- 
 < 
'. . 
't ' ,:, 
" 
. 
. .:.;....1. 
'1. 
. Ill' 
:. 
f." -\ 
t'" \.. 
'" . \ 
..... ,..... 
;..J: 
J, 
, 
 
, 
- j. 
He/vella /acunosa is our most common elfin saddle. The cap is black or gray and usually lobed or 
wrinkled, while the stalk is white to dark gray, a/ways deeply fluted, and usually lacunose (i.e., 
with visible pits). Note how cross-section of stalk (bottom right) is chambered. In our area this 
species occurs in many habitats but is especially abundant under pine. 
H elvella lacunosa 
(Fluted Black Elfin Saddle) 
CAP 1-10 cm or more broad and high (but a veraging2-5 cm), saddle-shaped or more often 
irregularly lobed or convoluted. Fertile surface smooth or wrinkled, black to grayish- 
black or gray (or rarely whitish); margin typically attached to the stalk at several points 
or intervals, often incurved (toward the stalk) when young. Underside (sterile surface) 
grayish to grayish-brown or black (rarely white), smooth(not hairy), ribbed or unribbed. 
Flesh thin, rather brittle. ST ALK 3-15 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapering up- 
ward, deeply ribbed and typically lacunose( i.e., the ribs branching to form elongated holes 
or pockets); ribs often sharp and double-edged; white to gray or sometimes black (often 
white when young and darker in age), the base often paler; convoluted and chambered in 
cross-section. SPORES (12) 15-21 x (9) 11-14 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round 
to oblong, smooth or slightly roughened at maturity, with one central oil droplet. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods and under trees; very widely dis- 
tributed, but especially common in western North America. In our area it is usually abun- 
dant in the winter and early spring in pine forests or on lawns or roadsides where pines 
have been planted. but it also occurs with oak and Douglas-fir. In other regions it usually 
fruits in the late summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible when cooked and rated highly by some people. It can be sauteed, but 
in my experience is rather chewy and bland. The tough stalks should be cooked separately 
or discarded. It can also be dried and powdered for use as a seasoning. 
COMMENTS: This species is by far the most common of our Helvellas, often appearing 
in large groups or troops after winter rains. When fresh it is virtually unmistakable because 
of its gray to black cap and deeply fluted stem, but it is frequently disfigured by a white, 
moldy-looking parasite (Hypomyces cervinigenus). Such specimens should not be col- 
lected for eating. The cap is not brown as in H. maculata, and pale individuals can be 
told from H. crispa by the partially attached rather than free cap margin. H. mitra is 
an obsolete synonym. There are several similar species, including: H. palustris(=H. phi- 
lonotis) of eastern North America, a very similar but smaller species that favors damp or 
swampy places and has a deeply ribbed but not lacunose stalk; H. sulcata, which has a 
815 
,. 
.. 
"" 
., 
:- 
.".. 
.. 4'  
 
.. 
"- 
 
I 
.... 
t 
.- 
 
. ... 
Left: This fluted black elfin saddle (He/vella /acunosa) shows its lacunose (pitted) stalk to good 
advantage. (Rick Kerrigan) Center: Another example of He/vella /acunosa (others can be seen in 
photo on p. 815). Right: He/vella crispa. a common species in eastern North America, but infrequent 
in California. The pale (white to bufO cap and fluted stalk are its trademarks. 
small, pale gray to black cap that is usually saddle-shaped with a deep, well-defined cleft 
plus a ribbed but not lacunose stalk (it often grows on rotten wood); and H. phfebophora, 
a small, slender, rare species with a more or less convex or umbrella-like cap. All three of 
the latter species have been reported from the Midwest and/ or eastern North America by 
Nancy Weber, and may occur in the West. I can find no information on their edibility. 
H elvella crispa 
(Fluted White Elfin Saddle) 
CAP 1-5 cm broad and high, saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed at maturity; margin 
typically at first rolled up, then unfurling and flaring, typically free from the stalk. Fertile 
surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, white to creamy, buff, pale pinkish-buff, or tinged 
yellowish. Underside (sterile surface) colored like the cap or slightly darker or grayer, 
scurfy or minutely hairy. Flesh thin, rather brittle. ST ALK 3-10 cm long, 0.8-3 cm thick, 
equal or tapering upward, deeply ribbed and often lacunose, white to pinkish-buff or 
colored like the cap, sometimes darkening slightly in age; convoluted or chambered in 
cross-section. SPORES (14) 17-21 (24) x 10-14 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth, 
with a large central oil droplet. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious on ground or very rotten wood under both hardwoods 
and conifers; widely distributed and fairly common (especially in eastern North America), 
but almost totally supplanted in our area by H. lacunosa. I have found it only twice-in 
October and March under redwood and tanoak. In other areas it fruits in summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: To be avoided. Some sources report it as edible, but it should be tried 
cautiously if at all-and only after cooking it thoroughly. 
COMMENTS: The white to buff cap and deeply ribbed or fluted stalk are characteristic 
of this beautiful elfin saddle, which is the type species ofthe genus Helvella. The cap is not 
brown as in H. maculata, nor gray or black as in H. lacunosa. Pallid specimens of the 
latter occasionally occur, but can be distinguished by their partially attached rather than 
free cap margin. Other species: H. factea has a white to creamy or buff cap and a fluted 
stalk, but the underside of its cap is hairless. 
816 
Cup Fungi 
'o 
PEZIZACEAE& Allies 
spores 
IN THES E ubiquitous but inconspicuous fungi the fruiting body is usually concave ( cup- 
shaped) to disclike (flat) or cushion-shaped (very slightly convex) and mayor may not 
have a stalk. In a few species it is ear-shaped, top-shaped, cabbage-like, or irregular. The 
spore-bearing asci line the upper surface ofthe fruiting body or inner surface ofthe cup. 
The spores are shot out of the asci with such terrific force that cu p fungi, like other members 
ofthe Pezizales, will often "smoke" visibly (spew out clouds ofspores) when handled. 
The cup fungi are a vast group embracing five families and nearly one hundred genera 
-or more than twice that number if you count the minute cuplike members ofthe earth 
tongue order (Helotiales). Obviously, they can't be covered thoroughly in a book ofthis 
kind, and no attempt is made to do so. Most cup fungi are difficult to identify anyway 
and are too small to be worth eating. A few, such as the Pezizas, can be quite large, but are 
still unlikely to show up on anyone's list of best edibles. 
Cup fungi occur in a wide range of habitats-on dung and manure, in grass, humus, 
soil, and moss, on wood and foliage, and in recently burned areas. As the characters used 
to delineate the five families (Pezizaceae, Sarcosomataceae, Sarcoscyphaceae, Pyro- 
nemataceae, Ascobolaceae) and numerous genera are almost entirely microscopic, I have 
rather arbitrarily divided the cup fungi into five groups based on color, size, and texture. 
These are keyed below. 
Key to the Pezizaceae & Allies 
l. Fruiting body merely the bowl- or cup-shaped remains of a puffball, usually with traces of spore 
powder inside (or if not, then usually very dry and light as a straw) (see Gasteromycetes, p. 676) 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Fruiting body beginning as a hollow underground ball, then splitting at the top into several 
starlike rays; fertile (inner) surface sometimes grayish or whitish but more often pinkish or 
purplish or lilac; exterior without brown hairs ................... Sarcosphaera, p.825 
2. Not with above features (but may have some ofthem) ............................... 3 
3. Fruiting body an erect hollow club or closed urn that splits lengthwise from the top to form 
several rays; found on or near dead hardwoods .............. Sarcosoma& Allies, p. 826 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Fruiting body an irregular mass of cabbage-like, cauliflower-like, brainlike, or contorted tissue, 
with or without a stalk ........................................................ 5 
4. Not as above; fruiting body cuplike, earlike, disclike, etc. (but sometimes contorted, especially 
if growing in clusters) ......................................................... 6 
5. Stalk present, long (15-30 cm), brown, solid; fertile ..head" brain like, pitted, or cabbage-like, 
usually beige or yellowish-brown; found under hardwoods in eastern North America; rare 
. . . . " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . .. Wynnea sparassoides 
5. Stalk absent or rudimentary; widely distributed but not common ... Peziza& Allies, p. 818 
6. Fruiting bodies consistently slit down one side, usually erect or semi-erect (often standing on 
one end like a rabbit's ear); usually medium-sized, not huge or minute, often clustered or in 
contorted masses, not growing on manure or dung; tips of asci not amyloid . Otidea, p. 831 
6. Not as above; fruiting bodies sometimes slit down one side but not consistently so, and not 
usually growing erect; sometimes growing on dung ................................ 7 
7. Fertile (upper or inner) surface of fruiting body brightly colored (red, orange, yellow, blue, or 
green but not violet) ....................................... A leuria & Allies, p. 833 
7. Fertile surface some shade of brown, black, tan, dingy yellowish, or violet, or sometimes with 
a pinkish or lilac tinge ...................................... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8 
8. Flesh gelatinous to rubbery-gelatinous, or if not then flesh rather tough (not breaking easily) 
and fertile surface dark brown to black .................... S arcosoma & Allies, p. 826 
8. Not as above; flesh fragile or brittle to slightly rubbery, but usually breaking easily ....... 9 
818 PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
9. Stalk usually present and flesh rather tough; either fertile surface more or less pinkish-brown 
with a scalloped or stellate margin or fertile surface yellow-brown to olive-brown and underside 
(sterile surface) blackish ................................. Sarcosoma& Allies, p. 826 
9. Not as above ................................................................ 10 
10. Exterior or underside (sterile surface) of fruiting body clothed with brown or black hairs (the 
hairs sometimes sparse); tips of asci not amyloid ................ Aleur;a & Allies, p. 833 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
II. Fruiting body large to fairly small but not minute, usually (0.5) I-tO cm broad, often flattened 
(disclike) or spreading at maturity; fertile surface yellow-buff to brown to dark brown, or 
violet, or occasionally whitish or tinged pinkish; asci with amyloid tips; usually growing soli- 
tary, scattered, or in small groups (a few species in clusters) ....... Pez;za& Allies, below 
II. Fruiting bod y fairly small to minute, 0.5-2 (3) cm broad, often remaining cup-shaped at maturity; 
fertile surface variously colored but not often dark brown or violet unless very small; sometimes 
growing in large swarms; tips of asci not amyloid ............... A leur;a & Allies, p. 833 
PEZIZA & Allies 
Small 10 fairly large fungi found in a wide variety of habitats. FRU ITING BODY typically cup- 
shaped to f/aliened (disc/ike) at maturity. but in a few cases truffle-like or irregularly contorted. 
Fertile (upper or inner) surface typically some shade of yellow-brown. brown. black. or purple (but 
sometimes paler or tinged pinkish. Exterior (underside) smooth. scurfy, or roughened by warts but 
not usually hairy. Flesh often ralher brilile or at least breaking easily. STALK absent or ifpresent 
usually short and continuous with the cup and not normally ribbed. SPORES elliptical to round. 
smooth or roughened at maturity, with or without oil droplets. Asci lining upper surface of cup or 
disc, typically 8-spored, operculate, with amyloid tips. 
THIS is the largest and most common genus of cup fungi. It is also the most mundane. The 
majority of its species are dull or dark colored. A short stem is sometimes present but more 
often absent. Although most species are cup- or disclike, a few are truffle-like (e.g., P. 
ellipsospora) and one, P. proteana, sometimes produces compound fruiting bodies that 
look like heads of cabbage. 
Identification of Pezizas is difficult even with a microscope. Most species grow in soil, 
humus, or rotten wood, but some have more distinctive milieu. For instance, P. vesicu/osa 
grows on dung, P. vio/acea on burnt ground, and P. domiciliana in bathrooms. cellars. 
rugs, and other domestic settings. 
Little is known about the edibility of Pezizas, and considering how difficult they are to 
identify, the entire group is best avoided. Only a few of the many species are described 
here. Two closely related genera, Plicaria and Pachyella, are also treated. 
Key to Peziza & Allies 
1. Fruiting body flattened or spreading, attached to substrate by numerous "roots" (rhizomes); 
stalk absent; usually under conifers .......................... (see Helvellaceae, p. 796) 
1. Not as above; fruiting body if flattened not attached by numerous ..roots" .............. 2 
2. Growing on dung or manure ............................ P. ves;culosa & others, p. 823 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Fruiting body compound, somewhat reminiscent of a head of cabbage (i.e., composed of many 
spoon-shaped or distorted lobes or "cups"); fertile surface whitish to pinkish, creamy, tan, or 
lilac-tinged; often but not always growing in burned areas ............ P. proteana, p. 824 
3. Not as above (but fruiting bodies can be clustered and somewhat distorted by mutual pressure) 
............................................................................. 4 
4. Growing in charcoal or recently burned areas ...................................... 5 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
5. Fertile (upper) surface violet- or lilac-tinged when fresh ........ P. v;olacea & others, p. 824 
5. Fertile surface creamy to pinkish, tan, yellowish, reddish, brown, or black, occasionally with a 
lilac tinge, but if so then overall color quite pale ................................... 6 
PEZIZA & ALLIES 
819 
9. 
10. 
Fertile surface dark brown to black .............. Plicaria endocarpoides & others, p. 820 
Fertile surface paler than above .................................................. 7 
Fertile surface creamy to pinkish or faintly lilac-tinged; tips of asci amyloid P. proteana, p. 824 
Fertile surface reddish to yellowish to tan to brown, grayish-brown, or sometimes distinctly 
pink; tips of asci not amyloid.................... ... ..... (see A leuria & Allies, p. 833) 
8. Growing in bathrooms, on rugs, in cars, and other domestic situations P. domiciliana, p. 822 
8. Not as above; usually growing outdoors ........................................... 9 
9. Growing underground or under the humus (but sometimes partially exposed); fruiting body 
round, lobed, or saucer-shaped with a permanently inrolled margin; interior hollow or with 
canals or solid and marbled with veins ............. P. sp. (unidentified) & others, p. 824 
Not as above ................................................................ 10 
Fruiting body developing underground with only the mouth at ground level (like a hole in the 
ground); interior brown to dark brown; margin often lobed or scalloped at maturity; growing 
in sand, sandy soil, or sand dunes ........ P. ammophila (see Sarcosphaera crassa. p. 825) 
Not as above ................................................................ I I 
Fruiting body shallowly cup-shaped to umbilicate (with a central depression) to flat or even with 
a downcurved margin; fertile surface usually yellow-brown to tan, but sometimes darker 
brown or reddish-brown; short stalk often present; nearly always found in the spring when or 
soon after the snow melts, especially under mountain conifers; mature spores often apiculate, 
with oil droplets; tips of asci not amyloid ......................... (seeDiscina, p. 797) 
II. Not with abovefeatures (but may have some ofthem) .............................. 12 
12. Fruiting body somew hat ru bbery or ru bbery-gelatinous, almost the entire underside attached to 
substrate (not just the center); usually found on wet wood .......................... 13 
Not as above; fruiting body rather brittle and centrally attached, on wood or ground .... 14 
Fruiting body small (less than 5 mm broad) Pachyella babingtonii(see Peziza repanda. p. 821) 
Fruiting body larger (typically 2-8 cm broad) Pachyella clypeata (see Peziza repanda. p. 821) 
Fruiting body small (usually less than 2.5 cm broad) and stalkless, dark brown to nearly black, 
usually becoming shallowly saucer-shaped or disclike (flat) at maturity P. brunneoatra, p. 820 
14. Not as above; fruiting body usually larger, or if small then paler or more deeply cup-shaped 
or with a stalk .............................................................. 15 
Fruiting bodies usually slit down one side and often clustered, causing them to be somewhat 
contorted; tips of asci not amyloid ............................... (see Otidea, p. 831) 
15. Not as above; fruiting bodies often round (spherical) when very young and flattened or 
spreading in age, or at least not as above ........................................ 16 
Fruiting body 1-3 cm broad, brown to grayish-brown, often with a short stalk or narrowed 
base (especially when young), not normally flattening out in age; tips of asci not amyloid 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see A leuria & Allies, p. 833) 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. 
6. 
6. 
7. 
7. 
10. 
II. 
12. 
13. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
19. 
Flesh staining yellow or exuding a yellowish juice when squeezed or cut .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. P. succosa (see P. sylvestris. p. 821) 
Not as above ................................................................ 18 
Fertile (upper or inner) surface grayish to dark grayish-brown to nearly black; base offruiting 
body often with obscure ribs ................................... (see Helvella, p. 805) 
Not as above; fertile surface usually tan to brown, reddish-brown, etc., but not grayish or 
blackish ................................................................... 19 
Exterior (underside) of fruiting body brown to reddish-brown even in dry weather ......... 
. ................. ...... ... ........ ....... P. badia& others (see P. sy/vestris. p. 821) 
Exterior usually white to pale tan, at least toward base (but often brown if wet) ......... 20 
Fruiting body usually flattening out in age, the fertile surface usually strongly veined, wrinkled, 
or pebbled (especially toward center); usually found on well-drained or sandy soil (e.g., along 
streams) in spring; tips of asci not amyloid; spores smooth, without oil droplets .......... 
............................................................ (see Disciotis, p. 796) 
Not with above features (but may have some of them); tips of asci amyloid ............. 21 
Usually found on rotten wood, wood chip mulch, or humus rich in lignin; fruiting body often 
quite large and spreading (flattened) in age; spores smooth ............ P. repanda, p. 821 
Usually found on ground, sometimes on very rotten wood; fruiting body usually medium-sized, 
the spores often roughened at maturity .............. P. sylvestris & many others, p. 821 
17. 
18. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
20. 
21. 
21. 
'";, 
# 
 
\, 
. .. 
01;," · 
':' 
:, . 
':. :. 
*.; 
. .- 
.' 
. * 
.'-: 
f1 ;1. ,. ;; 
.. <- 
 
..', ".... 
,  
" \.. , 0\' 
"  I 
Left: Plicar;a endocarpo;des, a blackish charcoal-loving disclike fungus. Right: Pez;za sylvestr;s. 
Young specimen at bottom is cuplike; older one at top resembles a torn piece of discarded rubber. 
P licaria endocarpoides 
FRUITING BODY 1-7 cm broad, at first cup-shaped but soon becoming flattened or 
undulating. Fertile ( upper) surface dark brown to black, smooth or roughened, sometimes 
also wrinkled. Exterior( underside) same color or paler, smooth or roughened. Flesh rather 
brittle, usually paler or browner than fertile surface. STALK absent or rudimentary. 
SPORES 8-10 microns, round, smooth, typically with several small oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on burnt ground, old campfire sites, etc.; usually but 
not always fruiting in the spring; widely distributed. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? 
COMMENTS: Also known as P. leiocaTpa, this charcoal-lover is easily told by its dark 
brown to black fruiting body that is usually stalkless and flattened at maturity (see photo). 
P. tTachycaTpa is a very similar but smaller ( up to 2.5 cm broad) warted species with larger, 
roughened spores. P. caTbonaTia should also be mentioned. All three of these grow in 
ashes, have round spores, and are placed in Peziza by some taxonomists. 
Peziza brunneoatra 
FRUITING BODY 0.5-2.5 cm broad, cup-shaped becoming flattened (disclike) in age. 
Fertile (upper or inner) surface brown to brownish-black, sometimes with an olive tinge, 
smooth. Exterior (underside) same color or slightly paler or redder (red-brown). Flesh 
thin, brownish, brittle. STALK absent or present only as a very short, narrowed base. 
SPORES 16-22 x 8-12 microns, elliptical, smooth becoming roughened (warty) or par- 
tially reticulate at maturity, with one or two oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or clustered on damp soil along roads and paths 
through the woods, near streams, under trees, etc.; widely distributed but not particularly 
common. I have found it several times in our area in the winter and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unquestionably inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: The small size, dark color, and tendency to become disclike in old age 
help to identify this species. It is a "cup fungus" in name only, for mature specimens are 
usually disclike or even slightly convex. Pleclania species are also quite dark, but are 
tougher and more deeply cup-shaped, while Pachyella species usually grow on wood and 
Plicaria species favor ashes. 
820 
.... 
.. 
.. I" 
.., ';" 
 
.. . 
. 
... 
 - J 
Peziza sy/vestris. This common woodland cup fungus resembles many others in its genus. Fertile 
surface is brown; exterior is whitish or buff, at least when dry. See photo on p. 820 for more specimens. 
Peziza sylvestris (Boring Brown Cup Fungus; Fairy Tub) 
FRUITING BODY 2.5-8 cm broad, deeply cup-shaped when young, becoming shallowly 
cup-shaped or sometimes flattened in age. Fertile ( upper or inner) surface brown, smooth 
or often somewhat wrinkled; margin sometimes wavy or scalloped. Exterior finely warted 
or roughened to nearly smooth, whitish to pale tan when fresh. Flesh rather fragile. 
ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 15-20 x 9-10 microns, elliptical, smooth or 
becoming finely roughened at maturity, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small clusters on ground, usually in woods; 
widely distributed. It is common in our area, especially in the winter and spring, under 
both hardwoods and conifers. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of many terrestrial brown Pezizas that are best differentiated 
microscopically. As a group they can be recognized by their brown color, more or less cup- 
shaped fruiting body, fragile texture, and growth (usually) on the ground in the woods. 
P. sylvestris seems to be the most common of the lot in coastal California, but may not be 
so abundant in other regions. Other boring brown cup fungi include: P. echinospora 
(=P. pustulata?), with a pale brown fertile surface and coarsely roughened or pimpled 
whitish exterior; P. succosa, light brown with a whitish exterior and turning yellow (or 
exuding a yellow juice) when broken;P. cerea, a yellowish-buff species; and three species 
that often have a reddish tinge when fresh(i.e., they rangefrom brown to reddish-brown to 
brownish-orange): P. badia andP. badioconJusa, both medium-sized to fairly large with a 
brown to reddish-brown exterior (the former with partially reticulate spores, the latter 
with warty spores); and P. petersii, a smaller species (up to 4 cm broad) with a smooth 
exterior and smaller spores (10-12 microns long). All of these Pezizas are cuplike at first 
and are sometimes called "fairy tubs" because they look like miniature bathtubs when 
filled with rainwater. In age, however, they can be quite flat or irregular in shape, or in the 
words of Gary Lincoff, "may resemble discarded torn pieces of rubber" (see photo on p. 
820). None are worth eating. 
Peziza repanda (Spreading Brown Cup Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY 4-13 cm broad or occasionally larger, cup-shaped when young but 
expanding to nearly flat or often wavy (undulating), the margin often splitting. Fertile 
(upper or inner) surface pale brown to medium brown, tan, or in age somewhat darker, 
smooth to somewhat wrinkled or convoluted at the center. Exterior (underside) pallid. 
Flesh fairly brittle. STALK absent or present only as a short, narrowed base. SPORES 
14-18 x 8-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
821 
'\ 
(C- 
.A 
. .,' 
.. 
( 
'\ 
\ 
" 
-' 
Left: Peziza repanda, fairly young specimens which have not yet flattened out; note growth on wood. 
Right: This unidentified Pez;za (see description on pp. 824-825) is one of several truffle-like species 
that grow underground or on the surface of the soil beneath the humus. Note irregular shape. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, gregarious, Or in clusters on logs and branches (especially of hard- 
woods), lignin-rich humus, etc. (often in nurseries where wood chip mulch is used); widely 
distributed. It is common in our area in the winter but fruits practically year-round. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but easily confused with look-alikes of unknown edibility. 
COMMENTS: The salient features of this brown cup fungus are its medium to large size, 
growth on wood or wood chips, light brown color, and smooth spores. There are several 
similar species, including: P. varia, with minutely roughened spores and a slightly grayer 
fertile surface, widespread on rotting wood or occasionally in basements;P. emileia, with 
minutely roughened spores and an ochre-brown fertile surface; andP. badioconjusa(see 
comments under P. sylvestris), often found on or near rotting conifers. See also P. domi- 
dliana. which prefers to grow in domestic situations, and P. sylvestris. which usually grows 
on the ground. Other species: Pachyella (formerly Peziza) grows on soggy logs or stumps, 
but has a somewhat gelatinous-rubbery fruiting body that is broadly attached to the 
substrate (rather than just at the center) and is usually flattened (disclike) or shallowly 
cuplike. The most common species, Pachyella c1ypeata, grows 2-8 cm broad and has a 
brown to chestnut-brown fertile surface. pachyella babingtonii is minute (1-5 mm) and 
cushion-shaped, reddish-brown to purplish-brown, and often somewhat translucent. 
Peziza domiciliana (Domicile Cup Fungus) Color Plate 207 
FRUITING BODY 2-10 cm broad or occasionally larger; cup-shaped when young and 
often with a short stalk, becoming flattened or wavy in age but often retaining a central 
depression (i.e., umbilicate); outline frequently irregular or somewhat angular in old age. 
Fertile (upper) surface at first white or buff, but often darkening in age to tan or brown; 
smooth to slightly wrinkled. Exterior( underside) same color or paler. Flesh rather fragile, 
at times slightly waxy, sometimes turning yellow when broken. ST ALK often prominent 
when young and inconspicuous or absent in age, short( when present) and stout, up to 1 cm 
long, usually whitish. SPORES 11-15 x 6-10 microns, elliptical, smooth to very slightly 
roughened, at times with two small oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on a wide range of domestic materials: 
plaster, cement, sand, gravel, coal dust, carpets, fireplace ashes, etc. (It is said to favor 
strongly alkaline substrates.) Hugo Sloane, Santa Cruz County's incorrigible enfante 
PEZIZA 
823 
terrible-in-residence, has had specimens grow out of the wall above his bathtub-in two 
different houses! It also grows in cellars, greenhouses, shower stalls, damp closets, under 
porches. on wet rugs, behind refrigerators, around leaky water beds-and in my car! 
EDIBILITY: If it were poisonous we would probably know by now, but I can find no 
specific information on it. 
COMMENTS: This white to tan or brown fungus is best identified by its propensity for 
appearing in unexpected places. Several other cup fungi will occasionally grow indoors 
(e.g., P. varia. P. petersii), but this one makes a habit of it. The color plate shows specimens 
photographed in situ-in the carpeted "romper room" of a nursery school! It has been 
shown that the fruiting bodies develop quite slowly, taking 3-5 weeks to mature. During 
this time their shape, size, and color can change considerably. 
Peziza vesicu/osa (Common Dung Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 2-8 cm broad, at first more or less round (spherical), then opening to 
become cup-shaped with an inrolled (but often crimped or convoluted) margin. Fertile 
(inner or upper) surface yellowish to yellow-brown to pale brown or buff, smooth or 
wrinkled toward the center, sometimes darker brown in age. Exterior( underside) whitish 
to buff or pale tan, minutely roughened or scurfy. Flesh rather fragile and soft. ST ALK 
absent or present only as a narrowed basal point of attachment. SPORES 18-24 x 10-14 
microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often gregarious (sometimes in large clusters) on manure, 
dung, rotting straw, in corrals, around stables, gardens, and other fertilized areas, etc.; 
widely distributed and common. In our area it fruits practically year-round, whenever it is 
damp enough. I have seen massive clusters growing with Bolbitius vite//inus in a corral. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. One source says it is poisonous unless well-cooked. 
COMMENTS: This is one of our characteristic dung-inhabiting fungi. The habitat is its 
most distinctive feature, and when it grows in fertilized soil it may be necessary toexamine 
it microscopically in order to distinguish it from P. repanda and other species.P.fimeti 
also grows in dung, but is smaller (up to 2 cm) and dull brown, seldom grows in clusters, 
and has smaller spores. For even more miniscule"d ung cups," see Cheilymenia coprinaria. 
Pez;za ves;culosa. a common dung lover. These are young, almst spherical specimens. As they mature 
they will open out or even become flat; those growing in clusters will often be distorted. 
 
. 
\. 
.", 
.. 
.... ,. \ 
' .. 
1 \ 
.".....,. 
, -- 
h 
-. . 
. " 
824 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
Peziza violacea (Violet Cup Fungus) 
FR UITIN G BODY 1-3 (4) cm broad, at first nearly round but soon becoming cup-shaped, 
then expanding to shallowly cup-shaped or disclike; often somewhat irregular in old age 
with the margin splitting. Fertile (upper) surface smooth or slightly wrinkled and often 
depressed at the center, violet to reddish-violet, often darker in age. Exterior (underside) 
pallid to grayish or tinged violet, delicately powdered at least near margin. Flesh brittle, 
thin, tinged violet. STALK absent or present as a short, narrowed base (especially when 
young). SPORES 16-17 x 8-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious on burnt ground (forest fire and campfire sites, etc.); 
widely distributed, but not very common. In our area this species and P. praetervisa(see 
comments) fruit in the winter and spring; elsewhere I've seen them in spring and summer. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, or at least I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several cup fungi that grow almost exclusively on burnt 
ground. The violet color is distinctive, although another charcoal-lover, P. praeterv;sa, 
is also violet (but usually darker: deep purple to purple-brown), with smaller, roughened 
spores. P. proteana also likes ashes, but is paler (white to pinkish). For smaller charcoal- 
lovers, see comments under Cheilymenia coprinaria and Geopyxis vu/cana/is. 
Peziza proteana (False Sparassis) 
FRUITING BODY 1-6 cm broad and cup-shaped to disclike in the typical form, but 
forming large cabbage-like clumps 10-30 or more cm in diameter inform sparasso;des, the 
"cups" in these fruiting bodies much distorted by mutual pressure and usually lopsided, 
spoon-shaped, or completely misshapen (especially at center of clump). Fertile surface(s) 
smooth or wrinkled, whitish to tan, often witha pinkish orlilactinge; margin(s) often wavy. 
Exterior same color or slightly paler or darker, or often lilac-tinged at or toward the base; 
often slightly scurfy. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 10-13 
x 4.5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened, usually with two small oil droplets. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground in woods, usually in burned 
areas; widely distributed but not particularly common (form sparassoides is rare). I have 
found it only twice in our area, in the winter and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Edible if cooked thoroughly. One book lists form sparassoides as "choice." 
COMMENTS: The typical form ofthis cup fungus can be recognized by its pale color and 
preference for burnt ground (it is not normally as dark or as purple as P. vio/acea and P. 
praetervisa). The cabbage-like form was originally placed in a different genus, but is now 
thought to be a growth form of P. proteana in which the "cups" are "bent out of shape" by 
overcrowding ( wouldn't you be?). This form superficially resembles the cauliflower mush- 
room (Sparassis), but is differently colored, more brittle in texture, and bears its spores 
in asci rather than on basidia. It has been suggested that "sparassioid" Pezizas such as 
P. proteana link the hordes of regular cup-shaped species to the rare, convoluted, truffle- 
like forms (e.g., P. ellipsospora). 
Peziza sp. (unidentified) (Truffle-Like Peziza) 
FRUITING BODY 0.5-5 or more cm broad, usually buried in ground, but sometimes 
partly exposed; ranging from simple and cuplike with a strongly inrolled margin to com- 
plex and lobed (a loosely joined mass offolded chambers). Exteriorsmooth or finely hairy, 
white to creamy when fresh, yellowing when handled and developing ochre to orangish to 
rusty-yellow stains in age (and old or dried areas often becoming brown or reddish- 
brown). Interior (fertile surface) sometimes intricately folded, with one to several large 
PEZIZA 
825 
chambers which open to the exterior; colored like exterior. Flesh fragile; odor usually 
sweet in age. ST ALK absent. SPORES 10-17 x 9-14 microns, broadly elliptical, minutely 
roughened at maturity. Asci 8-spored, forming a palisade that lines the interior. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups under oak and other trees, usually growing 
on the surface of the soil beneath the humus layer, but sometimes partially exposed; fairly 
common in our area in the winter and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but too fragile to bother with. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several truffle-like Pezizas. The internalizing of the fertile 
surface is an obvious adaptation to growing underground (see chapter on truffles). The 
above description is based on material collected near Santa Cruz, California, where it is 
a common species (see photo on p. 822). It is apparently unnamed, although it approaches 
P. (formerly Hydnotrya) ellipsospora, a sometimes large Californian species described as 
being "purplish to brown" with slightly larger spores. Other truffle-like Pezizas include: 
P. stuntzii, discovered under conifers in Washington, an aromatic species whose solid 
interior is marbled with brown veins; andP. gautierioides, also found in the PacificN orth- 
west, but growing quite deep in the soil (up to 6 inches down!), usually in the spring. All 
of these can be confused with other underground Ascomycetes( e.g., Hydnotrya), but their 
amyloid or amyloid-tipped asci place them in Peziza. 
SARCOSPHAERA 
THIS distinctive genus includes a single widespread species, described below. It usually 
develops underground as a hollow ball, but when it surfaces the wall usually splits into 
several lobes at the top to form a crown. In the underground stage it is apt to be mistaken 
for a truffle, and was once given its own truffle genus, Caulocarpa. I t is now placed along- 
side Peziza in the Pezizaceae because its asci have amyloid tips. 
Sarcosphaera crassa (Crown Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a hollow, round to flattened or lobed ball3-lOcm broad, 
usually with a "soft spot" or slight depression at the top; wall usually splitting at maturity 
from this spot downward to form several (usually 6-10) pointed segments or rays which 
open up part way to form a deep crownlike cup; 5-20 cm broad when expanded. Fertile 
(inner) surface smooth or breaking into fine scales, usually whitish to grayish at first, but 
becoming grayish-pink to pinkish, lilac, purple, or purple-brown in age (especially after 
splitting open). Exterior whitish to creamy, scurfy or roughened, usually dirt-incrusted. 
Flesh rather thick but brittle, whitish. ST ALK usually (but not always) present as a short, 
thick, narrowed base up to 3 cm long. SPORES 14-22 x 7-9 microns, elliptical with blunt 
or truncate ends, smooth or very slightly roughened, with 1-3 (usually 2) oil droplets. 
Sarcosphaera crassa, rather small specimens. This distinctive fungus begins as an underground ball 
(right) which is hollow inside (center). Eventually, however, it splits at the top into starlike rays (left). 
 
,.  ,. 
\ . 
. , 
.. .. 
.. -; 
,;"- 
.. .. 
.. 
., 
1, 
Sarcosphaera crassa. Left: Large, young specimens that are just beginning to split into rays. Right: 
Older specimens. Large one at top has flattened out more than is usual. Flesh is thick but fragile. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or in clusters of 2-5 individuals, developing at or below 
ground level but usually exposed or partly exposed at maturity; widespread, but especially 
common under western conifers. It is often found in the spring (while morel hunting), but 
also fruits in the summer and fall. It is common under pine and other conifers in the Sierra 
Nevada, Cascades, and Rocky Mountains, but I have yet to find it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Not recommended. It!S rated highly by some but is difficult to clean and a 
few people are adversely affected by it. Cook it thoroughly if you decide to try it. O.K. 
Miller describes the texture as U a little like a rubber eraser that's been softened by time." 
COMMENTS: Also known as S. ex;m;a and S. coronar;a, this is a curious and highly 
distincti ve fungus. Specimens which haven't split open are likely to be mistaken for truffles 
(especially if they're growing underground), but are easily distinguished by their com- 
pletely hollow interior. Older individuals, on the other hand, might be confused with 
Scleroderma geaster, but can be told by their pinkish to purplish color. Other species: 
Pez;za ammophila is somewhat similar in shape when mature, but has a brown to dark 
brown interior and is cu p-shaped when young. It grows in sand dunes or sandy soil around 
the world, but is not common. Geopora species can also be similar, but have fuzzy brown 
hairs on the exterior and are not pinkish- or purple-tinged. Neournula pouchet;; has a 
pinkish fertile surface, but is smaller and always cuplike (see key to Sarcosoma & Allies). 
SARCOSOMA & Allies 
Small to medium-large fungi found on ground or roUen wood. FRUITING BODY variously 
shaped but usually cuplike 10 urnlike or lop-shaped. Fertile (upper or inner) surface usually dark 
brown 10 black, sometimes paler but not brightly colored. Exterior (sterile surface) often but not 
always minutely hairy. Flesh gelalinous or very rubbery, or if not Ihen ralher lough (i.e., not 
breaking easily). STALK present or absent. SPORES elliptical to round, smooth or roughened, 
with or without oil droplets. Asci lining upper surface of fruiting body or interior of cup, mostly 
8-spored, operculate, with non-amyloid tips. 
THESE dark, tough to rubbery or gelatinous cup fungi are not necessarily cup-shaped. 
The paler, non-gelatinous types can usually be separated from Peziza and Helvella by 
their tougher texture. The thickly gelatinous ones are more apt to be mistaken for jelly 
fungi, but produce their spores in asci and are usually darker or differently shaped. 
Sarcosoma, with gelatinous flesh, and Plectania and Urnula, with tough flesh, are the 
three principal genera treated here. Along with a few other genera they comprise the 
family Sarcosomataceae. They are saprophytic on humus and dead wood, and like most 
Ascomycetes, are espe.cially prevalent in the spring. Although distinctive, they are unpala- 
table except in an emergency because of their texture. Four species are described here and 
others are keyed out, including gelatinous relatives of the earth tongues (Helotiales). 
826 
SARCOSOMA & ALLIES 
827 
Key to Sarcosoma & Allies 
I. Fruiting body an erect, hollow club or closed urn that splits lengthwise from the top to form 
several rays; fertile (inner) surface pallid to yellowish, exterior brown and hairy; found on or 
near dead hardwoods; southern (fairly common in Texas) .... ChoTiactis (=Urnula) geasteT 
I. Not as above ..... _.. _.... _....................... _........................... 2 
2. Fruiting body shallowly cup-shaped or ear-shaped or like a piece of seaweed, dark brown to 
reddish-brown or purplish but not normally black unless it dries out, 2-10 cm broad; flesh thin 
and rubbery or rubbery-gelatinous; sterile surface (exterior) minutely hairy; spores borne 
on basidia which often (but not always) line the lower surface ofthe fruiting body ......... 
.................................................. (see Auricularia auricula, p. 675) 
2. Not as above; spores borne in asci which line the upper surface offruiting body .......... 3 
3. Fruiting body rounded and nearly closed becoming shallowly cup-shaped in age; stalk short or 
absent; fertile (upper or inner) surface brown to reddish-brown; exterior with a dense covering 
of dark hairs; flesh thick and rubbery or gelatinous; found in groups or clusters on hardwood 
sticks and branches in eastern North America and tropics (one report from California) .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Galiella (=BulgaTia) Tufa 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Fruiting body 1-5 mm broad or if larger then shallowly cup-shaped to disclike (flat) at maturity 
(not top-shaped), stalkless, and broadly attached to the substrate (i.e., only the margin free); 
flesh rather waxy; found on wet logs; asci with amyloid tips ... (seePeziza& Allies, p. 818) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Fruiting body top-shaped to cup-shaped or irregular and very rubbery or gelatinous; flesh 
usually gelatinous and sometimes translucent, at least when young and fresh ........... 6 
5. Not as above; fruiting body usually cup-shaped or urnlike or occasionally disclike, sometimes 
with a long stalk; flesh tough to slightly rubbery, but not usually gelatinous ............ 9 
6. Growing on hardwoods (usually dead); fruiting -body cylindrical to top-shaped to shallowly 
cup-shaped and usually less than 4 cm broad or if larger then fruiting body lobed or irregular 
(like a jelly fungus) and not black; asci not operculate ............ (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
6. Not as above; growing on ground or dead wood, usually under conifers; fruiting body round to 
cylindrical to top-shaped or shallowly cup-shaped, dark brown to purple-brown to black, 
2-12 cm broad when mature; asci operculate (i.e., with "lids") ........................ 7 
7. Found in eastern North America (rarely in West?); base offruiting body usually as broad as the 
top ..................................... SaTcosoma globosum (see S. mexicana, 828) 
7. Found in western North America; base usually tapered (narrower than top) ............. 8 
8. Fruiting body 4-12 cm or more broad when mature; flesh thickly gelatinous; mature spores with 
1-3 oil droplets ........................................ Sarcosoma mexicana, p. 828 
8. Fruiting body 2-5 (7) cm broad; flesh gelatinous when young but often less so in age; mature 
spores lacking obvious oil droplets ....... Sarcosoma latahensis (see S. mexicana, p. 828) 
9. Stalk present ................................................................ 10 
9. Stalk absent or rudimentary ................................................... 16 
10. Fertile (inner or upper) surface more or less pinkish-brown; margin of cup scalloped or lobed; 
stalk whitish; found in northern North America, usually under conifers; rare ............. 
. .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . Neournula (=Urnula) pouchetii 
10. Not as above; fertile surface usually brown to black, at least in age ................... 11 
II. Fertile surface tan to brown, yellow-brown, or olive-brown (but may blacken in age) .... 12 
II. Fertile surface dark brown to black, even when young .............................. 13 
12. Exterior (underside of cup) wtih sparse brown hairs; stalk usually ribbed or appearing 
"gathered" ............... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . .. (see AleuTia & Allies, p. 833) 
12. Underside black or nearly so; not as above ... Plectania melaena (see P. nannfeldtii. p. 830) 
13. Fruiting body urn-shaped to deeply cup-shaped, 4-12 cm high and 3-10 cm broad; found mainly 
on hardwood sticks and logs in eastern North America (also reported from Alaska) ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Urnula cTateTium & others, p. 829 
13. Not as above; fruiting body shallowly cup-shaped or smaller than above; widespread .... 14 
14. Stalk 2-6 cm long, 2-4 mm thick, not ribbed; fruiting under mountain conifers in the spring, 
when or shortly after the snow melts ............... Plectania nannfeldtii & others, p. 830 
14. Not with above features ....................................................... 15 
.. 
- 
. . 
" 110- 
!'- 
).. 
,. 
- " 
 
, 
,A- 
Sarcosoma mexicana. Specimen on right has been sliced open to show the thickly gelatinous interior. 
Specimen on left shows the wrinkled blackish exterior. 
15. Stalk well-developed, 2-5 (7) mm thick; cup fleshy or fragile; exterior of cup lacking orangish 
granules; spores with one large central oil droplet .................. (see Helvella, p. 805) 
15. Not as above; fruiting body tough, not breaking easily; stalk usually present as a narrowed base 
beneath cup; exterior usually black, sometimes with orangish granules .................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Plectania melastoma, p. 829 
16. Fruiting body small and shallowly cup-shaped to disclike, usually less than 1 cm broad; usually 
found on ground in association with .a minute orange cup fungus called Byssonectria 
aggregata ............................................... Nannfeldtiella aggregata 
16. Not as above ................................................................ 17 
17. Found on burnt ground or in dung, or if not, then flesh fragile ....................... 18 
17. Not as above; flesh usually tough .................. Plectania melastoma & others, p. 829 
18. Fruiting body small to minute; found on dung or burnt ground, sometimes in swarms ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see A leuria & Allies, p. 833) 
18. Fruiting body usually larger than 1 cm broad; found on ground or in scorched areas but not in 
dung ................................................. (seePeziza & Allies, p. 818) 
Sarcosoma mexicana (Starving Man's Licorice; Giant Gel Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 5-10 (20) cm broad and 3-10 (15) cm high, rubbery, sometimes cup- 
shaped but more often more or less top-shaped (i.e., with a narrowed base and broader, 
flattened to slightly concave "cap"); margin often lobed. Fertile (upper) surface black or 
sometimes dark brown. Exterior dark gray to black, finely velvety (especially above), 
usually narrowed below to form a thick "stalk" which is often deeply wrinkled or ribbed or 
has large pockets. Flesh (interior of fruiting body) a thick, watery-gelatinous mass, clear 
gray to black or brownish. STALK usually present as a narrowed base (see above). 
SPORES 23-34 x 10-14 microns, elliptical to somewhat sausage-shaped, smooth, with 
one to three oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on rotting wood or duff under conifers; 
fruiting in the late winter, spring, summer, and early fall. It is known only from western 
North America and Mexico, and has been characterized as ""rare." However, it is some- 
times very common (along with S./atahensis-see comments) in the mountains of Oregon 
and northern California during the morel season (Ma y and June) or shortly after the snow 
melts. I have not seen it in our area, but S. /atahensis occurs occasionally. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. As its common name implies, you would really have to be hungry 
to be tempted by it. 
COMMENTS: Originally known as Bulgaria mexicana, this is one of my fifty ""five 
favorite fleshy fungal fructifications." Its black color, thickly gelatinous flesh (best seen 
by slicing it open lengthwise as shown in above photo), and growth with conifers make it 
virtually unmistakable. It is muchlargerthan""Poor Man's Licorice" (Bu/garia inquinans), 
and is associated with conifers rather than hardwoods (at least in my experience). S./ata- 
hensis is a similar but slightly smaller (2-7.5 cm broad), purple-brown to black species 
828 
-,  
" , II) 
\ '\ \ 
: 
" 7.. .. 
, 
 
...... t/ 
.. 
:'\  
..... '* 
 
Sarcosoma lalahensis (see comments under S. mexicana, which resembles it very closely). Specimens 
on right and left are being viewed from the top; those in center, from the side (the one at the bottom 
has been sliced open to show the gelatinous flesh). 
that is common under western conifers, particularly at higher elevations. Its flesh is 
gelatinous when young but often becomes tougher and less gelatinous in age, plus its 
spores lack oil droplets at maturity. Another species,S. globosum, may occur in the West 
but is much more common in eastern North America. It is massive, black, and gelatinous 
like S. mexicana, but its water-and-gel-filled base is very broad (not tapered) and may 
"leak" when collected! 
Urnula crater;um (Crater Cup; Devil's Urn) 
FRUITING BODY 4-12 cm high and 3-6 (10) cm broad, usually urn-shaped (i.e., with a 
narrowed base or stalk); upper portion at first closed, then opening to form a deep cup or 
"urn"; margin remaining incurved for some time, usually scalloped, sometimes torn at 
maturity. Fertile (inner) surface smooth or scurfy, dark brown to black. Exterior variable 
in color: dull pinkish-gray to dark brown and scurfy at first, often smoother and blacker 
in age. Flesh tough and fibrous or leathery, black or very dark. STALK 2-4 cm long, 
5-10 mm thick, continuous with and colored like exterior of cup, or darker; usually with 
a patch of dark brown to black mycelial hairs emanating from the base. SPORES 
24-36 )( 10-15 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. 
HABIT A T: Solitary or more often in groups orclusters on or near rotting hardwood sticks 
and logs (the wood often buried); common in eastern North America in the spring. 
EDIBILITY: Too tough to be worth eating. 
COMMENTS: This dark brown to black urn-shaped fungus is one of the first fungi to 
appear each spring in the hardwood forests of eastern North America. It differs from 
Plectania melastoma by its deeper cup and better developed stalk, but the two species 
might just as well be merged into one genus. I can find no record of it from the west coast, 
but a similar species, U. h;emal;s, has been found in Alberta and Alaska. It might con- 
ceivably be mistaken for a Cratere//us, but the growth in the spring plus the fertile upper 
or inner (rather than lower or outer) surface and slightly different shape distinguish it. 
Plectan;a melastoma (Black Cup Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY 1-2.5 cm broad and 1-3 (4) cm high; at first nearly round (or with a 
stemlike base), then opening slowly at the top and eventually becoming more or less cup- 
shaped; margin usually remaining incurved for a long time but sometimes splitting in 
places. Fertile (upper or inner) surface smooth or sometimes with veinlike markings when 
829 
"\. 
t " 
" . 
 " 
 ....... 
J 
.. 
Plectania melastoma. This small black cup fungus can be recognized by its color, tough texture, 
and frequently wrinkled underside. Note how young specimens (right) are nearly closed at the top. 
dry, often glistening when wet, black or deep brownish-black. Exterior tough (but with 
a semi-gelatinous inner layer when wet), minutely hairy, strongly wrinkled or veined, 
black, but often with a rusty-orange tinge near the margin from the presence of minute 
orange granules. Flesh tough or cartilaginous, not brittle. STALK absent or present as 
a short, stout, narrowed base; continuous with and colored like exterior of cup, the base 
often with wiry black mycelial threads that extend into the substrate. SPORES 20-28 
)( 8-12 microns, elliptical or spindle-shaped, smooth, with oil droplets when immature. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or more often in small groups or clusters on decaying sticks and 
other debris of both hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed and not uncommon, but 
easily overlooked, fruiting mainly in the spring. In our area this species or something very 
similar (see comments) occurs under oak in the late winter and early spring. I usually find 
it when I'm foraging for Craterellus cornucopioides, perhaps because both are black. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The black color, wrinkled exterior (or underside), small size, and tough 
texture are the principal field marks of this attractive cup fungus. The typical form with 
rusty-orange granules usually grows under conifers. Our local oak-loving version usually 
lacks visible granules, but orange granules can be seen under the microscope. Bulgar;a 
melastoma is an older name for it. Two very similar black cup fungi with little or no stalk 
and no orange granules are also worth mentioning: P. miller; has a stellate margin (i.e., 
with starlike points) and elliptical spores, whileP. (=Pseudoplectan;a) n;grella has round 
spores. Both usually occur under conifers. See also Urnu/a craterium, which has a larger, 
deeper (urnlike) fruiting body. 
Plectan;a nannfeldt;; (Black Snowbank Cup Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY consisting of a shallow cup mounted on a well-developed, slender 
stalk. Cup 0.5-2 (3) cm broad, the margin at first incurved. Fertile (inner or upper) surface 
smooth, black. Exterior also blackish but delicately hairy. Flesh black, rather tough or 
cartilaginous. STALK always present and typically rather long and slender, 2-6 cm long, 
2-4 mm thick, more or less equal, not ribbed, black, often with black mycelium at base. 
SPORES 21-30 (35) x 10-14 microns, elliptical, smooth or slightly roughened, without 
oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in duff and debris or on buried or rotten wood under 
conifers (particularly fir and spruce); fruiting in the spring shortly after the snow melts 
or even developing under the snow. It is known only from western North America and is 
fairly common at higher elevations (but easily overlooked). I have not seen it in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This attractive black cup fungus can be distinguished in the field by its 
color, small size, well-developed stalk, and growth in the spring under conifers. He/vella 
---.. 
Plectan;a nannfeldt;;. This small black cup fungus has a long thin stalk and often grows near snow. 
corium (see comments under H. macropus) is somewhat similar but larger, not as tough, 
and often shows ribs on the stalk. P. (=Pseudoplectania) melaena also grows in the spring 
under conifers, but is slightly larger and has a yellow-brown to olive-brown cap or cup 
when young (but blackens in age) and a short or long stalk. For species with little or no 
stalk, see Plectania melastoma. 
OTIDEA 
Medium-sized, mostly terrestrial fungi. FRUITING BODY usually erect or semi-erect (often 
standing on one end), usually lopsided and open or slit on one side. sometimes shaped like a rabbit's 
ear. at other times more cuplike. Fertile (inner) surface variously colored, usually smooth. Exterior 
smooth or scurfy but not usually hairy. Flesh usually rather brill/e, not gelatinous. STALK absent 
or present as a short, thick base. SPORES elliptical, smooth, usually with two oil droplets. Asci 
lining inside or upper surface of fruiting body, typically 8-spored, operculate, tips not amyloid. 
THIS is a small but common group of lopsided or earlike cup cungi. The fruiting bodies 
are usually erect (i.e., they stand on end) and slit down one side, and often occur in groups 
or contorted clusters. Many other cup fungi can be open on one side or lopsided, but Otidea 
is the only common genus that is consistently slit or lopsided and erect or semi-erect. 
The dozen or so North American Otideas are differentiated primarily on microscopic 
characters, but can be divided into two groups based on their shape. One group has an 
elongated, erect, rabbit-ear-like fruiting body; the other is more open and cuplike and 
often truncate (chopped off) at the top. To avoid otidealogical debate, only one species 
from each group is described here. Otidea belongs to the Pyronemataceae. 
Key to Otidea 
I. Fruiting bodies arising in groups or clusters from an underground "tuber" (sclerotium), shaped 
more or less like rabbit ears, 5-15 cm tall; fertile (inner) surface orange to pinkish to reddish- 
brown, often blackening in age; exterior dark brown to blackish; found under hardwoods in 
eastern North America, usually in the summer; rare, but often occurring in spectacular 
numbers when it fruits ......................................... Wynneaamer;cana 
I. Not as above; fruiting bodies not arising from an underground utuber" ................. 2 
2. Fruiting body bright yellow to orange but usually developing dark bluish or greenish stains; 
found mainly in spring under northern and mountain conifers (see CaloscyphaJulgens, p. 837) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Fertile (inner) surface of fruiting body pale yellow to orange, ochraceous, or pinkish ..... 4 
3. Fertile surface predominantly tan to brown, sometimes with brighter areas ............. 7 
831 
832 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
4. Fruiting body pale to bright yellow, usually with a truncate (broad, flattened) apex ........ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. O. concinna & O. cantharella (see O. onotica, below) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Fertile surface bright orange; underside usually whitish; fruiting bodies only sometimes lop- 
sided or slit down one side (particularly when clustered) ..... (see Aleur;a & Allies, p. 833) 
5. Not as above ................................................................. 6 
6. Fertile surface dull orange to yellowish or tinged pinkish ............... O. onot;ca, below 
6. Fertile surface yellowish, the exterior usually brownish .. O. leporina (see O. onotica, below) 
7. Fruiting bodies typically elongated and erect (standing on end like rabbit ears) .......... 8 
7. Fruiting bodies typically broadened and flattened somewhat on top (truncate) or cuplike or 
distorted (especially when clustered); usually growing semi-erect ..................... 9 
8. Fertile surface yellowish-brown ...................... O. lepor;na (see O. onotica, below) 
8. Fertile surface usually deep reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown ......................... 
............................... O. sm;th;;& Wynnellas;lv;cola(see O. a/utacea, below) 
9. Fruiting bodies often nearly round (spherical) when young and flattened in age, usually solitary 
or in small groups but not often clustered; tips of asci amyloid . (see Pez;za & Allies, p. 818) 
9. Not as above; fruiting bodies often clustered and distorted by mutual pressure, not normally 
flattening out in age nor spherical when young; asci not amyloid O. alutacea & others, below 
Otidea alutacea (Brown Clustered Ear Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 2-6 cm high and 2-4 cm broad, shape variable: usually cup-shaped but 
lop-sided (the shorter side split lengthwise or open) and semi-erect, but often irregularly 
wavy or contorted when growing in clusters; apex often truncate when growing erect. 
Fertile surface (interior) smooth, tan or light brown to grayish-brown or brown. Exterior 
often slightly scurfy, pale to dull brown (or yellowish in one variety). Flesh brittle. STALK 
absent or present as a narrowed, whitish, downy base. SPORES 14-16 x 7-9 microns (or 
smaller in one variety), elliptical, smooth, typically with two oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely clustered in forest humus, usually under conifers; fairly 
common in western North America. In our area this species and its look-alikes (see 
comments) is frequent in the fall and winter, particularly under Douglas-fir and oak. 
EDIBILITY: U nknown- better chucked than plucked. 
COMMENTS: The brownish color, lopsided fruiting bodies that are often contorted, 
broadened at the apex, and split down one side, plus the tendency to grow in dense clusters 
are the distinguishing features of this undistinguished fungus. There are a number of 
similar brownish Otideas, including: O. buJonia, dark brown, usually growing in clusters; 
O. rainierensis, found in the Pacific Northwest and normally not clustered; O. abietina, 
medium to dar k brown and often cup-shaped, but with much larger spores (18-22 microns 
long); and O. grandis, brown but frequently with reddish-orange patches on the fertile 
surface and a thicker, more prominent stalk. There are also several brown Otideas with 
an elongated, erect, spoon-shaped to earlike (not truncate or cup-shaped) fruiting body 
like that of O. onotica. These include: O. smithii, deep reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown 
and fairly large (up to 8 cm high), with a thick stalklike base, fairly common under conifers 
in the Pacific Northwest and northern California; and Wynne/fa si/vico/a (=0. auricula), 
a northern species that is colored like O. smithii but has larger spores (22-25 microns long). 
Otidea onotica (Donkey Ears) 
FR UITIN G BODY (3) 5-10 cm high and (2) 4-6 cm broad (more if completely expanded); 
shape variable but usually spoon-shaped or like an elongated ear (standing erect on one 
end with one side open or slit); margin at first inrolled, but expanding somewhat in age. 
Fertile surface (interior) smooth, ochraceous to dull orange to orange-buff or yellowish, 
often with a pinkish or rosy tint when fresh. Exterior similarly colored but without a 
,- 
\ 
Left: Otidea alutacea, rather pale (tan) specimens. Note rather erect growth habit. Right: Otidea 
onotica. Note erect growth habit and also how the fruiting body is slit down to the base on one side 
pinkish tinge, often slightly scurfy. Flesh thin, pallid, brittle. STALK present as a whitish, 
narrowed, hairy or downy base that arises from a litter-binding mycelium. SPORES 
12-14 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, with two oil droplets. Paraphyses (sterile cells) 
strongly hooked. 
HABITAT: Scattered or more often in groups or clusters under both hardwoods and 
conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits in the winter and spring, but is not as 
numerous as O. alU/acea. 
EDIBILITY: Edible according to some, but one study revealed the presence of the toxin 
MMH. In other words, it is better chucked than plucked. 
COMMENTS: The erect growth habit and earlike fruiting body plus the ochraceous or 
orangish to pinkish-tinged fertile surface separate this species from most other cup fungi. 
The apex of the fruiting body is not broadlyfla ttened or truncate as is typical of O. alU/acea. 
Other species: O. leporina ("Rabbit Ears") has a yellowish-brown interior and brownish 
exterior, but is otherwise quite similar. O. concinna and O. cantharella are both pale 
to bright yellow, but often have a broadened or truncate apex. All of these species are 
widely distributed. For duller or browner Otideas, see comments under O. alU/acea. 
ALEURIA & Allies 
Mostly small 10 minute fungi found on dung, soil, moss, wood, foliage, and ashes. FRUITING 
BODY usually cup-shaped to disclike (flattened) or cushion-shaped, often gregarious. Fertile 
(upper) surface often brightly colored. usually smooth. Sterile surface (underside) often hairy, but 
sometimes bald. Flesh usually fragile, but sometimes rather tough. STALK absent or present. 
SPORES round to elliptical or elongated, smooth or roughened, with or without oil droplets, 
thick-walled when immature in Ascobolaceae, otherwise thin-walled. Asci lining upper surface 
of fruiting body, typically 8-spored, operculate, not amyloid; thin-walled in Pyronemataceae 
and Ascobolaceae, truck-walled in Sarcoscyphaceae. 
THIS is a motley multitude of miniscule to medium-sized cup- and disclike fungi with 
non-amyloid, operculate asci and fragile to fairly tough but not gelatinous flesh. In 
contrast to Pez;za, many of the species are brightly colored, and those that aren't are 
usually small. A few, such as the common orange peel fungus, Aleur;a aurant;a, are 
conspicuous, but most are so minute or mundane that only the most avid devotees of 
diminutiveness (see p. 224) will notice them. 
833 
834 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
These cup fungi, like others, grow in a wide range of habitats. Many digest dung; others 
occur in swarms on scorched earth and were among the first organisms to colonize the ash- 
covered wasteland around Mount St. Helens after that volcano erupted. Space permits 
descriptions of only a few species, nearly all of which belong to the Pyronemataceae (not 
to be confused with the Pyrenomycetes or flask fungi). Exceptions are the scarlet cup 
fungus, Sarcoscypha coccinea. and its relatives, which are placed in a separate family, the 
Sarcoscyphaceae, because of their tougher texture and a number of microscopic dif- 
ferences. A third family, the Ascobolaceae, is only briefly mentioned here. Most of its 
constituents are minute, dark-spored dung addicts of interest only to scatologists, asco- 
mycologists, students of Fungi 112B, and other assorted eccentrics who deal with dung 
on a daily basis. 
Key to Aleuria & Allies 
1. Growing on dung or manure .................................................... 2 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
2. Fruiting body typically at least 1 cm broad when mature, nearly round (spherical) when young 
becoming cup-shaped to nearly flat in age, yellowish to brown, without prominent hairs; 
asci with amyloid tips................................... (seePeziza& AlIies,p. 818) 
2. Not as above; fruiting body small or minute, often with hairs ........................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Cheilymenia coprinaria & many others, p. 838 
3. Exterior (underside) of cup or disc clothed with brown to black hairs; margin often fringed 
with dark hairs also ........................................................... 4 
3. Not as above; exterior either hairless or with white or pale hairs ...................... 12 
4. Most or all of fruiting body immersed in the ground with only the top (mouth) showing, 
making it look like a hole in the ground ......................... (see Geopora, p. 846) 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Fertile (upper or inner) surface yellow, orange, orred ............................... 6 
5. Fertile surface white to creamy, tan, gray, brown, etc. ............................... 9 
6. Fruiting body small or minute, growing on burnt soil or charred wood ................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Anthracobia melaloma & others (see Chei/ymenia coprinaria, p. 838) 
6. Not as above; growing in soil, humus, or on wood but not usually in burned areas ....... 7 
7. Fruiting body tough or corky and thick-fleshed; fertile surface orange to red or sometimes yel- 
lowish; exterior dark brown to black; found in eastern North America Wolfina aurantiopsis 
7. Not as above ................................................................. 8 
8. Underside of fruiting body with minute brown hairs; fertile surface bright orange .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Melastiza chateri(see Scutellinia scutellata, p. 839) 
8. Underside of fruiting body with fairly obvious hairs which fringe the margin like eyelashes; 
fertile surface bright red to orange-red or orange .... Scutellinia scutellata & others, p. 839 
9. Fertile (upper or inner) surface white to grayish; stalk absent or rudimentary ........... 10 
9. Fertile surface white to grayish, brownish, or darker; stalk usually present (but often short) II 
10. Fruiting body typically 1-3 cm broad ..................... Humaria hemispherica, p. 839 
10. Fruiting body typically less than I cm broad ......................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Trichophaea boudieri & others (see Humaria hemispherica, p. 839) 
11. Stalk ribbed, often short; fertile surface white to tan or brownish but not gray ............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Jafnea semitosta (see Humaria hemispherica, p. 839) 
11. Stalk not ribbed, or if so then fertile surface grayish or blackish ....... (see Helvella, p. 805) 
12. Growing on recently fallen branches or foliage of conifers; fruiting body small or miniscule, 
stalkless, often brightly colored; asci operculate ..................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pithya vulgaris & others (see Sarcoscypha coccinea, p. 836) 
12. Not as above ................................................................ 13 
13. Fertile (upper or inner) surface bright red to scarlet; exterior usually whitish or with white hairs; 
usually growing on wood or buried sticks ....................................... 14 
13. Not as above ................................................................ 16 
14. Fruiting body very small (less than I cm broad); exterior of cup with long hairs ......... 15 
14. Fruiting body larger and/ or hairs on exterior short .. Sarcoscypha coccinea & others, p. 836 
ALEURIA & ALLIES 
835 
15. Fruiting body arising from an elongated rootlike structure (several often arising togetherfrom 
the same "root") .............. M;crostoma protacta (see Sarcoscypha coccinea. p. 836) 
15. Not as above ................... M;crostomaJloccosa (see Sarcoscypha coccinea. p. 836) 
16. Fruiting body yellow to orange but soon developing dark bluish to greenish or olive stains; found 
under northern and mountain conifers in spring and early summer CaloscyphaJulgens, p. 837 
16. Not as above (but fruiting body may be yellow or orange) ........................... 17 
17. Fruiting body bright yellow, minute (less than 5 mm broad), occurring in swarms on wood; asci 
inoperculate (without "lids") ................................. (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
17. Not as above ................................................................ 18 
18. Fruiting body minute (1-6 mm broad) and disclike to cushion-shaped; growing mainly in burned 
areas, often in swarms or masses ............................................... 19 
18. Not as above; either larger or distinctly cuplike or consistently growing in other habitats . 20 
19. Fertile (upper or inner) surface orange to yellow-orange to reddish ...................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pyronema omphalodes & others (see Chei/ymenia coprinaria. p. 838) 
19. Not as above; fertile surface usually darker .......................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ascobolus carbonar;us & others (see Chei/ymenia coprinaria. p. 838) 
20. Fertile (upper or inner) surface bright orange to yellow-orange ...................... 21 
20. Not as above (but fertile surface may have a dull yellowish or pale orange tinge) ........ 23 
21. Stalk absent or rudimentary; very common ..................... Aleuria aurant;a, p. 837 
21. Stalk present, at least in many specimens ......................................... 22 
22. Fertile surface bright orange to bright yellow-orange ..... Aleur;a rhenana & others, p. 836 
22. Fertile surface pale orange to pale or dingy yellowish .......... Geopyxis vukanalis, p. 840 
23. Growing in recently burned areas ............................................... 24 
23. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
24. Fertile surface pink to reddish; stalk absent or rudimentary ............................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Tarzetta rosea (see Geopyxis vu/cana/is. p. 840) 
24. Not as above; fertile surface differently colored (including brick-red) ................. 25 
25. Fertile surface more or less brick-red ...... Geopyxis carbonar;a (see G. vu/canalis. p. 840) 
25. Not as above ................................................................ 26 
26. Fruiting body turquoise to blue-green or at least tinged those colors; found on wood 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
26. Not as above; differently colored ................................................ 27 
27. Fruiting body with a stalk that arises from a swollen tuberlike structure (sclerotium) immersed 
in the substrate; asci inoperculate ............................. (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
27. Not as above ............................................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. 28 
28. Fruiting body very small (typically less than 7 mm broad); stalk when present very thin; often 
found on living plant parts (leaves, stems, etc.); asci inoperculate ... (see Helotiales, p. 865) 
28. Not as above; usually found on ground or dead wood; asci operculate (with "lids") ...... 29 
29. Fruiting body tough or leathery, the flesh very thin; exterior usually with white or grayish 
hairs; common on dead hardwood sticks, branches, etc; spores borne on basidia ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Stereaceae & Allies, p. 604) 
29. Not as above ................................................................ 30 
30. Fertile surface pale orange to pale or dingy yellowish; fruiting body usually less than 1.5 cm 
broad ........................................ Geopyx;s vulcanal;s & others, p. 840 
30. Not as above; fertile surface grayish-tan to tan or brown and/ or fruiting body larger .... 31 
31. Stalk present (at least in most specimens) ......................................... 32 
31. Stalk absent or rudimentary ............................................. _ . . . .. 34 
32. Exterior of cup and upper stalk usually hairy or densely scurfy when fresh; fertile surface 
often dark; stalk well-developed though sometimes short ........... (see HelveNa, p. 805) 
32. Not as above ................................................................ 33 
33. Fruiting body 1-3 cm broad ............ Tarzetta cat;nus (see Geopyxis vu/canalis. p. 840) 
33. Fruiting body typically 1.5 cm broad or less Tarzetta cupular;s (see Geopyxis vu/canalis. p. 840) 
34. Fertile surface dark brown to blackish; fruiting body usually saucer-shaped or disclike (flat) 
in age; tips ofasci amyloid ............................... (see Pez;za & Allies, p. 818) 
34. Fertile surface brown to yellowish; tips of asci not amyloid ............................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tarzetta bronca (see Geopyxis vu/canalis. p. 840) 
836 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
Sarcoscypha coccinea (Scarlet Cup Fungus) Color Plate 210 
FRUITING BODY 2-5 (6) cm broad when mature, more or less cup-shaped, the margin 
usually incurved, often tattered in old age. Fertile (inner or upper) surface bright red to 
scarlet, sometimes fading to reddish-orange in age, smooth. Exterior whitish, covered 
with minute hairs. Flesh thin but not particularly brittle. STALK absent or more often 
present, up to 4 cm long, 3-7 mm thick; minutely hairy and white, tapered downward. 
SPORES 24-40 x 10-14 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Solitary ,or in groups on buried or fallen hardwood sticks or branches; widely 
distributed and fairly common in the winter and early spring (or late fall in some regions). 
In our area I have found it in abundance in a riparian woodland composed of willow, 
alder, buckeye, and cottonwood. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible; I haven't tried it. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Plectania coccinea, this beautiful cold weather cup 
fungus is easily told by its bright red fertile surface. The marginofthe cup is not fringed with 
dark hairs as in Scutellinia scutellata, and the exterior or underside is whitish. The length 
of the stem seems to depend partly on how deep its food source (stick) is buried. Other 
species: S. occidentalis is a similar but smaller (up to 1.5 cm broad) eastern species with 
a well-developed (1-4 cm long) stalk and smaller spores. Microstoma (=Anthopeziza, 
Sarcoscypha) floccosa is a minute (up to 1.5 cm high and I cm broad) bright red species 
whose exterior is clothed with long white hairs. It is fairly common on downed sticks in 
eastern North America, but I have not seen it in the West. Microstomaprotacta (=Plectania 
hiemalis) is somewhat similar to M. floccosa, but its stalk arises from a hard, elongated 
rootlike structure and is often branched above, giving rise to up to a dozen bright red 
cups. It is widely distributed but rather rare. Several closely related genera of bright red 
to orange or pink cup fungi occur in the tropics, including Cookeina and Phillipsia, 
with striate or banded spores. Finally, there are several small stalkless, disclike species 
that grow on the recently fallen branches or foliage of conifers. These species include: 
Pithya vulgaris, yellow to orange or reddish-orange, semi-gelatinous, and up to I cm 
broad, usually found in the spring on branches of fir and other conifers; P. cupressina, 
similar but not gelatinous, found on cedar or cypress; and Pseudopithyella miniscula, 
a miniscule (1-2 mm) scarlet species. 
Aleuria rhenana (Stalked Orange Peel Fungus) Color Plate 209 
FRUITING BODY 1-2cm broad, cup-shaped with a stalk. Fertile (inner or upper) surface 
bright orange to yellow-orange, smooth. Exterior white or whitish and minutely hairy or 
downy. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK present, 1-3 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, slender, equal or 
ta pered downward, colored like the exterior; base often arising from a dense mass of white 
mycelium that may bind several stalks together. SPORES 20-23 x 11-13 microns, ellip- 
A/euria rhenana is a small orange or yellow-orange cup fungus with a well-<leveloped stalk. It often 
grows in clusters, as shown here (at left) and in the color plate. 
" 
. 
" 
 
. 
.... 
" 
...... 
ALEURIA 
837 
tical, coarsely reticulate at maturity. 
HABITAT: Gregarious, often in small clusters, on ground or moss in woods (usually 
under conifers); widely distributed but infrequent. I have found it only twice-in Mt. 
Rainier National Park in Washington, in September, and near San Francisco in January. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably consumable, but much too small and rare to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This petite cup fungus is the same color as its cosmopolitan cousin, A. 
aurantia, but is much rarer and usually smaller, possesses a stalk, and likes to grow in 
dainty clusters (see color plate). Leucoscypha (=Neottie//a, A/euria) ruti/ans is a similar 
moss-inhabiting species with slightly larger spores and longer hairs on its underside. 
Aleur;a aurant;a (Orange Peel Fungus) Color Plate 208 
FRUITING BODY 1-10 cm broad, sometimes nearly round at first but soon becoming 
cup-shaped to saucer-shaped to flattened or wavy, or sometimes irregularly contorted 
(especially if clustered). Fertile (upper or inner) surface bright orange to golden-orange, 
fading somewhat in age, more or less smooth; margin often wavy or lobed. Exterior 
(underside) pallid or at least paler, smooth or minutely downy. Flesh thin, brittle orfragile. 
STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 18-24 )( 9-11 microns, elliptical, coarsely 
reticulate or ridged at maturity, typically with two oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground, fruiting mainly in the 
fall and winter in our area; widely distributed and very common. It seems to prefer bare 
soil or sand along roads, paths, landslides, etc., but also grows in grass or moss. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and highly rated by one authority, but bland according to others. 
One of my colleagues uses it ra w in salads, but it is so thin-fleshed and fragile that it hardly 
seems worth the trouble to collect it. 
COMMENTS: The orange peel fungus is most likely to be mistaken for one of the old 
orange peels that frequently litter our woods and roadsides. It is much more fragile, how- 
ever, and less common. Its size and shape vary considerably depending on environmental 
conditions, but the "aleuring" bright orange color and absence of a stalk are constant. 
Some species of Otidea are orangish, but have a more erect rather than prostrate growth 
habit, while A. rhenana is smaller and has a stcdk. A variety of A. aurantia with smaller 
spores (13-15 microns long) occurs in our area. See also Melastiza chateri (under Scutel- 
linia scutellata), a somewhat similar but smaller species with brown hairs on its exterior. 
Caloscyphafulgens Color Plate 211 
(Snowbank Orange Peel Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY 1-4 (6) cm broad, sometimes nearly spherical when young but be- 
coming cup-shaped or flatter in age, sometimes slit down one side and appearing lop- 
sided; margin inrolled when young. Fertile (upper or inner) surface smooth or slightly 
wrinkled, bright yellow-orange to orange, sometimes with dark bluish to olive-green 
stains. Exterior hairless, colored like interior but usually with more pronounced blue or 
greenish stains, especially toward margin. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK absent or present 
only as a short, narrowed whitish base. SPORES 6-8 microns, round, smooth. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to gregarious or clustered in damp soil or duff under conifers, 
fruiting in the spring and early summer shortly after the snow melts; widely distributed, 
but especially common in the mountains of western North America. It is one of the charac- 
teristic spring mushrooms of the Sierra Nevada, Cascades, and Rocky Mountains. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
838 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
COMMENTS: The yellow-orange color and dark blue or greenish stains that make it 
look like a moldy orange peel are the hallmarks of this springtime cup fungus. The my- 
celium apparently parasitizes the seeds of conifers (mainly spruce and fir) and clusters 
of fruiting bodies often arise where squirrels stash their seed-containing cones. An albino 
form of this species with bluish stains has been found in Idaho. 
Cheilymenia coprinaria (Eyelash Dung Cup) 
FRUITING BODY (1) 3-7 (10) mm broad, at first closed but soon opening to become 
shallowly cup-shaped to disclike or somewhat cushion-shaped. Fertile (upper) surface 
orange to pale orange becoming yellow or brownish in age, smooth; margin fringed with 
minute dark brown hairs, often wavy. Exterior (underside) paler, also clothed with dark 
hairs. Flesh thin. STALK absent. SPORES (14) 17-22 (25) )( 8-12 microns, elliptical, 
smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to densely gregarious on dung and manure or compost, etc.; fruiting 
in wet weather, cosmopolitan (along with its numerous look-alikes) but seldom noticed 
because of its small size. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? 
COMMENTS: This species is one of several small, difficult-to-distinguish, dung-loving 
cup fungi. Although the hairs on the exterior are quite conspicuous, in the words of one 
specialist, "they may be overlooked in the field, where the nature of the substrate dis- 
courages close scrutiny." Similar yellow to orange dung-lovers include: C. the/ebo;des, 
with paler hairs (sometimes also growing on soil, humus, or "spent hops"); C. stercorea, 
with branched dark brown hairs; Coprob;a granu/ata, minute (1-2 mm), orange, and hair- 
less. Several similar disclike to cushionlike species occur in burned areas, often in vast 
numbers, or in the heated (sterilized) soil in greenhouses. These include: Anthracob;a 
macrocyst;s, with a reddish fertile surface and brown hairs on its exterior; A. me/a/oma, 
with a yellowish-brown to ochre-orange fertile surface and brown hairs on its exterior; 
Tr;chophaea abundans, minute and whitish with pale brown hairs, growing on plaster as 
well as burnt ground; Pyronema ompha/odes, very common in confluent masses, with a 
pale orange to reddish-orange, minute (1-3 mm), hairless fruiting body and elliptical 
sores; Pu/v;nu/a carbonar;a, also minute and pale to bright orange and hairless, but with 
round spores; and Pu/v;nu/a archer;, similar to the previous species but with smaller 
(7-9 microns), round spores. Also worth mentioning is Ascobolus, which usually has 
a minute dark (greenish to dark brown or black), disclike fruiting body. Most of its 
species grow on dung, but one, A. carbonar;us, grows in swarms on burnt ground. For 
small cup fungi that do not grow in dung or burned areas, see Scutellinia scutellata, and 
for larger and more deeply cup-shaped, ash-loving or terrestrial species, see Geopyxis 
vulcana/is. Better yet, go get some exercise! 
Chei/ymenia coprinaria in its favorite milieu-a "road apple" (piece of horse dung). Note small size, 
disclike fruiting body, and the long hairs or bristles protruding from its margin. 
-. c,...',\ 
:;. 
 
" 
".... 
t" , 
." 
-.. 
, 
. 
. :\t 
. , ... 
" 
 
I 
.j 
-  
..., 
.. 
if 
'"  -.;" 
't 
J .\ ..:...- 
. . "  
'# V <: 
,.. .. 
. . , 
 
, \. /I. 
. .  . 
< 'f 
., 
" .' , . 
 -:.1', ., p 
... .... 
t ... 
A 
, 
<I. 
t'- : 0 
.... 
" 
. 
0' 
..... .... 
\. 
. 
, ..- 
« . . 
. 
 
'.. 
. .... 
...- . : '\ 
Sewe//in;a sewel/ala typically grows in groups (left) and is easily recognized by its orange to red color 
and the dark hairs that fringe its margin (right). Unfortunately, the hairsdo not show up as well in these 
black-and-whites as they do in the original color photographs. (Ray Gipson, Dan Harper) 
Scutell;n;a scutellata (Eyelash Pixie Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 0.2-1.5 cm broad, at first nearly round (spherical), but soon opening 
to form a shallow cup and eventually disclike (flattened). Fertile (upper) surface smooth, 
bright red to scarlet to orange (or rarely paler with a pinkish cast); margin conspicuously 
ciliate (fringed with dark brown or blackish hairs up to 1 mm long). Exterior(underside) 
also clothed with dark hairs. Flesh very thin. STALK absent. SPORES (15) 17-19 (23) 
x (9) 11-14 (17) microns. elliptical. minutely warted, with one or more oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Gregarious on rotten wood or damp soil (or occasionally on ashe wet lea ves, 
or conks); widely distributed and common, but easily overlooked because of its small size. 
In our area it fruits in the winter and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too puny to be of importance. 
COMMENTS: This is another easily-recognized cup fungus. The bright red to orange 
fertile surface and ciliate (eyelash-like) margin are good field characters. S. umbrarum 
is a very similar, widespread, terrestrial species with a slightly largerfruiting body (up to 2 
cm broad), larger spores, and shorter, less conspicuous hairs. S. er;naceus is also similar, 
but is orange to yellow and smaller (2-5 mm broad), has smooth spores, and grows on 
wood. Che;lymen;a crucipila is a minute (I -4 mm) orange to orange-red, terrestrial species 
with paler, shorter hairs and smooth spores that lack oil droplets. Lamprospora species are 
minute and hairless. Finally there is M elasl;za chaler;, a bright orange terrestrial species 
that is 0.5-2 cm broad and has minute brown hairs on its exterior, especially near the mar- 
gin. For similar dung- and ash-lovers, see comments under Cheilymenia coprinaria. 
Humar;a hem;spher;ca (Hairy Fairy Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 1-3 cm broad, at first nearly round (spherical), gradually opening up 
to become cup-shaped. Fertile surface (interior) white or whitish to grayish, smooth; 
margin fringed with brown hairs. Exterior densely clothed with stiff brown hairs. Flesh 
thin. STALK absent or present only as a "rather abruptly narrowed base. SPORES 20-24 
x 10-12 microns, elliptical, smooth or minutely warted, with 2 or sometimes 3 oil droplets. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or occasionally rotten wood; 
widely distributed and fairly common under both hardwoods and conifers, usually 
fruiting in the summer and fall. I have yet to find it in our area, but it may well occur. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? Who cares? Do you? 
COMMENTS: The combination of pallid fertile surface and brown hairy exterior make 
839 
840 
PEZIZACEAE & ALLIES 
this an easy cup fungus to recognize. Jafnea sem;tosta is a larger(2-5 cm broad) species with 
a creamy-white to tan or brown interior, a brownexteriorclothed with scattered soft brown 
hairs, plus a short ribbed stalk; it is fairly common in eastern North America. Other hairy 
species: Tr;chophaea boud;er; and T. bullata have a pale gray to whitish interior and 
brown hairy exterior, but are much smaller (1-6 mm broad) and grow on wet soil under 
conifers; T. abundans is a minute whitish species that grows in burned areas. For more 
colorful hairy or ciliate species, see Scutellinia scutellata and Cheilymenia coprinaria. 
Geopyxis vulcanalis (Vulcan Pixie Cup) 
FRUITING BODY 0.3-1 (2) cm broad, nearly round (spherical) when young, becoming 
deeply cup-shaped and then often flattening out in age. Fertile (upper or inner) surface 
smooth, pale orange to pale or dingy yellowish, the margin usually finely scalloped. Ex- 
terior paler or whitish, usually powdery or downy when young but often entirely smooth 
in age. Flesh thin, fragile. STALK usually present, up to 5 mm long and 1-3 mm thick, 
sometimes so short as to be practically absent, equal or tapered downward, colored like 
exterior of cup. SPORES 14-21 x 8-11 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to densely gregarious in duff or moss under conifers, or in burned 
areas; widely distributed. I have seen large fruitings locally in the fall, winter, and spring. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but much too puny to be of value. 
COMMENTS: This pixieish cup fungus and its close relatives are easily told by their small, 
deeply cup-shaped (at least when young) fruiting body that often has a finely scalloped 
margin. In G. vulcanalis a short stalk is usually present, but in some of the other species 
(see below) it is lacking. G. carbonar;a is a similar species that grows only in burned areas. 
It has a brick -red fertile surface and normally remains cup-shaped rather than expanding. 
Tarzetta species closely resemble Geopyxis in size and appearance, but as currently de- 
fined, have spores with two prominent oil droplets. Their ranks include: Tarzetta cupu- 
lar;s, widespread under conifers, in moss, on burnt ground, etc., which resembles a 
miniature goblet with its dainty stalk and grayish-tan to tan or brownish cup; T. rosea, 
found in burned areas, with a pink to reddish cup and little or no stalk; and two somewhat 
larger (1-3 cm broad), yellowish to brownish, woodland species: T. bronca of eastern 
North America, with little or no stalk, and T. cat;nus, widespread (including California), 
with a stalk. Most of these species have a scalloped margin or "lip" as in G. vulcanalis. and 
were originally placed in Geopyxis. Pustu!aria. and/ or Peziza. 
Geopyxis vu/cana/is. Note small size, gregarious nature, and the small stalk below the cup which is 
often covered by dirt (visible in specimen at top). 
# 
'\ 
.... ." 
.; ,. . 
. 
. 
" 
" 
t 
, 
'- 
... 
. 
. 
841 
TUBERALES 
Truffles 
TRUFFLES are seldom seen because they grow underground.* Most of them look like 
tiny potatoes or rocks, but reveal a system of canals, veins, and/ or cavities when sliced 
open. They are likely to be confused only with the aptly named false truffles (Hymeno- 
gastrales), which also grow underground but bear their spores on basidia rather than in 
asci and typically have a mmutely chambered rather than marbled, channelled, or hollow 
interior. (For a more detailed comparison, see footnote at bottom of p. 844.) 
The truffles are thought to be cup fungi which ha ve gone underground. The evolutionary 
pathway leading from a cup fungus to a truffle is exquisitely illustrated by the genus Geo- 
pora. Some Geoporas are truffle-like and subterranean, while others are cuplike and partly 
exposed (i.e., hollow with a large mouth at ground level that opens to the air as shown on 
p. 935). Some of the underground Geoporas are also hollow, but the mouth is oriented 
randomly (at the side, bottom, etc.) and others have become greatly infolded so that the 
interior is channelled orchambered(see photo on p.847) rather than hollow. The infolding 
of the tissue is advantageous because it greatly increases the surface area for producing 
spores (the spore-bearing asci line the canals or chambers inside the fruiting body). In 
the "true" truffles (e.g., Tuber), this trend is carried to its logical extreme-the interior 
of the fruiting body is marbled but solid (it presumably evolved through the fusing or 
merging of folded tissue) and the asci are imbedded randomly in the tissue rather than 
lining the canals or chambers. 
As might be expected, truffles exhibit several other special adaptations to their under- 
ground lifestyle. In Geopora the spores are forcibly discharged as in the cup fungi, but 
other truffles have lost the ability-and necessity-to discharge them because they do not 
depend on the wind for spore dispersal. Instead, their spores are spread by various truffle- 
eating animals (rodents, deer, pigs, insects, slugs, etc.). The spores pass through the ani- 
mals' digestive systems unscathed, and a microscopic analysis of the spore content of 
animal droppings can give you a pretty good idea of which truffles and false truffles grow 
in your area! Some animals, such as the California red-backed vole (a sort of burrowing 
mouse) tunnel through the soil eating nothing but truffles and are thus restricted to the 
coastal fog belt, where truffles and false truffles occur year-round. 
To attract attention and make themselves desirable, most truffles have developed 
distinctive odors and flavors. However, the odor and flavor do not normally become 
strong until well after the truffle is mature, thereby insuring that the eater of the truffle will 
ingest a large number of viable spores. Furthermore, truffles do not need to develop as 
rapidly as epigeous(above-ground) fungi because they are insulated from sudden changes 
in the weather. Instead, the maturation process takes place gradually, over a period of 
several weeks or months, although a few spores often develop earlier coupled with a slight 
scent, perhaps as a safeguard against a prolonged cold or hot spell that would inhibit 
further development of the fruiting body. 
Truffles, particularly species of Tuber, have been eaten for centuries. Unfortunately, 
the fabled truffles of France and Italy have become a fetish of the rich. Due to their rarity 
and the difficulty in finding them, they have acquired considerable snob appeal and retail 
for more than $500 a pound! Their flavor and aroma are so powerful that a little goes a long 
way, but to a person of modest means such as myself, nothing edible is worth that much! 
Since truffles grow underground, we humans, with our underdeveloped noses, have 
.When speaking of truffles and false truffles, the terms underground," ""subterranean," ""hypogeous," and 
""buried" are used rather loosely to mean beneath the surface of the ground, either in the humus layer or in the soil 
itself or in the interface between the two. 
,II . t. /') .dr.. 
",,,' :h...,it, 
,>;' \'\,..... ,. '. >; 
 '(t--", ',\ 
t...J_ 1W 1}l": \  . C\ " 
;X Jt"  X-": "'1 ;' ... , 
..tJ.;j.J 9  .." 7 s:T ;-\ \,' 
", ... ......l..1 t: " k " 
 .'"\' 4.: ... _ . _ ) 
\,  )0 '-y-... d' . 
l }   y -4f:; "'\, ;;..:- ../ .." " · 
- '/ "-t.......)t« 
'" ...P . .I -r "\ -,,,A<T. _"  
. _ "'..r' -.1'-:-,  · 
,,  J_.\.--' , 
t, ;. __ 'f\- 
'I' 1.;'\ 't,, _:- 
.;) "," . ....,; I 
..-'t, '..I'y, 
Y' , 
. 
, 
., 
.. 
Left: The famous "Black Diamond" of France, Tuber me/anosporum. sliced open to show the 
marbled interior (see pp_ 854-855 for more details). Right: Microscopic view ofthe surface of a Tuber 
spore, showing the alveolate (pitted-reticulate) pattern typical of many species_ (Herb Saylor) 
trouble finding them without "hired hounds." Goats have been used to track down 
truffles in Sardinia and bear cubs have been employed in Russia, but pigs and dogs are 
the most accomplished truffle hunters. Some truffles contain pig sex hormones, meaning 
that pigs have a natural nose (and lust!) for truffles. They require little or no training, but 
must be physically restrained from devouring their quarry, and are hard to control even 
when there are no truffles about. Acorns are sometimes given as nutritional recompense 
for finding a truffle (a pitiful substitute, if you ask me) or the pig is muzzled and pulled 
a way just as it begins to dig up the truffle with its exceptional snout. Another problem with 
pigs is that they tire easily, and must be carted to and from the truffle grounds iftheyare 
distant. 
Dogs, on the other hand, are tireless and devoted, and care more for humans than 
truffles. In fact, most dogs loathe truffles and must be painstakingly trained to seek them 
out. There are schools in Italy devoted exclusively to this purpose, and a seasoned truffle 
hound commands a steep price. Short-legged breeds are traditionally popular, presumably 
because they're closer to the ground. Both pigs and dogs, incidentally, can detect truffles 
from as far away as50 yards, and there is one case on record ofa dog that jumped a hedge, 
crossed a field, and "secured his prize" under a beech tree at least 100 yards away! 
Perhaps you are now convinced that you need canine or porcine companions to find 
truffles. Well, let me state, unequivocally, that you don't. True, the odds against casually 
bumping into a truffle are great, but you can find truffles by making a concerted effort 
to find them. This means getting down on your hands and knees and systematically sifting 
through the forest humus and soil, paying special attention to "truffle tracks": squirrel 
diggings, small cracks in the soil caused by those that develop close to the surface, strange 
and compelling odors (some seasoned trufflers claim they can smell them out!), and an 
occasional cloud of "truffle flies" hovering over the buried object of their affections. 
Truffles, in fact, are far easier to find than most people realize. Looking for them is both 
challenging and fun, like hunting for buried treasure or panning for gold, but without the 
monetary incentive. (Entrepeneurs, are you listening? The expensive truffles of Europe 
are not known to occur in the United States and most of our native species are notasrichly 
flavored.) 
Why, then, do so few mushroom hunters look for truffles? Perhaps because they don't 
know how, when, or where. (As evidence of this assertion, I offer the chapter on truffles 
in the first edition of Mushrooms Demystified!) The how, the when, and the where are 
delightfully described by Harold E. Parks in the following excerpt from a 1921 article in 
the scientific journal, Mycologia. A resident of San Jose, California, Parks was one of 
California's earliest and most avid trufflers, and he has had numerous species of truffles 
and false truffles named after him. 
842 
TUBERALES 
843 
Even when one knows the ground thoroughly it is surprising how little of it may be 
covered on a day of good collecting. Frequently two or three hours will be spent in 
working over the ground under a single large oak, and on several occasions an entire 
afternoon has been spent in one place. . . 
The equipment of the truffle hunter is important. I use a wheel on many trips, as the 
roads are excellent and the stops are very frequent in some places. It is easily hidden 
in the brush when I leave the roadways and take to the high hills, and it makes accessible 
places otherwise out of one's reach. To the wheel is strapped a small combination rake 
and hoe with a four-foot handle. This implement is very useful in climbing, raking and 
digging and furnishes good protection in a snake country, as I well know. A short- 
handled hoe useful for work in thick brush, a trowel, knife, tweezers, lens, kodak, 
plenty of newspapers and a large number of small pasteboard cartridge boxes obtained 
from a shooting gallery. These small boxes are very useful in handling the many small 
specimens or single individual specimens, while large collections are wrapped in the 
paper. Lunch and thermos bottle complete the outfit, and all are packed compactly in 
the large canvas bags used by newsboys. These bags ride comfortably with a large load 
evenly distributed over the shoulders. 
In the earlier parts ofthe season the edges of the forests and the small groups oftrees 
are usually the best places for operations, although frequently the dense forest will yield 
good specimens. Late in the season the best places are to be found deep in the forest, 
where the ground retains more moisture. When the collector finds a favorable place 
for operations the rake comes into use and a small area is raked free ofleaves and hum us. 
Watch must be kept in the leaves for certain species. . . Other species will appearentirely 
exposed on the surface of the earth [under the leaves] and some will be just beneath 
the surface and out of sight. Excavation may be continued to a depth of a foot, at which 
depth most species will cease to be found. Care should be taken at all stages, especially 
near the surface, to avoid injury to specimens, but they will often be injured in spite of 
it, and many of the dark-colored species will require very careful search and sifting of 
the soil. The rewards are more often blistered hands and an aching back than truffles, 
but there are also some intensely exciting moments. . . 
To these remarks I would add only this: Digging up the forest can be unsightly as well 
as destructive, so do it on a small scale, in scattered places over a large area, don't go 
truffling in locales traditionally frequented by mushroom hunters (they have a right to 
undisturbed dum), and always cover up the soil you expose, leaving the environment as 
close to its original state as possible. . 
Truffles are mycorrhizal. This means they can be found wherever there are trees and 
shrubs, but like the false truffles, they are especially abundant and diverse along the west 
coast. They are normally terrestrial, but can also occur inside very rotten wood that has 
been permeated by tree rootlets. This is particularly true in dry areas like the Sierra Nevada, 
where the rotten logs are a major source of moisture for both the trees and the truffles. 
In our area they seem to favor evergreen oaks (live oak and tanoak) and conifers such as 
Douglas-fir. Because truffles develop slowly, they are usually found at the end of the 
mushroom season (February-July in our area). Some, such as Tuber gibbosum, are 
excellent esculents; others are mediocre and still others have yet to be tried. 
Although a microscope is often required, truffles are not as difficult to identify as false 
truffles (for one thing, there are far fewer species). A fairly extensive-but by no means 
comprehensive-selection is offered here in the hope that it will stimulate mushroom 
hunters to start looking for these clandestine denizens of our forests. Since I am by no 
means an expert on truffles, I have gleaned much of the information in this chapter from 
articles by Helen Gilkey and James Trappe, the past and present authorities on the subject. 
Anyone who takes truffles seriously should consult these articles ( see Suggested Readings 
and References) or join the North American Truffling Society. 
Modern taxonomists try to show the truffles' relationships to the cup fungi by scattering 
them among several families in the Pezizales, just as they place many false truffles with 
the Agaricales. The T uberales, in other words, is a defunct and artificial- but convenient 
844 
TUBERALES 
-category that is used here because it facilitates identification. In the following key, 
the truffles have been divided into several natural groups. An attempt has been made to 
use field characters, but microscopic features have unavoidably come into play- 
particularly the shape and ornamentation of the mature spores (you must have at least 
one mature or partially mature specimen!). Truffle spores, incidentally, are exceptionally 
ornate. Some are spiny like porcupines or pitted like golf balls, others are covered with a 
geometrical network of ridges (see photo on p. 842), still others are warted, pegged, 
or smooth. 
Key to the Tuberales 
1. Spores borne on basidia. ........................ (see Hymenogastrales & Allies, p. 739) 
1. Spores borne inside asci. ....................................................... 2 
2. Found in the deserts of the Southwest; fruiting body more or less round and somewhat puffball- 
like, i.e., developing underground but sometimes emerging at maturity, then drying out and 
blowing about in the wind; asci brown under the microscope ............... Carbomyces 
2. Not as above ................................................................ 3 
3. Fruiting body earth ball-like, i.e., consisting of a thick (2-5 mm) tough outer wall and a single 
large inner cavity which is soon filled with tissue; internal tissue at first white and cottony, 
becoming divided into several chambers by white sterile bands, then becoming dark brown to 
blackish and powdery when mature (the asci disintegrating quickly and the sterile bands not 
evident in age) ............................................... Elaphomyces, p. 862 
3. Not as above; mature spore mass not powdery ..................................... 4 
4. Spores borne inside the fruiting body (or on inside surfaces); common ................. 5 
4. Spores borne externally (on outside surface offruiting body); rare. . . .. . .. . ... . .. .. . .. 23 
5. Interior of fruiting body either hollow or with empty chambers or with open veins or empty 
canals formed by infolding of the fruiting body wall, or occasionally with chambers that are 
loosely stuffed with cottony hyphae ............................................. 6 
5. Interior solid, with pockets or zones of fertile tissue and meandering sterile veins ....... 16 
6. Fruiting body hollow inside (with one or sometimes two large empty chambers which may be 
round or convoluted or canal-like due to infolding of the outer wall) ........... _ . . _ . . _ 7 
6. Interior of fruiting body with separate canals or several separate chambers ............. 9 
7. Exterior of fruiting body with small rounded to angular warts, typically with one or more open- 
ings to the interior ........................................ Genea & Genabea, p. 849 
7. Exterior not finely warted; opening(s) present or absent ............................. 8 
· As already pointed out, this fundamental difference can only be seen with a microscope (and then only after the 
basidia or asci haveformed and before they disintegrate ). However, thefalse truffles (underground Basidiomycetes) 
and truffles (underground Ascomycetes) can often be differentiated in the field by the following characters: 
If the interior is gelatinous, it is a false truffle. 
If the interior has a columella (e.g., a branched or unbranched internal stalk or well-developed sterile base), 
it is probably a false truffle (exception: Fischerula subcau/is. an Ascomycete). 
If the interior is solid and marbled with veins, it is probably a truffle. 
If the interior is composed of numerous minute holes or empty chambers (giving it a sponge-like ap- 
pearance) it is probably a false truffle. 
If the interior shows the embryonic beginning of cap, gills, and stalk. it might be a young Amanita or other 
gilled mushroom! 
If the fruiting body is very hard with a solid interior that flakes or chips off like wax, it is probably a truffle. 
If the interior is completely hollow or has several large hollows or is composed of one mazelike hollow, 
it is probably a truffle. 
If the wall (peridium) of the fruiting body is very thick (several mm) and the interior is not hollow and the 
fruiting body has a distinct base, it is probably a false truffle or earthball. 
If the outer wall of the fruiting body is very thick and the interior is cottony or powdery and the fruiting body 
lacks an obvious base. it is probably a truffle. 
If the wall ofthe fruiting body is infolded to form numerous empty canals or veins orcavities that often open 
to the exterior, it is probably a truffle. 
If the exterior is covered with rootlike mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) it is probably a false truffle. 
If the exterior is covered with warts (often small or large), it is probably a truffle. 
There are also several mycorrhizal Zygomycetes (e.g., Endogone and Glomus) with truffle-like fruiting bodies 
These fungi are not treated in this book because they have neither asci nor basidia. Instead sexual spores are 
formed by the conjugation of "mother cells" (gametangia), and asexual spores are often formed on hyphae. 
Most species have gigantic spores (100-200 microns!) and some, such as the common Endogone lacliflua, exude 
a latex when cut. 
TUBERALES 
845 
Fruiting body a large hollow ball (but often lobed or flattened); inside surface white to grayish, 
pinkish, or purplish, not warted; outer wall often splitting into lobes (at top) in age; common, 
especially under northern and mountain conifers ............. (see Sarcosphaera, p. 825) 
8. Not as above ................................................................ II 
9. Exterior offruiting body with rounded to angular warts ............................ 10 
9. Exterior offruiting body smooth or hairy, but not distinctly warted .................. II 
10. Fruiting body black to brownish to reddish or orange, often (but not always) with a tuft of my- 
celium at the base; spores smooth even at maturity ............. Balsam;a & Allies, p. 852 
Fruiting body white to yellowish or yellow-gray, or if not then interior warted like exterior; basal 
tuft present or absent; spores ornamented at maturity .......... Genea & Genabea, p. 849 
Exterior of fruiting body with fuzzy brown hairs (i.e., tomentose); interior a hollow chamber 
or with open canals formed by complex infolding of the fruiting body wall; spores forcibly 
discharged, smooth at maturity; fairly common, especially under conifers . Geopora, p. 846 
II. Not as above; exterior not brown and tomentose .................................. 12 
12. Spores smooth and round at maturity; chambers of the fruiting body typically stuffed with 
cottony hyphae; tips of asci not amyloid; rare (at least on west coast) ......... Stephens;a 
12. Not with above combination of features .......................................... 13 
13. Asci with amyloid tips (i.e., tips staining bluish in iodine solution) (see Pez;za & Allies, p. 818) 
13. Asci not amyloid ............................................................. 14 
14. Interior of fruiting body hollow or with open veins, canals, or chambers formed by complex 
infolding of the fruiting body wall; spores ornamented at maturity; especially common under 
northern or mountain conifers (often inside rotten wood), but also found in other habitats 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hydnotrya, p. 848 
14. Not as above ................................................................ 15 
15. 
8. 
10. 
II. 
Spores elliptical and smooth at maturity; channels or canals inside fruiting body usually empty 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Balsam;a & Allies, p. 852 
15. Not as above; spores ornamented (at least at maturity) ............. Tuber & Allies, p. 854 
16. Columella (sterile column or base or rudimentary internal stalk) present, or if not then a very 
distinct basal pad of mycelium present; exterior of fruiting body pallid to pinkish-gray to 
brownish; interior pinkish-gray to grayish-purple to nearly black with narrow white veins; 
spores very large (60-100 microns), elliptical, brown at maturity and ornamented with obscure 
spines; found under conifers in the Pacific Northwest .............. F;scherula subcaul;s 
16. Notasabove;columellaabsent ........... ....................................... 17 
17. Asci with amyloid tips or weakly amyloid throughout; asci arranged in a distinct palisade 
(hymenium); spores elliptical .................................................. 18 
17. Asci not amyloid; asci arranged in a palisade or randomly imbedded in tissue; common .. 21 
18. Spores round, ornamented with spines or pegs at maturity; rare ...... Tuber & Allies, p. 854 
18. Not as above; occasional ...................................................... 19 
19. Asci weakly amyloid throughout; fruiting body white to yellowish or yellow-brown; rare 
(known from coastal California) ............................................... 20 
19. Asci amyloid mainly or only at their tips; fruiting body often darker than above; widespread 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Pez;za & Allies, p. 818) 
Spores less than 20 microns long ............:................. Hydnotryops;s setchell;; 
Spores averaging 20 microns or more long .................... Hydnotryopsis compactus 
Fruiting body with a fatty or gristle-like consistency (especially the interior), usually whitish 
or buff when fresh; spores round and ornamented at maturity ...... Tuber & Allies, p. 854 
Not as above; texture not gristle-like . .......................................... 22 
Spores smooth even when mature; exterior of fruiting body often warted; interior pallId when 
mature or grayish to olive with pallid veins (rarely brown) ...... Balsam;a & Allies, p. 852 
Spores ornamented at maturity; exterior offruiting body warted in some species, but more often 
smooth; interior pallid when immature but usually brown or reddish-brown with pallid veins 
when mature (but sometimes grayish or olive) .................... Tuber & Allies, p. 854 
Fruiting body pale brown to brown or purplish; asci faintly amyloid; spores mostly 20 microns 
or more broad, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope ................. Sphaerosoma 
Fruiting body yellowish to olive or brown; asci not amyloid; spores 8-25 microns broad, hyaline 
to yellowish or brown under the microscope ............................ Sphaerozone 
20. 
20. 
21. 
21. 
22. 
22. 
23. 
23. 
846 TUBERALES 
GEOPORA (Fuzzy Truffles) 
Small to medium-sized fungi growing underground or at ground level. FRUITING BODY usually 
more or less round to cuplike, with one (or sometimes more) openings to the interior. Exterior 
typically brown and hairy or fuzzy (tomentose). INTERIOR complexly folded or channelled in 
one species, hollow in the others. STALK, columella, and basal mycelial tuft typically absent. 
SPORES elliptical to nearly round, smooth. hyaline (colorless) under the microscope,forcibly 
discharged. Asci arranged in a distinct palisade (hymenium) lining the inside surface of the fruiting 
body or the internal folds (if present), mostly 8-spored, not amyloid. 
THIS genus is best recognized by its fuzzy brown exterior. Some species, such as G. areni- 
cola, are traditionally grouped with the cup fungi (in genus Sepu/taria) because of their 
hollow fruiting body that grows just below the soil surface with only the large opening or 
"mouth" at the top exposed to the air. G. cooperi, on the other hand, has traditionally 
been treated with the truffles because it grows underground and has a complexly folded 
interior and one or more irregularly oriented openings. These apparently disparate fungi 
are linked by species such as G. clausa, which is hollow like G. arenico/a, but grows under- 
ground and has an apical, basal, or lateral opening. 
Geopora is currently placed in the Pyronemataceae, alongside A/euria, Otidea, Geo- 
pyxis, and many other cup fungi. About a dozen species are known, most ofthem in the 
mode of G. arenicola. However, G. cooperi seems to be the most common species in Cali- 
fornia. It is said to be a good edible, but I can find no information on other members of 
the genus. 
Key to Geopora 
I. Wall of fruiting body complexly infolded to create numerous canals or chambers inside the 
fruiting body ................................................................ 2 
1. Not as above; interior of fruiting body with a simple hollow .......................... 3 
2. Exterior of fruiting body only slightly hairy if at all; odor often sweet or garlicky when fully 
mature; spores ornamented at maturity; often (but not always) growing inside rotten wood 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Hydnotrya, p.848) 
2. Not as above; exterior distinctly hairy or fuzzy; spores smooth .......... G. cooperi, below 
3. Opening or"mouth" of fruiting body irregularly oriented (at top, base, or side); usually growing 
underground .................................... G. clausa(see G. arenicoJa, p.847} 
3. Opening or "mouth" always at top; fruiting body immersed or partly immersed in the ground 
with the mouth exposed to the air ............................................... 4 
4. Fertile surface (interior) orangish to reddish or sometimes yellowish ..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G. aurantia& G. pellita (see G. arenicola, p.847) 
4. Fertile surface white to pale brownish or sometimes drying yellowish .................. 5 
5. Fruiting body up to 1 cm broad... .. ......... ....... G. arenosa(see G. arenicola, p. 847} 
5. Fruiting body 1-4 cm broad .............................. G. arenicola& others, p. 847 
Geopora cooper; (Fuzzy T ruffle) 
FRUITING BODY usually buried or partially buried, round or nearly round (but often 
squirrel-eaten), 2-7 (10) em broad. Exterior fuzzy or velvety from a coating of light brown 
to dark brown hairs, usually furrowed. INTERIOR white to creamy or yellowish-tan, 
usually streaked with tan or brown, deeply convoluted, the folds often touching each 
other but leaving at least some open spaces or"canals" between them. Odor usually mild, 
but in one form resembling fermented cider. SPORES 18-27 (30) )( (10) 13-21 microns, 
broadly elliptical in one form, round or nearly round in another; hyaline ( colorless) under 
the microscope, smooth, with one oil droplet. Asci usually 8-spored, forming a distinct 
palisade (hymenium) that lines the open surfaces of the folds. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on or in the ground under both hardwoods 
 
4 · , \1 i; , 
.A - 
 
Geopora cooper;' Note the convoluted interior (specimen on left) and fuzzy exterior (specimen on 
right). It is usually found under conifers, often in sandy soil. 
and conifers (but especially the latter); widely distributed in western North America and 
locally common, especially under mountain conifers during the spring, summer, and fall. 
It favors pine in coastal California and pine, fir, or spruce in the Sierra Nevada and else- 
where; in Alaska it has been found under willow and aspen. It develops underground 
but may surface (or be dug up by squirrels) in age, and so is often seen by casual collectors. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. Rodents are very fond of it and so are some humans. 
COMMENTS: This is one of our largest truffles and also one of the more distinctive. 
Its telltale traits are the fuzzy brown exterior and convoluted interior. The latter is simply 
a mass of folded tissue (see photograph), with the spore-bearing asci lining the empty 
spaces or "canals" between the folds. The spores are shot out of the asci as in the cup fungi. 
It has numerous synonyms, including G. harkness;; and G. magnata. 
Geopora aren;cola (Hole In The Ground) 
FRUITING BODY at first closed and buried in ground, then opening at the top and 
becoming more or less cup-shaped at maturity, the margin remaining incurved or often 
splitting stellately (in starlike lobes) in age; 14 cm broad. Exterior brown and densely 
clothed with flexible brown hairs that bind surrounding dirt or sand. INTERIOR (fertile 
surface) pallid to creamy or grayish, often becoming yellowish, tan, or brownish in age; 
smooth. Flesh brittle to rather tough. ST ALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 23-30 x 
12-17 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth, usually with one( rarely two) large oil 
droplets. Asci lining inner surface of cup, typically 8-spored, not amyloid. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in sand or silt, disturbed ground, 
etc., usually immersed in the soil with only the mouth showing; widespread but not 
common, or at least not often noticed. 1 have found it once in our area, in the spring. 
EDIBILITY: Academic-it is practically impossible to get rid of the sand or dirt! 
COMMENTS: Better known asSepultar;aaren;cola, this species looks like a hole in the 
ground or an insect burrow or worm tunnel(see photo on p. 935).ln old age it is clearly cup- 
like, however, and often splits into lobes (as shown in photo). The hairy brown exterior 
distinguishes it from Sarcosphaera crassa and other cup fungi that develop in the ground, 
and relates it to G. cooper;, which has a complexly folded rather than hollow interior. The 
fuzzy brown hairs can be seen with a hand lens by gently brushing away some ofthe dirt. 
Other species: G.long;; ofthe Southwest is similar but has nearly round spores; G. arenosa 
is also similar but much smaller; G. aurant;a is similar but has a reddish to orange or 
egg-yellow interior and rigid hairs on its exterior; G. pellita has a yellowish to pale orange 
interior, but its hairs are not rigid; G. c1ausa(=Hydnocystiscaliforn;ca) has a fuzzy brown 
exterior and its mouth is oriented randomly with respect to the fruiting body( i.e., at the top, 
bottom, or side). It usually grows underground, but is rare in our area. 
847 
848 TUBERALES 
HYDNOTRYA (Wood Truffles) 
Small to medium-sized woodland fungi found in soil or very rotten wood. FRUITING BODY 
roundish to lobed or brainlike. Exterior variously colored, smooth to scurfy or occasionally slightly 
fuzzy, but not conspicuously hairy or warted. INTERIOR variable in structure. sometimes com- 
posed of a single chamber. but more often with several to many chambers or canals formed by 
complex infolding and fusing of the outer wall. STALK and columella absent; mycelial tuft also 
absent. SPORES round to elliptical or cubical, smooth at first but becoming roughened, warted, 
ridged, pitted, or spiny at maturity; yellowish to brown under the microscope. Asci typically borne 
in a palisade (hymenium) lining the chamber( s) or canals, not amyloid. 
THE fruiting bodies of this genus are extremely variable in size and shape. Some species 
are hollow inside, others are complexly folded. All have open canals or chambers, non- 
amyloid asci, and spores which suggest a kinship to the elfin saddles and false morels 
(Helvellaceae). Geopora exhibits a similar range of variation, but has a hairier or fuzzier 
exterior and smooth spores. Genea and Genabea differ in having a distinctly warted 
exterior and interior. 
Hydnotryas are sometimes called "wood truffles" because several species can fre- 
quently be found inside rotten wood (they also grow in soil). As pointed out earlier, the 
fact that they grow inside wood does not necessarily mean they are wood-rotters. Rather, 
they could be associated with tree rootlets that penetrate the wood in search of moisture. 
A dozen species of Hydnotrya are known; half occur in North America. They are fairly 
common in the Sierra Nevada and other mountain ranges, but rare or absent in coastal 
California. A single species is described here and several others are discussed. 
Key to Hydnotrya 
1. Exterior of fruiting body brown to dark brown to dark reddish-brown; interior complexly 
folded or convoluted; odor often strong (sweet or garlicky) whenfu//y mature; spores round 
(but often knobby) ........... H. cerebriJormis& H. tulasnei(see H. variiformis, below) 
1. Exterior whitish to buff, cinnamon-buff, pinkish-cinnamon, or sometimes brown; interior 
complexly folded or a simple hollow; odor not usually as above; spores elliptical ........ 2 
2. Interior usually a simple hollow; spores often cubical; usually found in ground ............ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . H. cubispora(see H. variiformis. below) 
2. Interior ranging from a simple hollow to complexly folded; spores not cubical; found in ground 
or inside rotten wood ......................................................... 3 
3. Asci with amyloid tips; common in coastal California ......... (seePeziza& Allies, p. 818) 
3. Not as above; asci not amyloid ......................... H. variiJormis & others, below 
Hydnotrya variijormis 
FRUITING BODY 0.74 cm broad, round to somewhat flattened, depressed, or lobed. 
Exterior minutely velvety, whitish to creamy to buff or yellowish to cinnamon-buff or 
brownish, not warted. INTERIOR variable in configuration, but small specimens often 
containing a simple cavity with a prominent opening, and larger ones usually with several 
chambers or narrow, branching canals formed by crowding and infolding of the outer 
wall; canals usually empty but their sides often fused; white or pallid, but the hymenium 
(fertile tissue) often brownish to pinkish-orange at maturity. SPORES 32-36 )( 24-28 
microns, elliptical, smooth becoming minutely pitted and wrinkled at maturity, yellowish- 
brown under the microscope. Asci borne in a palisade (hymenium) that lines the canals or 
cavity, typically 8-spored. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in groups in soil or inside very rotten wood under conifers; oc- 
casional (along with H. cerebriformis-see comments) in the Sierra Nevada, Cascades, 
and other western mountains. It fruits in the spring, summer, and early fall. 
EDIBILITY: Edible? I can find no specific information on it. 
HYDNOTRYA 
849 
COMMENTS: This species and H. cerebriformls (see below) can usually be told in the 
field by their fondness for growing inside rotten wood plus their complexly folded interior 
(at least in large specimens) and non-amyloid asci. The exterior lacks the warts of Genabea 
cerebriformis and the brown hairs of Geopora coo peri. H. cerebriJormis is similar to 
H. variiformis and grows in similar habitats. It has a more consistently complex or con- 
voluted interior (not unlike that of Geopora cooperi, shown on p. 847), is usually slightly 
darker than H. variiformis (dull reddish-brown to dark purple-brown), typically has a 
strong garlicky odor when mature, and has round, minutely spiny spores. H. tu/asneiis a 
widespread odoriferous species that is very similar to H. cerebriformis; it is also brown to 
reddish-brown, but has coarsely warted spores. H. cubispora is a widely distributed, 
brownish to pinkish-cinnamon, usually terrestrial species with a more or less hollow (but 
lobed) interior and spores which are often cubical. H. michae/is (=H. yukonensis) is a 
rather rare northern species with elliptical warted spores and a convoluted interior. 
GENEA& GENABEA (Geode Truffles) 
Small underground woodland fungi. FRUITING BODY round to strikingly lobed or brainlike. 
usually with one or more openings to the interior. Exterior minutely warted. variously colored, 
bald or with hairs. INTERIOR usually warted; hollow or with empty. mazelike c:analsformed by 
infolding or inward projections of the outer wall. STALK and columella absent, but basal tuft of 
mycelIum often present in Genea. SPORES round to elliptical, warted or spiny at maturity (but 
ornamentation may dissolve in KOH or Melzer's reagent!), pale or colorless (Genea) to brown 
(Genabea) under the microscope. Asci arranged in a palisade (hymenium) lining the surfaces of 
the inner cavity or canals; typically 8-spored, not amyloid. 
THESE small truffles are easily recognized by their finely warted, often lobed fruiting 
bodies with a hollow or partly hollow, warted, geode-like interior. Geneas typically have 
a single, often irregularly shaped cavity and warted spores, while Genabeas usually 
have a more complex or mazelike interior and spiny spores. In addition, the western 
species differ in color: reddish to brown or black in Genea, white or creamy in Genabea. 
The origins and affinities of Genea and Genabea are unknown; together they form the 
family Geneaceae. Both are fairly common, at least in California. They seem to fruit closer 
to the surface of the ground than many truffles and also have an earlier season, appearing 
in late November in our area and continuing on into the spring. I can find no information 
on their edibility. Their small size is hardly an asset, but they seem to be very popular with 
our local wild pigs. (Y ou can sometimes find them where pigs have been foraging.) Genea 
has over 20 known species, whereas Genabea includes only a handful. Three Geneas and 
one Genabea are described here and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Genea & Genabea 
I. Exterior of fruiting body or at least the "mouth" with brown hairs _ _ . _ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
2. "M outh" offruiting body fringed with stiff hairs Genea kraspedestoma (see G. arenaria. p. 851) 
2. Not as above .... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Genea arenoria & others, p. 851 
3. Exterior distinctly reddish; interior often reddish- or pinkish-tinged Genea intermedia, p. 851 
3. Not as above (but exterior may be very dark reddish-brown) ......................... 4 
4. Exterior of fruiting body dark reddish-brown to dark brown to almost black when fresh .. 5 
4. Exterior white to buff, yellowish, light brown, or medium brown when fresh ............ 6 
5. Found in West; spores warted ........................ Genea harknessii & others, p. 850 
5. Found in eastern North America; spores spiny GenabeaJragilis (see G. cerebriform is. p. 851) 
6. Exterior offruiting body white to creamy or pale yellow; interior usually complex (mazelike or 
with many separate chambers); spores spiny ...... Genabea cerebrijormis & others, p. 851 
6. Exterior light yellow-brown to light brown or brown; interior usually a single cavity (but the 
cavity often convoluted); spores warted ....... Genea compacta (see G.harknessii. p. 850) 
 
\- 
. 
I'" ,., .. 
 
l 
Many geode truffles look like bits of knobby coral. This one is Genea harknessii. (Herb Saylor) 
Genea harknessii (Dark Geode Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 0.5-2.5 cm broad, round to flattened to very knobby 
and irregularly lobed, usually with an apical opening to the interior and a tuft of mycelium 
at the base. Exterior dark reddish-brown to dark brown to dark gray or black (but often 
with a thin whitish covering of hyphae when very young), divided into small, often pyra- 
midal warts. INTERIOR basically hollow, but often interrupted by irregular projections 
of strile tissue from the outer wall; inner surface of wall warted and dark brown to blackish 
or bluish-gray; sterile tissue white to grayish. SPORES averaging 24-28 )( 22-27 microns, 
elliptical to nearly round, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, smooth at first but 
finely warted at maturity. Asci 8-spored, arranged in a palisade (hymenium). 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in humus or soil under oak, manzanita, coyote bush 
(Baccharis) and other trees and shrubs; known only from the west coast. It is fairly com- 
mon (for a truffle) in California in the winter and spring, especially in February-March. 
I've found this species, G. gardneri. and G. compacta (see comments) under live oak. It 
also occurs in the Sierra Nevada. Like other Geneas, it often growsjust below the ground 
or on the soil surface beneath the humus, and is difficult to see because of its color. 
EDIBILITY: Prized by pigs, but I can find no mention of humans eating it. 
COMMENTS: The hollow interior and dark warted exterior separate this common 
species from most other truffles. The shape ranges from nearly round to elaborately lobed 
or cerebriform (brainlike). Round specimens are reminiscent of miniature geodes because 
of their warted internal cavity, while the more knobby specimens look like bits of coral or 
piles of intertwined worms (see above photo). Other species: G. gardneri is very similar 
but has larger, coarsely warted spores; it grows under oak in coastal California. G. com- 
pacta is a similar but much paler (brown to yellowish-brown), knobby species with a 
hollow, convoluted interior (see photo below). I have found it several times under oak 
in the spring. It is edible but tasteless. 
Left: Genea gardneri (see comments above). Note black hollow interior (below) and warted exterior. 
(Herb Saylor) Right: Genea compacta (see comments above), a common yellowish to brown, oak- 
loving species. Note knobby fruiting body, large "mouth" (specimen at center), and hollow interior. 
, 
.\ 
. 
1'1; 
, 
i 
GENEA 
851 
Genea ;ntermed;a (Red Geode Truffle) 
FR UITIN G BO D Y underground, 0.5-2.5 cm broad, sometimes roundish( especially when 
young), but more often lobed or knobby, with or without an apical opening to the interior 
and a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior reddish to reddish-brown, vinaceous, or vinaceous- 
purple, the lobes or protuberances superimposed with minute warts. INTERIOR 
basically hollow, but often interrupted by irregular projections of sterile tissue from the 
outer wall; inner surface warted, pink to whitish; sterile tissue also white to pinkish. 
SPORES averaging 36-40 microns, round, finely warted at maturity. Asci arranged in a 
palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in soil in woods; known only from Oregon and Cali- 
fornia. It is not uncommon under conifers in the Sierra Nevada in the spring; I have yet 
to find it on the coast. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The beautiful reddish, lobed and warted exterior plus the hollow interior 
make this one of the few truffles that can be recognized instantaneously in the field. No 
other Genea is as red, at least in California. (G. harknessii can be dark reddish-brown 
when fresh but soon blackens after picking.) 
Genea arenar;a (Hairy Geode Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 1-3 cm broad, usually irregularly lobed or coarsely 
knobby (at least at maturity), with or without an opening to the interior and a basal tuft of 
mycelium. Exterior brown to pale brown, divided into small, often pyramidal warts and 
covered with scattered long brown to dark brown hairs. INTERIOR basically hollow, but 
the cavity usually irregular in shape due to infolding ofthe outer wall; inner surface finely 
warted and colored like the exterior or paler; sterile tissue whitish. SPORES averaging 
22-32 x (16) 20-24 microns, mostly elliptical, with minute scattered warts. Asci arranged 
in a palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in soil under trees (mainly live oak); 
known only from California and Oregon. It typically fruits from the late fall through the 
early spring (November-April) and is not uncommon in our area. However, it seldom 
occurs in quantity and is easily overlooked because of its brown color. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This species is best recognized by the highly irregular shape at maturity, 
the hollow (but usually folded) interior, and the presence of hairs on the warted brownish 
exterior. Other species: G. hispidula is a similar species known from eastern North 
America; G. kraspedestoma is a reddish-brown to brownish Californian with a circular 
apical opening that is fringed by stiff incurved hairs; it has small spores( only 12-20 microns 
long) and was originally collected near Almaden, California, under oak. G. compacta (see 
comments under G. harknessii) is also similar, but lacks obvious hairs on its exterior. 
Genabea cerebriform;s (White Geode Truffle) 
FR UITIN G BO D Y underground, 0.4-1.5 (2.5) cm broad (but usually under 1 cm); smaller 
specimens often roundish, larger ones usually quite irregular (knobby, lobed, or brain- 
like) in shape and typically with several openings to the interior; lacking a basal tuft of 
mycelium. Exterior covered by small, more or less conical warts superimposed on each 
knob; white to yellowish-white or yellow-gray. INTERIOR often a single cavity in small 
specimens, but in larger ones usually consisting of a mazelike system of canals formed by 
852 
TUBERALES 
infolding and inward projections of the wall; colored more or less like exterior. Odor 
mild or strong. SPORES 28-44 microns, round, smooth at first but covered with long, 
slender spines at maturity; hyaline (colorless) to grayish-yellow (in age) under the micro- 
scope. Asci arranged in a palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus in woods and under trees; fairly 
common (for a truffle) in western North America under various trees, but especially fond 
of Douglas-fir. In California it fruits, like other truffles, in the winter, spring, and early 
summer. Although small, its light color makes it fairly conspicuous. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it; too small to be of much value. 
COMMENTS: Formerly known as Genea (or Myrmecocyst;sj cerebriform;s, this is one 
of our most distinctive truffles. The yellowish-gray to white color plus the irregularly con- 
voluted and warted exterior and complex interior with open canals (in larger specimens) 
distinguish it. The interior is vaguely reminiscent of Geopora cooperi. but that species is 
much larger and has a fuzzy brown exterior. Other species: Genabea frag;lis (the type 
species of the genus) is a blackish species reported from Europe and Quebec; G. sp;no- 
spora is a whitish species that has been found in Virginia. 
BALSAMIA& Allies (Smooth-Spored Truffles) 
Small to medium-sized underground woodland fungi. FRUITING BODY round to somewhat 
flattened or irregular, often with a depression or cavity leading to the interior. Exterior variously 
colored, warted in Balsamia. warted or smooth in Barssia and Picoa. INTERIO R solid with sterile 
veins and pockets of fertile tissue (Picoa). or with open or hyphae-slUffed veins or canals (Barssia 
& Picoa); variously colored. STALK and columella absent, but a basal tuft of mycelium sometimes 
present in Balsamia. SPORES smooth at maturity. usually elliptical or elongated but sometimes 
round; colorless under the microscope in Barssia and Balsamia, sometimes brown in Picoa. Asci 
typically 8-spored, not amyloid, arranged in a palisade or randomly imbedded in the tissue. 
THREE genera are treated here: Balsamia. Barssia. and Picoa. They are intermediate in 
aspect between the geode truffles (Genea and Genabea) and the true truffles (Tuber and 
allies). As a unit they are difficult to distinguish in the field because their unifying feature 
is microscopic: the spores are smooth even at maturity. On an individual basis, however, 
the three genera are easier to recognize. For instance. Ba/samia can be told by the frequent 
presence of a basal mycelial tuft plus its warted exterior and pale (white to yellowish) 
marbled interior. Barssia typically has a broad depression or "mouth" at the top of the 
fruiting body and several open canals which empty into it. Picoa, on the other hand, has 
a solid interior plus a brown to blackish exterior. It is easily confused with the true truffles, 
but has a greener or grayer interior and smooth spores. 
Ba/samia. Barssia. and Picoa constitute the family Balsamiaceae, but their relationships 
to other families are unclear. They occur in a variety of habitats and seem to fruit relatively 
early for truffles, at least in our area. All three genera are small; one species from each is 
described here. 
Key to Balsamia & Allies 
1. Interior of fruiting body solid and usually gray to greenish-gray to greenish-blue at maturity; 
exterior slate-violet to black, minutely warted; basal mycelial tuft absent ................ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Picoa carthusiana. p. 854 
1. Not as above; interior of fruiting body not solid, or if solid then remaining pallid ........ 2 
2. Interior of fruiting body with open canals which empty into a broad central depressionat or near 
the top of fruiting body; exterior warted or not warted; basal mycelial tuft absent ......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Barssia oregonensis. p. 853 
2. Not as above; internal veins or canals empty or stuffed with hyphae; exterior finely warted; 
tuft of mycelium often present at base ...................... Balsamia magnata, p. 853 
.. 
. 
-. } 
""'.0. 
"'1' 
" 
 A. 
 =.""': 
, .. 
,a" · 
, ....,... 
\ . 
'o... .". 
.'" 
.. 
.. 
. , 
...  
, 
., 
.. 
,# 
.. 
.. 
..,. 
Ba/samia magnata. Note marbled or veined interior and finely warted exterior. Unlike Tuber, the 
interior does not darken appreciably at maturity. (Herb Saylor) 
Balsamia magnata 
FRUITING BODY underground, 0.5-2 cm broad, round to somewhat compressed or 
flattened, the apex usually infolded and the base often with a tuft of mycelium. Exterior 
divided into numerous rounded to pointed warts, occasionally with small depressions; 
color variable: bright orange to reddish-brown to brownish-pink or occasionally black 
(but may be whitish when very young). INTERIOR white to pale yellowish, even when 
mature; composed of crowded folds which form maze like canals, the canals united or 
separated into several chambers and either open or filled loosely with cottony hyphae; 
canals usually converging at the apex or sometimes at several points. SPORES 20-24 )( 
12-14 microns, variable in shape (cylindrical to elliptical to nearly round), smooth at 
maturity, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, usually with three oil droplets. Asci 
mostly imbedded in the tissue between the veins or canals; typically 8-spored. 
HABITAT: Solitary to gregarious (usually the latter) in soil under various trees and 
shrubs (oak, pine, madrone, etc.); common (for a truffle) in California and Oregon in the 
winter and spring; also reported from Arizona. 
EDIBILITY: I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: The prominently warted orange to reddish-brown exterior plus the pallid 
interior composed of open or stuffed, often united or converging canals are characteristic 
of this rather common truffle. It is most likely to be confused in the field with Pachyphloeus 
citrinus (which can also be bright orange), but the smooth spores and pale interior dis- 
tinguish it. Pseudobalsamia magnata is an older alias, and the names P. alba and P. 
nigTens have been used for the whitish and black forms (species?), respectively. 
Barssia oregonensis (Depressed Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 1-2.5 cm broad, roundish but usually more or less flattened or slightly 
lobed, typically with a prominent depression or cavity at the top; firm but not hard, without 
a mycelial tuft at base. Exterior smooth to roughened or finely warted, pale ochre-buff to 
orange-cinnamon to brick-red or reddish-brown. INTERIOR composed of empty, un- 
connected, broad or narrow canals, many of which empty into the depression (i.e., more 
or less solid except for the canals); white to pale gray, even at maturity. SPORES 24-36 
)( 12-21 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, colorless under the microscope. Asci mostly 
8-spored, forming a palisade (hymenium) that lines the canals. 
HABIT AT: Solitary or in small groups in soil in woods, associated with Douglas-fir and 
possibly other trees; known only from the West (California, Oregon, Idaho). Like most 
truffles, it is commonest in the spring and early summer. I have yet to find it in our area, 
but see comments. 
EDIBILITY: Presumably edible; I haven't tried it. 
853 
854 
TUBERALES 
COMMENTS: This truffle is best recognized by its color, the frequent presence of a 
prominent depression into which several canals empty, and the white or pallid interior. It 
might be mistaken for a Genea or Genabea, but is differently colored, not as warted, and 
has smooth spores at maturity. An unidentified yellowish to pale orange Barssia with a 
prominent broad apical depression has been found recently in the Guadelupe Mines area 
near Almaden, California (an area as richly endowed with truffles as it is with mercury). 
Picoa carthusiana (Oregon Black Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY 0.5-4.5 (8) cm broad, round or nearly round to slightly irregular, 
without a mycelial tuft at the base. Exterior minutely warted, black to dusky slate-violet. 
INTERIOR more or less solid, composed of large pockets of fertile tissue marbled with 
paler (whitish to bufO sterile veins; fertile tissue whitish to buff when young but becoming 
grayish-green to greenish-blue in age; sometimes exuding a clear latex when fresh which 
slowly (overnight) stains white paper pale violet. SPORES (56) 74-84 )( 20-35 microns, 
lemon- or spindle-shaped, smooth, typically with one giant oil droplet at maturity; pallid 
to greenish-yellow becoming brown at maturity (under the microscQpe). Asci typically 
8-spored, imbedded in the tissue (not forming a palisade). 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in soil and humus in woods; known 
from Europe and the western United States. In Oregon and California it favors Douglas- 
fir. In our area it fruits in the spring and summer, but is more common in Oregon, where it 
occurs earlier. It has been found at Point Reyes by Herb Saylor and Dennis Desjardin, 
in July. 
EDIBILITY: Edible and delicious raw, according to truffle connoisseur Gary Menser. 
COMMENTS: In the words of Herb Saylor (Mycena News, May 1983), "The general 
aspect of this fungus is that of a piece of animal dung, with which we frequently confused 
it while making the collection. It is possible that this may be one reason why it is infrequent- 
ly collected, as animal dung of similar size and color was common in the area." The solid 
interior might lead to confusion with Tuber and allies, but its greenish to grayish color 
at maturity plus the large, smooth, spindle-shaped spores and minutely warted, blackish 
exterior form a distinctive set of characters. 
TUBER & Allies (True Truffles) 
Small to fairly large, underground mycorrhizal fungi. FRUITING BODY round to copiously 
lobed, often hard (especially in Tuber). Exterior sometimes warted in Tuber and Pachyphloeus, 
otherwise not; variously colored. INTERIOR typically solid and firm, usually marbled. often 
waxy, usually white or pallid when young but usually with darkfertile tissue at maturity or pockets 
of fertile tissue separated by paler walls. STALK and columella absent; basal mycelial tuft 
also absent (except in some species of Pachyphloeus). SPORES ornamented with spines. warts. 
pegs, pits, or ridges at maturity (but smooth when young), round to elliptical in Tuber. round in 
other genera; light to dark brown at maturity. Asci typically 1-6-spored in Tuber. 4-8-spored in 
other genera, randomly imbedded in the tissue between the veins ( or sometimes forming a palisade 
or hymenium in Pachyphloeus and Choiromyces); not amyloid. 
THE "true" truffles or "earth nuts," as they are sometimes called, can be told from other 
truffles by their solid, marbled interior and ornamented spores. There are two families, 
the Tuberaceae( with one principal genus, Tuber) and the T erfeziaceae. Tuber is the largest 
and most famous genus of truffles. It includes the fabled black truffle (T. melanosporum 
-see photo on p. 842) and white truffle (T. magnatum) of Europe as well as a number of 
species endemic to North America. Tuber is an easy genus to recognize. The fruiting body 
is hard and easily mistaken for a small rock or acorn. The interior is solid and marbled 
rUBER & ALLIES 
855 
,typically whitish when young but become brown or black with white veins at maturity), 
nd has the consistency of wax, i.e., it flakes or chips like a candle. The exterior of the 
fruiting body is smooth in some species and warted in others, and mayor may not be lobed. 
Microscopically, Tuber is distinct by virtue of its relatively large, round to elliptical, geo- 
metrically-patterned spores and one- to six-spored asci that are imbedded randomly in 
the tissue between the veins. However, most species of Tuber are practically indistin- 
guishable from each other when young(i.e., without mature spores) and not much easier 
to differentiate at maturity. A few are distinctive in color, odor, and habitat, but most can 
only be identified by examining the spores under the microscope. Even then it isn't easy, 
because the ornamentation of the spores changes as they mature and the size is notoriously 
variable (a one-spored ascus tends to produce significantly larger spores than a two- or 
four-spored ascus in the same fruiting body). In other words, Tuber may be an easy genus 
to recognize, but the identification of its species often requires the services of a specialist. 
The second family of "true" truffles, the T erfeziaceae, encompasses five genera. Micro- 
scopically these genera differ from Tuber in several respects (see the key), but they can 
often be told in the field on an individual basis. Pachyphloeus. for instance, has a more or 
less round, warted fruiting body with a grayish-olive to blackish-olive interior marbled 
with paler veins, and it often has a tuft of mycelium at its base; Delastria. on the other hand, 
is often pink- or reddish-tinged; Terfezia is partial to sand y soil in arid or semi-arid regions; 
Hydnobolites has a very distinctive gristly or fatty texture and pale color, while Choiro- 
myces is even harder than Tuber and tends to be rougher and more copiously lobed. 
Tuber is a fairly sizable genus, with about 60 known species and an equal number of 
synonyms. Roughly half of these species occur in California and Oregon, making the west 
coast the best truffle territory in N orth Americ. Tubers take an inordinately long time 
to mature-several weeks or even months. In our area they typically begin developing in 
the winter, which means they mature in the spring (March-J une), after most other mush- 
rooms have long departed. They are mycorrhizal with both hardwoods and conifers, but 
are particularly abundant under oak and Douglas-fir. Some of our species (e.g., T. 
gibbosum) are good edibles, though not as distinctively flavored, perhaps, as their Euro- 
pean counterparts. Many other North American species have yet to be tried. As already 
mentioned, differentiating the various species can be extremely difficult. Fortunately, 
none are known to be poisonous. Alas, the famous European truffles (T. magnatum. 
T. melanosporum. T. aestivum) do not seem to occur here, though special truffle hounds 
have been flown in from Italy to look for them. 
TerJezia is the largest genus in the Terfeziaceae. However, its dozen or so species occur 
mostly in southern and/ or arid regions, and have yet to be found in California. The other 
fur genera in the T erfeziaceae are very small. Little is known of the edibility of the North 
American representatives, but Terfezia arenaria, a large (5-12 cm) Mediterranean species 
that grows in sandy soil (often with rock rose or Cistus) is prized in Islamic countries and 
was a favorite with the Romans and Greeks. Four common Tubers and three members of 
the Terfeziaceae are described here, and several others are keyed out. 
Key to Tuber & Allies 
I. Fruiting body white or pale-colored when fresh; interior with a very distinctive gristle-like 
texture .......................................... Hydnobolites californicus, p. 857 
I. Not as above; interior not gristle-like ............................................. 2 
2. Exterior offruiting body black to slate-violet or greenish-black, usually warted; interior usually 
greenish, grayish, or blackish at maturity (with paler veins) .......................... 3 
2. Not with above features ........................................................ 4 
3. Spores smooth; widely distributed, but on west coast occurring mainly with Douglas-fir .... 
............................. .. ..... " . ... . . . .. . . .... (see Balsamia & Allies, p. 852) 
3. Spores ornamented at maturity; found mainly in eastern North America and Europe ....... 
.............. ..... . .. ... .' . .... . Pachyphloeus melanoxanthus(see P. citrin us. p. 856) 
856 
TUBERALES 
4. Exterior of fruiting body usually warted and often brightly colored; interior either remaining 
pallid at maturity or becoming olive to grayish to blackish with paler veins; mycelial tuft often 
present at base of fruiting body; spores smooth or ornamented with spines or pegs ...... 5 
4. Not as above; mature interior usually brown to reddish with white veins (but usually pallid when 
young); exterior warted or not; mycelial tuft usually absent; mature spores ornamented .. 6 
5. Spores smooth; interior whitish or pallid even in age ........ (see Balsam;a& Allies, p. 852) 
5. S pores ornamented with pegs at maturity; interior pallid when young but becoming olive, 
grayish. or darker at maturity .................. Pachyphloeus c;tr;nus & others, below 
6. Exterior of fruiting body covered with warts (warts often small) .. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 
6. Exterior offruiting body smooth, cracked, downy, pitted, etc., but not warted . . .. . . .. _ 8 
7. Found in eastern North America; exterior tawny becoming distinctly reddish or brown at 
maturity; interior usually brick-red or reddish-brown with paler veins (at maturity) ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. T. canal;culatum (see T. gibbosum. p. 858) 
7. Not as above; found in western North America T. mur;num& others (see T. gibbosum. p. 858) 
8. All of the spores round at maturity and alveolate (pitted-reticulate) .................... 9 
8. Spores spiny or alveolate at maturity, at least some of them elliptical or broadly elliptical 10 
9. Fruiting body 1-10 cm broad, often lobed and very hard; spores with numerous small pits 
like those on a golf ball ............................... Cho;romyces alveolatus, p. 858 
9. Not as above; fruiting body 1-3 (5) cm broad; exterior often with minute white hairs or patches of 
hairs (i.e., pubescent) ............................... T. californ;cum & others, p. 860 
10. Associated with Douglas-fir; odor often garlicky when mature and the peridium (skin) often 
cracking in age; spores alveolate (pitted-reticulate) ................. T. g;bbosum, p. 858 
10. Not as above ................................................................ II 
II. Found in Texas and along the Gulf Coast ........... T. texens;s(see T. gibbosum. p.858) 
II. Not as above ................................................................ 12 
12. Spores spiny; exterior of fruiting body brown to cinnamon-colored when mature (but usually 
paler when young) ............................................... T. ruJum, p. 861 
12. Spores alveolate (pitted-reticulate); exterior of fruiting body usually some shade of brown or 
yellowish-brown when mature, but sometimes reddish-brown (especially when old) ....... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. T. separans& many others, p. 859 
Pachyphloeus citrinus 
(Berry Truffle) 
Color Plate 213 
FRUITING BODY underground, 0.5-3 cm broad, more or less round (spherical) to 
slightly lobed or tapered below, firm but not hard; apex often with a depression, circular 
furrow, or cluster of furrows; base often with a tuft of mycelium. Exterior usually divided 
into polygonal warts; color variable, but usually bright to dull orange to brown. IN- 
TERIOR more or less solid, composed of sterile veins which often converge toward the 
apex or depression and form elongated pockets of fertile tissue between them; entirely 
whitish when young, becoming grayish to grayish-olive with paler (white to yellowish) 
veins, and eventually becoming dark olive to blackish with yellow to pale olive veins. Odor 
of mature specimens sometimes pungent ("'like rotting weeds"-Herb Saylor) after col- 
lecting, at other times mild. SPORES (11) 13-21 microns, round, smooth and hyaline 
(colorless under the microscope) at first, becoming spiny, and at maturity the spines 
enlarging into broader, conical to truncate warts or "pegs" that look like miniature golf 
tees; usually yellowish at maturity. Asci typically 8-spored, forming an irregular palisade 
(hymenium) along the sterile veins and/ or randomly imbedded in the surrounding tissue. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in soil under both hardwoods and conifers; very widely 
distributed (throughout most of North America and Europe). In our area it fruits, like 
other truffles, in the winter, spring, and early summer. I have found it several times under 
tan oak and madrone in June and July, and it has turned up repeatedly under live oak in 
the Guadelupe Mines area near Almaden, California. 
EDIBILITY: Specimens I sampled had little taste, but were immature. 
PACHYPHLOEUS 
857 
COMMENTS: This species appears to be one of the most widespread of all the truffles. 
The combination of orange to brown, warted exterior and solid, grayish-olive to blackish 
interior is distinctive. The "pegs" on the spores are also unusual-at maturity each is 
usually tipped with a small depression that makes it look like a golf tee. The fruiting bodies 
are not nearly as hard as Tubers, and are usually rounder. Local material is usually bright 
orange when immature and has the aspect of a madrone berry (see color plate) or the fruit 
from a strawberry tree (a European madrone). Other species: P. v;rescens is said to be 
similar, but has a dull green exterior and yellower interior. It was originally collected in 
Los Gatos, California, but is also reported from Nebraska! P. melanoxanthus of eastern 
North America and Europe has a black to greenish-black, warted exterior and a grayish 
to blackish interior marbled with hollow or greenish veins (at maturity) and sometimes 
has a short "stalk" of mycelial fibers. P. conglomeratus has slightly amyloid asci. 
Hydnobolites californicus (Gristly Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 0.5-4 cm broad, roundish to oval, usually lobed or 
folded but quite compact. gristly or fatty and rubbery in texture (especially the interior), 
not hard. Exterior often roughened but lacking warts, whitish to buff or dingy yellowish, 
often becoming ochre-tan or dingy brown in age or as it dries. INTERIOR more or less 
solid, with several narrow, meandering sterile veins or canals; white to slightly grayish, 
but often discoloring brown when cut and dried or in old age. Odor mild or sometimes 
musty at maturity. SPORES 14-18 (24) microns, round, very coarsely alveolate at 
maturity, the ridges of the alveoli (pits) projecting like needles from the edges of the spore; 
hyaline (colorless) to yellowish or pale brown under microscope. Asci mostly 8-spored, 
imbedded in the tissue between the veins, not arranged in a palisade (hymenium). 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or pockets of several individuals in soil and 
humus under trees and in woods. As its name implies, it was originally discovered in Cali- 
fornia, but appears to be widely distributed in North America. In our area it is fairly com- 
mon from January to July under many trees, but especially oak. 
EDIBILITY: Prized by slugs, despised by humans. The texture is fatty but the flavor is not. 
COMMENTS: This truffle is easily recognized by its pale color and gristly or fatty con- 
sistency. The latter feature is particularly striking and almost without parallel among 
the truffles. The interior is whitish except in old age and the fruiting body is never as hard 
as a Tuber. The very coarsely alveolate spores re also diagnostic. Other species: H. cere- 
briform;s of Europe is said to have larger spores; it has also been found in Iowa. 
Hydnobo/;tes ca/iforn;cus. Note pale color and lobed fruiting body. 
..' . 
. 
-.4,>:;  ,," 
_ 0 
'" . 
. 
., ... 
 4, 
"'P. 
>4i. - 
'. JI 
iC:.. 
0.".;;'. .' 
" 
- 
858 
TV BERALES 
Cho;romyces alveolatus (Hard Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY usually underground, (0.5) 1-10 cm broad, nearly round or more 
often lobed or knobby (potato-like); very hard, without a mycelial tuft at the base. Exterior 
usually roughened or minutely downy, whitish when very young becoming yellowish to 
tawny, brown, or rusty-brown in age. INTERIOR more or less solid and very firm, consis- 
tency rather like hard wax; at first white or pallid, but becoming marbled with darker 
(yellowish to orange, yellow-brown, or rusty-brown) veins or chambers which are usually 
solid but occasionally empty. Odor mild or distinctive (see comments). SPORES 20-30 
(36) microns, round, smooth at first but covered with numerous rounded pits (alveolate) 
like a golf ball at maturity; yellowish to brown underthe microscope. Asci mostly8-spored 
(but many appearing 1-4-spored in younger specimens), arranged in a palisade (hy- 
menium) lining the veins or chambers (but see comments). 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in soil under trees and in the woods; known only from 
western North America, occasional (if you're looking for truffles) in the late winter, spring, 
and early summer. I t is particularly numerous in the Sierra Nevada, but also occurs along 
the coast. Like the Tubers, it takes several weeks or months to mature. 
ED IBILITY : Tempting and probably edible, but I can find no mention of anyone eating it. 
COMMENTS: This is a variable species as evidenced by its plethora of pseudonyms (e.g., 
C. cooke;, P;erson;a alveolala, P. b;spora). It is likely to be mistaken for a Tuber because 
of its solidity, but microscopic examination reveals that the spores are finely pitted like 
golf balls and the spore-bearing cells (asci) are arranged in nests or a palisade rather than 
being randomly imbedded in the tissue. (Apparently the spores tend to form first in" nests" 
which represent the inner termination of the veins; it is only in older specimens that they 
line the entire lengths of the veins.) It is one of our largest truffles, capable of attaining the 
size of a fist! The odor is sometimes distinctive. Helen Gilkey says of one collection: "Odor 
at first resem bling desiccated coconut, changing as [it] dries to that of strongcream cheese." 
Tuber g;bbosum (Oregon White Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY usually underground, 1.5-5 (8) cm broad, nearly round to irregularly 
knobby or potato-like; firm or hard, without a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior minutely 
downy or irregularly roughened but not warted, whitish when young becoming pale buff 
to tan or brown, then usually developing darker (reddish to purple-brown) areas when 
fully mature; often cracking in age. INTERIOR solid, marbled, crisp; whitish when 
young, the fertile tissue becoming brown to dark brown to brick-red when mature, the 
meandering sterile veins remaining whitish. Odor usually strong and garlicky whenfu//y 
mature. SPORES 35-52 x 17-40 microns, elliptical or elongated, reticulate-alveolate 
(ridged and pitted with shallow depressions) when mature but smooth when very young; 
dark yellow-brown to brown under the microscope when mature. Asci mostly 1- to 
6-spored, randomly imbedded in the tissue between the veins. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woods and at their edges, associated 
mainly if not exclusively with Douglas-fir (usually trees between the ages of 8 and 65 
years); found from California to British Columbia, but especially common in Oregon. 
Although it normally grows underground, I have found specimens on the surface. (They 
were probably dug up by squirrels, then rejected for reasons known only to squirrels.) 
EDIBILITY: Edible and choice, but widespread collecting can be destructive! It smells 
like the white truffle of Europe (T. magnatum), and some people proclaim it just as good. 
It can now be bought-for a slightly more reasonable price than T. magnatum. 
COMMENTS: Species of Tuber are often difficult to identify in the field, but this one 
can be told by its growth with Douglas-fir, relatively large size (when mature), tendency 
. 
 
Left: ChOiromyces a/veo/atus (p. 858). This specimen is over 5 cm broad! (Herb Saylor) Right: Close- 
up of the marbled interior of a mature Tuber separans. When young the interior is whitish. Other 
Tubers have very similar interiors. See next page and color plate for views of exterior. 
to develop cracks in age, and strong garlicky odor (when present). Like other Tubers, 
it has a marbled white-and-brown (or reddish-brown) interior when mature. The narrowly 
elliptical spores are also very distinctive, providing you have a microscope. Other species: 
T. besseyi is similar, but has an .. olive-buff' exterior and slightly longer spores. T. canali- 
culatum is a sizable choice edible with a distinctly warted, brown to reddish or tawny 
exterior. It is found in the summer and fall in eastern North America{a region not known 
for its truffles). Several western truffles also have a warted exterior (e.g., T. murinum, 
T. linsdalei, T. gardneri, and T. harknessil), but they are difficult to distinguish without 
a microscope. T. texensis{ofTexas, naturally) should also be mentioned. For other species 
with elliptical, alveolate spores, see T. separans. 
Tuber separans (Acorn Truffle) Color Plate 212 
FRUITING BODY underground, very firm or hard; (0.7) 14.5 cm broad, round to oval 
or sometimes lobed (potato-like), but usually with no more than three major lobes; lacking 
a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior smooth to very minutely roughened but not warted; whitish 
when very young but soon becoming uniformly pale brown to dingy yellow-brown (about 
the color of an oak gall), then eventually developing dark reddish-brown to dark brown 
areas (or darkening overall) as it reaches full maturity. INTERIOR solid, very firm and 
crisp, flaking or chipping like wax, marbled; white when young, the fertile tissue becoming 
light brown and then dark brown with age and the meandering sterile veins remaining 
whitish. Odor at maturity slight, difficult to describe. SPORES (30) 34-58 )( 28-50 (56) 
microns, broadly elliptical to round, brown and alveolate (pitted-reticulate) at maturity, 
with few to many pits. Asci 1-4 (6)-spored, imbedded randomly in tissue between veins. 
HABIT AT: Widely scattered to-gregarious in soil under oak and other hardwoods; known 
only from the west coast, fruiting mainly in the spring and early summer (at least in our 
area). I have found more than sixty specimens growing together in loose soil, associated 
with tanoak or possibly madrone, in June and July. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. It is mild or slightly nutty like Boletus edu/is, but much crisper. 
Slice it thinly and saute very briefly (about one minute) or the flavor will be lost. 
COMMENTS: The above description is drawn from a single large collection made near 
Santa Cruz, California, and thus may not represent the full range of variation within the 
species. The yellowish to brown color of the hard, marble- to walnut-sized specimens was 
quite constant, and they were frequently confused with acorns buried in the duff (see 
photo on p. 860). The growth with hardwoods and lack of a strong odor at maturitydistin- 
guish it from T. gibbosum, while the exterior is not pubescent as in T. californicum 
859 
Can you find the acorn among these prime examples of Tuber separans? If not, you aren't alone- 
I didn't discover it until I'd brought home all of these truffles, which were found under a single tanoak. 
Many other objects orupseudotubers" (rocks, animal dung, etc.) can also be mistaken for truffles! 
and the different color and alveolate spores separate it from T. rufum. However, there are 
many very similar species with elliptical to nearly round, alveolate spores that can only be 
differentiated with great difficulty. Part of the problem is that there are no up-to-date 
keys available for the North American species, and the spore sizes (an important 
feature) are useful only when correlated with the number of spores in each ascus. In other 
words, the identification of most Tubers is best left to truffle experts such asJ ames Trappe 
(who identified the above-mentioned collection as T. separans). Among the many other 
Tubers with elliptical, alveolate spores are: T. mont;cola, a rare species found under 
conifers in the Sierra Nevada; T. c;tr;num, also rare, with a smooth, pale yellow exterior 
in youth; T. dryoph;lum, a very widely distributed species with smaller, coarsely alveolate 
spores and a yellowish-brown exterior at maturity; T. leviss;mum, a thicker-skinned 
species that is also widespread; T. shear;;' with large, coarsely alveolate, broadly elliptical 
spores; and T. irrad;ans, with many nearly round, coarsely alveolate spores. All of these 
species have spores about the same size as T. separans or smaller. See also T. gibbosum. 
Tuber calijornicum (California Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, (1) 1.5-3 (5) cm broad, round to oval or more often 
irregularly lobed and/ or pitted; very firm, without a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior minutely 
but evenly pubescent (covered with tiny hairs) and whitish when young, becoming mot- 
tled with darker (olive to dingy ochre to brown) areas as it matures, but usually retaining 
patches of the white pubescence; sometimes cracked in age. INTERIOR solid, firm, 
marbled, chipping like wax, whitish when young, becoming dark brown with large 
meandering white sterile veins at maturity. Odor often distinctive when old (rather cheesy 
or like "gourmet" crackers). SPORES (30) 39-52 microns, round, alveolate (reticulate- 
pitted), brown at maturity. Asci 14 (6)-spored, imbedded randomly in flesh between veins. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious in or on soil (but under humus) in woods and at their 
edges; common (for a truffle) in California and Oregon, also reported from Idaho and 
Ohio. In our area it is sometimes abundant under oak in the late winter and spring, but I 
have also collected it on numerous occasions under Douglas-firas lateasJ uly. The fruiting 
bodies are often attacked by slugs, nematodes, and fly larvae. 
860 
< 
, 
...... 
.., 
< &. 
\ ''"1 
.' 
Tuber californicum. This common species always has round (spherical) spores, but can usually be 
recognized in the field by the patches of white pubescence on its exterior. 
EDIBILITY: Edible. Some people detect a bitter taste, but the specimens I sampled had 
a very strong mushroomy flavor that would go well in sauces or gravies. 
COMMENTS: The critical feature of this Tuber is its uniformly round( not round to ellip- 
tical), alveolate spores. However, it can usually be told in the field by its pubescent or 
downy exterior (use a hand lens!) and tendency to be quite knobby. T. sphaerosporum 
also has uniformly round spores, but it lacks the pubescent exterior of T. californicum and 
has fewer and larger pits on its spores. It occurs in eastern North America and Gary 
Menser has found it under willow in Colorado. For alveolate-spored species with at least 
some elliptical spores, see T. separans and T. gibbosum. 
Tuber rujum (Cinnamon Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 0.5-2.5 (3.5) cm broad, round to somewhat irregular or 
potato-like, with or without one or more furrows; very firm or hard, without a basal tuft 
of mycelium. Exterior smooth or broken up into patches or "eyes" but not conspicuously 
warted, color variable: brown to cinnamon when mature (brown to orange- or reddish- 
brown), usually duller and lighter (whitish to light brown) when young; sometimes with 
whitish, pinkish, or golden areas mixed with darker shades. INTERIOR solid, firm, chip- 
ping like wax, marbled; whitish when young becoming grayish-brown to brown in age; 
sterile veins large, remaining whitish. Odor not very distinctive. SPORES 20-48 )( 17-32 
microns, elliptical to nearly round, brown and covered with spines at maturity. Asci 
1-4 (7)-spored, randomly imbedded in the tissue between the veins. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered beneath the soil under oaks and other 
trees; widely distributed and common. In California it occurs principally with live oak 
and is our most commOn Tuber. I have collected hundreds of marble-sized specimens 
under oaks in the spring. It also fruits in the late winter, but takes several weeks to mature. 
Tuber rujum (also known as T. candidum) is our most common truffle. The paler specimens in this 
photo are younger, the darker ones older. Note the relatively smooth exterior and marbled interior 
<", 
 
.. 
862 
TUBERALES 
EDIBILITY: Edible and fairly good; it has a faintly nutty flavor. 
COMMENTS: Also known as T. candidum and more exactly called T. rufum var. niti- 
dum, this common truffle is best told in the field by its modest size and brown to cinnamon- 
colored peridium (at maturity), and in the laboratory by its spiny rather than pitted or reti- 
culate spores. The latter feature sets it apart from most other North American Tubers. As 
in other Tubers, the interior is solid and marbled. Other species: T. harknessii is an oak- 
loving western species with spiny spores and a distinctly warted exterior. 
ELAPHOMYCES (Deer Truffles) 
Small to medium-sized, underground, mycorrhizal fungi frequently incrusted with dirt. FRUIT- 
ING BODY round to oval, usually hard and lacking an obvious base. Exterior smooth or more 
often covered with small warts. Peridium (skin) thick (usually 2-5 mm). tough and usually hard. 
INTERIOR a single large cavity soon filled with cOllony white tissue that becomes dark (brown 
10 black) and powdery at maturity; sterile white bands oft issue often visible in intermediate stages. 
STALK and columella absent; sterile base and mycelial tuft also absent. SPORES usually dark 
brown 10 blackish at maturity, often so dark under the microscope that the ornamentation is dif- 
ficult to make out; round, ornamented with warts or spines. Asci typically round at maturity ( often 
irregular when young), 8-spored, not forming a hymenium, soon disintegrating, not amyloid. 
THESE thick-skinned truffles are unique among the Ascomycetes in having a dark 
powdery spore mass at maturity. The powdery texture, which results from early disinte- 
gration of the asci, * plus the thick skin can lead to confusion with the earth balls (Sclero- 
derma). However, earth balls usually grow near the surface of the ground and have a 
distinct base or point of attachment to their substrate, and are not usually incrusted with 
rootlets (mycorrhizae), whereas Elaphomyces species grow up to 12 inches under the soil, 
lack a distinct base, and are usually incrusted with dirt and mycorrhizae. 
Elaphomyces differs from other truffle genera in several additional respects. The wall 
of the fruiting body, in addition to being thick and hard, is marbled in some species (when 
sectioned). Also, the interior, although apparently homogeneous in old age, is actually 
divided into several large chambers by thick white bands of sterile tissue when younger. 
Finally, Elaphomyces is the only genus of fungi to be parasitized by certain species of 
Cordyceps (see p. 879). For these reasons, among others, Elaphomyces has traditionally 
been separated from other truffles and placed in its own order and family. However, it 
is now thought to be less dissimilar to other truffles than once believed. 
Elaphomyces is mycorrhizal with both hardwoods and conifers. In our area it fruits 
throughout the mushroom season and can even be found in the summer if you look hard 
enough (or dig deep enough!). It is among the most abundant of all underground mush- 
rooms, but is seldom seen or collected, perhaps because the soil-incrusted fruiting bodies 
look like balls of dirt. In Europe, species of Elaphomyces have been used as aphrodesiacs 
and cheap truffle su bstitutes, but their rind like skin is too tough and the mature spore mass 
too powdery to be worth eating. Over 30 species have been described, based largely on 
microscopic criteria. Two common and farflung representatives are depicted here. 
Key to Elaphomyces 
I. Fruiting body with a distinct base or point of attachment to its substrate; growing underground 
or above it; spores borne on basidia ......................... (see Scleroderma, p.707) 
I. Fruiting body usually lacking an obvious base, but exterior often incrusted with dirt and my- 
corrhizal rootlets; growing underground; spores borne inside asci . _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . _ . . .. 2 
2. Peridium(skin} marbled when sliced open (as shown on next page} E. muricatusgroup. p.863 
2. Peridium not marbled when sectioned ...................... E. granulatus group, p. 864 
*The early disintegration of the asci is a unique and puzzling feature of Elaphomyces that has caused even myco- 
logists to confuse it with Scleroderma. The spores are often highly compressed and irregular in shape while inside 
the asci, presumably as a result of pushing against the ascus wall. It may very well be that this pressure causes the 
asci to pop like balloons! 
.. ". 
.'- 
 
'\ 
Elaphomyces mur;calus group, mature specimens. Note how spore mass is dark and powdery in the 
two sectioned specimens (but the central core is still cottony in one of them), and how the exterior of 
central specimen is incrusted with dirt and mycorrhizal rootlets. 
Elaphomyces muricatus group (Marbled Deer Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 2-5 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat lobed, very 
firm. Exterior yellow-brown to ochre-brown and covered with minute, hard, pointed 
warts that give it a pimpled appearance, but the warts usually obscured by a crust of soil 
and tiny rootlets (mycorrhizae) that is easily stripped or brushed away. Peridium (skin) 
thick (2-5 mm), hard and rindlike, marbled when sectioned (dark brown to purplish- 
brown with whitish to vinaceous-tinged veins). INTERIOR at first hollow, soon stuffed 
with cottony white hyphae, then darkening to grayish, lilac, or purplish and divided into 
chambers by sterile bands, finally become brownish-black to black and uniformly 
powdery. Odor not very distinctive. SPORES 18-30 x microns, round, warted or warted- 
spiny, dark brown to black under the microscope. Asci round to pear-shaped or irregular, 
mostly 8-spored, not forming a palisade (hymenium) and disintegrating soon after the 
spores form (and before they are completely mature). 
Elaphomyces mur;calus group. Close-up of a sectioned specimen, showing the thick marbled peri- 
dium (skin). The spore mass (interior) is still cottony and divided into chambers by white sterile tissue. 
. 
. 
, 
.. 
. 
. 
" 
... 
..,. 
. 
 
" 
l 
". 
.- 
. 
.' 
'W 
,. 
... 
.,. 
" 4t 
E/aphomyces muricatus group. Note how the thick skin is marbled in sectioned specimen at left, and 
how the exterior is finely warted in specimen on right. E. granu/atus and its close relatives (not illus- 
trated) look quite similar, but do not have a marbled peridium. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff in woods; widely distributed and fairly 
common (if you're digging for truffles). It is said to prefer pine woods, but in our area I 
have found it as early as October under knobcone pine and manzanita and as late as July 
under tan oak and madrone. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown (but see comments on edibility of E. granulatus). 
COMMENTS: This lesser-known cousin of E. granulatus is best told by its marbled 
peridium (see photographs). Like other Elaphomyces species, it is sometimes parasitized 
by Cordyceps. and is easily told from other truffles by its thick rind like skin and dark, 
cottony to powdery mature spore mass (interior). The latter features can lead to confusion 
with the earth balls (Scleroderma). which, however, do not have a marbled peridium. 
Other species of Elaphomyces with a marbled peridium (e.g., E. verrucosum, E. var;e- 
gatus) differ from E. muricatus microscopically. 
Elaphomyces granulatus group (Common Deer Truffle) 
FRUITING BODY underground, 2-5 cm broad, round to somewhat oval, very firm. 
Exterior usually covered with small hard warts (but these often hidden by a crust of soil, 
yellowish mycelium, and/ or mycorrhizal rootlets); sometimes pallid when young but 
usually pale to dingy ochraceous or yellow-brown. Peridium(skin) rindlike, very firm and 
thick (2-5 mm), showing a very thin yellowish outer layer (when sectioned) and a thick 
white to grayish inner layer that may feature darker (brown) zones, but not marbled. 
INTERIOR at first hollow, soon stuffed with cottony tissue, eventually becoming 
powdery when spores mature; white at first, soon grayish to purplish (and often separated 
into chambers by whitish bands), finally becoming blackish and powdery. Odor not very 
distinctive. SPORES 24-45 (65) microns, round, thick-walled, blackish-brown to very 
dark reddish-brown under the microscope, ornamented with short spines or warts. Asci 
mostly 8-spored, round to pear-shaped, not forming a hymenium, disintegrating before 
the spores are fully mature. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in soil or humus under conifers or less 
commonly hardwoods; widely distributed and very common, but seldom seen by the 
average mushroom hunter because it grows underground. It is usually found 2-3 inches 
(5-8 cm) below the surface, often imbedded in or resting on clay soil at the point where it 
meets the humus layer. In many regions it is parasitized by species of Cordyceps-which 
serve as an above-ground indicator of its presence-but I have yet to observe this in our 
area. It fruits throughout the mushroom season and can sometimes be gathered by the 
bushel. I have found it under hemlock and pine in northern California, and Herb Saylor 
reports prolific fruitings from Mendocino County. Alexander Smith calls it "perhaps the 
most common hypogeous [underground] fungus in North America"-and he should 
know, since he has collected so many of them! 
864 
ELAPHOMYCES 
865 
EDIBILITY: Edible according to some reports, but not choice. In Europe it has been used 
for centuries as an aphrodesiac and truffle-substitute. 
COMMENTS: The thick rindlike skin and purple-gray to black, cottony to powdery 
interior distinguish Elaphomyces from all other underground Ascomycetes. E. granulalUs 
and its close relatives differ from the E. mur;catus group in having a non-marbled peridium 
(as seen in sectioned specimens). The earthball genus Scleroderma is similar, but produces 
spores on basidia, usually has a distinct base or point of attachment to the substrate, lacks 
the small hard warts and outer crust of soil and mycorrhizae so frequently found in E. 
granulatus, and usually grows nearer to the ground surface (or often above it). Other spe- 
cies of Elaphomyces with a non-marbled peridium are best differentiated microscopically. 
One, E. subviscidus, has a smooth skin, dark brown mature spore mass, and smaller spores. 
HELOTIALES 
 
'PO 
Earth Tongues 
THIS large order includes hundreds of small stalked or cuplike Discomycetes with in- 
operculate asci (i.e., each ascus has a pore at its tip through which the spores are expelled, 
but no operculum or "lid" as in the Pezizales). The most conspicuous members of this 
order are called earth tongues because of their clublike to tongue-shaped fruiting bodies. 
Many others are cup-shaped or disclike, with or without a stalk. 
The larger members of this order are saprophytic on soil, humus, and wood, while most 
of the smaller types are parasitic or saprophytic on plant stems, leaves, and other tissues. 
N one are prized edibles, being too small or too tough or too small and too tough to bother 
eating. There are several families and over 150 genera in the Helotiales. These are defined 
largely on the basis of microscopic features, and only a smattering of the larger or more 
colorful species are described here. These have been divided into five groups, keyed below, 
based on the shape and texture of the fruiting body. 
Key to the Helotiales 
1. Fruiting body with a cap and stalk, the cap rounded to convex or wrinkled but not cuplike 
(concave) or disclike .......................................................... 2 
1. Fruiting body variously shaped, sometimes with an enlarged ""head," but without a clearly 
differentiated, rounded to convex or wrinkled cap ................................. 4 
2. Stalk very thin (usually less than 2 mm); cap bladderlike (hollow), whitish to yellowish; found in 
eastern North America, often clustered; spores borne on basidia (see Aphyllophorales, p. 548) 
2. Not as above; spores borne inside asci ............................................ 3 
3. Cap with a sterile underside and an abrupt edge or margin (but the margin usually inrolled or 
tucked in toward the stalk) ................................. Leotia& Cudonia, p. 872 
3. Not as above; cap merely an enlarged, differentiated ""head" that lacks an abrpt margin and 
sterile underside .............................................................. 4 
4. Flesh gelatinous or rubbery-gelatinous; fruiting body variously shaped but notclublike, pinkish 
to reddish, purplish, brown, or black; growing on wood ........ Bulgaria & Allies, p. 875 
4. Not as above ................................................................. 5 
5. Fruiting body cuplike or disclike, with or without a stalk ......... Ciboria & Allies, p. 877 
5. Fruiting bod erect, clublike or with an enlarged or flattened ""head" .................... 6 
6. Fruiting body with large internal chambers or compartments ..... (see Helvellaceae, p. 796) 
6. Not as above ................................................................. 7 
7. Entire fruiting body black or sometimes dark brown; at least some of the spores brown under 
the microscope ................................ Geoglossum & Trichoglossum, p. 866 
7. Not as above; fruiting body usually lighter or brighter than above; spores hyaline (colorless) 
under the microscope or tinged yellow ....... Microglossum, Spathularia, & Allies, p. 868 
866 
HELOTIALES 
GEOGLOSSUM & TRICHOGLOSSUM 
(Black Earth Tongues) 
Small fungi usually found on ground or moss, sometimes on rotten wood. FRUITING BODY 
upright. usually c/ub/ike. with or without an enlarged "head"; dark brown to black. Flesh thin, 
tough, not gelatinous. STALK present, usually slender; smooth or velvety. SPORES very long 
and narrow, usually septate, smooth, brown under the microscope (at least some of them). Asci 
typically 8-spored, lining the upper portion of the fruiting body or the "head" if one is present; 
inoperculate and not amyloid, with a pore at the tip. 
THESE attractive little Ascomycetes are easily recognized by their black (or occasionally 
dark brown) clublike fruiting bodies. Their color separates them from the fairy clubs 
(Clavariaceae) and other earth tongues, and they lack the pimpled surface or white spore 
powder so often found inXylaria. Their very long(up t0250 microns!) brown partitioned 
(septate) spores are also distinctive. 
Both Geoglossum and Trichoglossum are charter members of the family Geoglossaceae. 
In the more common of the two, Trichoglossum, brown lance-shaped cells called setae 
protrude from the surface of the fruiting body, giving it a velvety texture. In Geoglossum, 
the setae are absent (at least in the fertile portion), and the texture varies from smooth 
to viscid to only slightly velvety. 
The black earth tongues are saprophytic on humus, soil, moss, or occasionally rotten 
wood. Several of the more than two dozen North American species are common, but all 
are difficult to distinguish from their surroundings because of their dark color and small 
size. They are also difficult to distinguish from each other, even with a microscope. For 
this reason, only one representative from each genus is described here. Neither is worth 
eating. 
Key to Geoglossum & Trichoglossum 
I. Flesh usually white; exterior offruiting body often roughened or minutely pimpled but not hairy 
or velvety; growing on wood (but wood often buried); asci borne in flasklike "nests" (peri- 
thecia) imbedded in the fruiting body ...................... (see Pyrenomycetes, p. 878) 
l. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Surface offruiting body distinctly viscid when moist. often glistening, not velvety .......... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. G. glutinosum & others, below 
2. Fruiting body not viscid ........................................................ 3 
3. Surface of fruiting body (especially stalk) distinctly velvety; fruiting body often (but notalways!) 
with a spade-shaped or flattened "head" ................... T. hirsutum & others, p. 867 
3. Not as above; fruiting body not velvety or only very slightly so, usually clublike ortwisted, but 
sometimes with a distinct "head" ... G. nigritum & many others (see G. glutinosum. below) 
Geoglossum glutinosum (Viscid Black Earth Tongue) 
FRUITING BODY 1.5-6 cm tall, cylindrical to club-shaped. Upper (fertile) portion 3-6 
mm wide, often flattened or slightly twisted but otherwise not sharply differentiated from 
lower portion (stalk); surface black, smooth, viscid (at least when moist). Flesh tough, 
usually brownish, not gelatinous. STALK occupying lower 1/3-2/3 of fruiting body, 2-3 
mm thick, dark brown to black, viscid when moist, usually smooth. SPORES 60-90)( 4-5 
microns, greatly elongated, smooth, brown under the microscope, with 0-7 (usually 3 or 7) 
septa (partitions). 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in humus, moss, or sometimes rotten 
wood, usually in the woods; widely distributed but infrequently encountered. I've found 
it several times in our area in the late fall, winter, and early spring, but never in quantity. 
EDIBILITY: I know of no one who bothers collecting Geoglossums, but Captain Charles 
McIlvaine says of this species: "Over a quart found in one patch. Stewed it is delicious." 
, , 
.. 
.. 
.' \- 
..; . 
----- 
. 
... 
.... 
Left: Geog/ossum g/Ulinosum. Note all the debris clinging to the viscid fruiting bodies. Right: Geo- 
g/ossum nigritum (see comments under G. g/utinosum) is a fairly common species with a clublike or 
twisted fruiting body that is not flagrantly velvety. 
COMMENTS: This dark earth tongue has many look-alikes (see below), but is one ofthe 
few species with a distinctly viscid, glistening surface when moist. Similar viscid species 
include: G. affine, rare, with shorter spores; and G. difforme, larger (3-12 cm tall), whose 
spores have 8-15 septa. The genus Geoglossum also includes many similar dark brown to 
black, non-viscid earth tongues that can only be differentiated microscopically. These 
species are not as velvety as Trichoglossum and do not often have a well-defined "head." 
Some of the more common and widespread ones are: G. glabrum, a smooth-stalked species 
up to 10 cm tall; G. simile, the most common species in eastern North America, stalk often 
scurfy or minutely scaly; and G. nigritum (see photo), the most common species in our area 
(but more widely distributed), with strongly curved paraphyses (sterile cells) whose tips 
are scarcely enlarged. All of these have brown spores, but some Geoglossums have both 
brown and hyaline (colorless) spores, including: G.fallax, whose hyaline spores are non- 
septate; and G. alveolatum and G. intermedium, whose hyaline spores are septate. There 
are also several similar, dark Microglossum species whose spores areal/hyaline, including: 
Microglossum atropurpureum, fruiting body dark brown to purplish or black; M. 
fumosum, yellow-brown to brown; and M. olivaceum (see comments under M. viride), 
greenish-brown to dark brown with very short spores (10-18 microns long). 
Trichoglossum hirsutum (Velvety Black Earth Tongue) 
FRUITING BODY 2-8 cm tall, cylindrical to club-shaped or more often with a distinct 
"head" (i.e., fruiting body shaped more orIess like the tongue ofa bell). Fertile"head" when 
distinct 3-8 mm broad, usually flattened laterally or compressed, oval or elongated to 
spade- or arrowhead-shaped; surface dry, minutely hairy or velvety, sometimes wrinkled, 
black. Flesh thin, tough, usually brownish. STALK thin (1-4 mm thick), more or less 
equal, densely velvety, often twisted or curved, tough, black. SPORES 80-195 (210»( 5-7 
microns, greatly elongated, smooth, brown under the microscope, typically with 15 septa 
(partitions) when mature, but some varieties with consistently fewer or more septa. Both 
stalk and head lined with long brown sterile cells (setae). Asci 8-spored. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or tufted in humus, moss, or soil (or occa- 
sionally on rotten wood), usually in woods; very widely distributed and common. It is the 
most abundant earth tongue in our area, sometimes carpeting large tracts of humus with 
867 
'I ' 
Trichoglossum hirsutum. Note the often spade-shaped ""head" of this common black earth tongue. 
Left: Typical fruiting bodies. Right: These specimens were photographed with a strobe in an effort 
to highlight some of the minute hairs that give them a velvety texture. 
its little black clubs. In seems to favor habitats shunned by other mushrooms (e.g., red- 
wood), and usually fruits in the winter or spring. Like other black fungi, it is difficult to see. 
EDIBILITY: Supposedly edible, but much too tough to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: This dainty earth tongue is easily recognized by its black velvety fruiting 
body. In California specimens the fertile portion is usually (but not always) set off from 
the stem as a thickened or flattened, often spade-shaped ""head." The wonderful velvety 
texture is caused by hundreds of minute projecting hairs or spines (setae) and is most 
evident on the stalk, especially in dry weather. Geoglossum species are very similar, but 
are not as velvety and do not normally have such a well-defined ""head." Other species of 
Trichoglossum can only be differentiated microscopically. They include: T. velutipes, 
with 4-spored asci and mostly 7-1 I-septate spores; and T. farlowii, with 8-spored asci 
and 0-5 (usually 3)-septate spores. 
MICROGLOSSUM, SPA THULARIA, & Allies 
(Colorful Earth Tongues) 
Small fungi found on ground, moss, or rotten wood. FRUITING BODY upTIght. usua//yc/ublike 
10 spatula- or lOngue-shaped. or with an enlargedfertile "head"; variously colored but not dark 
brown to black. Flesh often rather tough, not gelatinous. STALK usually present, often slender; 
smooth, mealy, minutely scaly, or velvety. SPORES round to elliptical, spindle-shaped, or needle- 
like, smooth, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. sometimes septate. Asci lining upper pan 
of fruiting body or confined to the "head" if one is present; typically 8-spored, not amyloid. with 
a pore at the tip but not operculate. 
THESE earth tongues are more cheerfully colored than Geoglossum and Trichoglossum, 
and their spores are colorless when viewed under the microscope. They may superficially 
resemble the unbranched coral fungi or fairy clubs (Clavariaceae), but bear their spores 
in asci rather than on basidia and usually have a swollen or flattened, fertile ""head." The 
""head," when present, lacks the abrupt edge and sterile undersurface ofaLeotia. Cudonia, 
or Helvella. 
Four common genera, all members of the Geoglossaceae, are treated here. Among 
these, Spathularia stands out because of its peculiar flattened, fanlike ""head" that runs 
down opposite sides of the stalk. Neolecta is also distinctive because of its highly irregular 
shape, while Microglossum and Mitrula have more or less c1ublike fruiting bodies, the 
latter with a clearly differentiated ""head." 
MICROGLOSSUM, SPA THULARIA, & ALLIES 
869 
These earth tongues, like Geoglossum and Trichoglossum. inhabit humus, soil, moss, 
and rotten wood, but do not grow on insects or truffles. None are large enough or tasty 
enough to collect for the table, but several are quite beautiful, and are worth getting to 
know for this reason if no other. One species from each of the four genera is described here; 
several others are keyed out. 
Key to Microglossum, Spathularia, & Allies 
1. Fruiting body green or greenish .................................................. 2 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
2. Fruiting body olive-green to green to dark green or blue-green; stalk often minutely scurfy 
or scaly ........................................................ M. viride, p. 870 
2. Fruiting body with only a slight greenish tinge; stalk smooth ........................... 
. . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mieroglossum olivaeeum (see M. viride. p. 870) 
3. Fruiting body with a flattened (paddle-like or fanlike) fertile "head" that extends down the 
the stalk on opposite sides (i.e., stalk appears to be wedged into the cap) ............... 4 
3. Not as above; "head" absent, or if present and flattened then not runningdown stalk on opposite 
sides ....................................................................... 5 
4. Stalk reddish-brown to dark brown and velvety; found mainly in eastern North America 
......................................... Spathularia velutipes(see S.j1avida. p. 871) 
4. Not as a bove; widespread .......................... Spathulariaflavida & others, p. 87 I 
5. Fruiting body with a small oval or rounded "head" that is sharply differentiated (and often 
differently colored) from stalk; sometimes growing in water ......................... 6 
5. Fruiting body lacking a sharply differentiated "head" (but apex may be swollen, flattened, or 
broadened); not growing in water ......... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8 
6. Typically growing on submerged sticks in running water (often in cold mountain streams); stalk 
usually brownish ..................... Vibressea truneorum (see Mitrula abietis. p. 870) 
6. Not as above; growing in still water or not in water at all ............................. 7 
7. "Head" pinkish-buff to pale flesh-colored to light brown; stalk light to dark brown; found in 
duff under conifers ......................................... Milrula abietis, p. 870 
7. "Head" differently colored (often yellow or orange) and stalk often white or pinkish-tinged 
and/ or growing in shallow pools or on very wet soil or leaves .......................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mitrula elegans & others (see M. abietis. p. 870) 
8. Fruiting body pallid to pale ochre or dingy yellowish, always growing on wood; exterior usually 
roughed or minutely pimpled by the projecting tips of perithecia (flasklike nests of asci); rare 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Pyrenomycetes, p. 878) 
8. Fruiting body differently colored, or if similar in colorthen lacking perithecia; usually terrestrial 
or in moss, sometimes on rotten wood ............ _ . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., 9 
9. Fruiting body pale yellow to bright yellow to orange ............................... 10 
9. Fruiting body differently colored ................................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. 12 
10. Fruiting body clublike and slender, without a broadened fertile "head"; spores borne on basidia 
. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . ._. . . . . . . . . (see Clavariaceae, p. 630) 
10. Fruiting body usually with a broadened, often flattened fertile "head" or if not, then extremely 
variable in shape (often lobed, forked, flattened, twisted, etc., and usually at least 0.5-2.5 cm 
broad at the top); spores borne inside asci ....................................... I I 
II. Fruiting body very irregular in shape (often lobed, forked, flattened, twisted, etc.), usually 
yellow and usually found under conifers; spores usually less than 10 microns long, elliptical 
to nearly round; widely distributed ................. Neoleeta irregularis & others, p. 871 
II. Fruiting body regularly clublike (but usually with a broad or flattened "head"), yellow to orange; 
found mainly in eastern North America; spores long and thin .......................... 
............... ..... ... ......... Mieroglossum rufum (see Neolecta irregularis. p. 871) 
12. Fruiting body yellow-brown to dark brown, purplish, or even black; usually slender; spores 
borne in asci . Mieroglossum atropurpureum & others (see Geoglossum glutinosum. p. 866) 
12. Fruiting body differently colored (usually paler or brighter than above) and/ or thick; spores 
borne on basidia ......................................... (see Clavariaceae, p. 630) 
870 
HELOTIALES 
Microglossum viride (Green Earth Tongue) Color Plate 214 
FRUITING BODY 1-5.5 cm tall, clublike to tongue- or spatula-shaped (i.e., with an 
enlarged "head" at maturity). Fertile "head" 4-12 mm broad, dark green to pea-green, 
green, olive-green, or even bluish-green, smooth or furrowed, often flattened or com- 
pressed in older specimens. Flesh greenish, rather tough. STALK 2-5 mm thick, colored 
like the head or paler green, usually thinner; surface minutely scurfy or scaly, but some- 
times smooth in age. SPORES 14-22 x 4-6 microns, sausage-shaped to spindle-shaped, 
smooth, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, not septate or septate only when old. 
HABITAT: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in soil, moss, and duff under both 
hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed. It is not uncommon in coastal California in 
the winter and early spring, but is often overlooked because of its small size and green 
color. I find it most often under redwood and tanoak. 
EDIBILITY: Too small to be worthwhile. 
COMMENTS: The striking green color sets apart this petite, farflung earth tongue. The 
specimens in the color plate are rather young and club-shaped, but as they grow older their 
"heads" will become flatter (laterally) and more distinct. The minutely scaly or scurfy stalk 
is also distinctive. M. olivaceum is a somewhat similar but smoother species with an olive- 
buff to greenish-brown to dark brown (not truly green) fruiting body and shorter spores. 
I have found it twice in our area, but it is more widely distributed. Other species of Micro- 
glossum are either yellow to orange (see M. rufum under Neolecta irregularis) or brown 
to blackish (see M. atropurpureum and M.fumosum under Geoglossum glutinosum). 
Mitrula abietis (Miniature Earth Tongue) 
FR UITIN G BO D Y 0.5-4 (5) cm tall, with a stalk and sharply differentiated "head." Fertile 
"head' 1-7 (10) mm broad and high, roundish to cylindrical (elongated), with a smooth 
surface; pinkish-buff to pale flesh-colored to light brown. Flesh thin. STALK 0.5-3 (4)cm 
long, 1-4 (7) mm thick, equal or tapered slightly, thin, light to dark brown (usually darker 
than cap), smooth or slightly powdered above, often with brown hairs at base. SPORES 
10-14 x 2-2.5 microns, elongated, smooth, not septate, hyaline (colorless) under the 
microscope. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious in needle duff under northern and mountain 
conifers; common in western North America in the spring, summer, and fall, but absent 
in our area. 
EDIBILITY: Fleshless and probably flavorless. 
COMMENTS: This little mushroom sometimes grows in large carpets on the forest floor. 
The sharply differentiated "head" distinguishes it from most earth tongues and fairy clubs, 
and it is usually smaller than Cudonia and lacks the abrupt cap margin and sterile under- 
side of that genus. M. elegans, sometimes called the "Swamp Beacon," is a similar, widely 
distributed and common species that fruits in very wet humus or soil or on leaves in shallow 
pools. It has a creamy to bright yellow or pale orange "head" and a white or pinkish-tinged, 
sometimes viscid stalk and can often be found under mountain conifers in the spring and 
early summer. It has long passed under the nameM. paludosa, a similar European species 
that differs microscopically. Other species: M. gracilis is a northern and montane species 
with an ochraceous to orange-buff "head"; it usually grows in moss. M. borealis, also 
northern, has a golden-yellow "head" like that of M. elegans. but has elliptical or crescent- 
shaped spores. M. lunulatospora is an eastern springtime, water-loving species with a 
flesh-colored to yellowish "head" and crescent-shaped spores. Jlibressea truncorum looks 
like a Mitrula or a miniature Leotia. but usually grows on sticks in running water (often 
in cold mountain streams). It is even smaller than Mitrula and somewhat gelatinous. 
NEOLECTA 
871 
N eolecta irregularis (Irregular Earth Tongue) Color Plate 200 
FRUITING BODY 1-7 cm tall, clublike to very irregular (lobed, sparingly branched, 
grooved and twisted, etc.), usually flattened or compressed, 0.4-2.5 cm broad at apex. 
Fertile surface pale yellow to bright yellow or orange-yellow. Flesh white or yellowish, 
rather tough. STALK sometimes absent but usually present as a sterile, pale yellow to 
white base beneath the fertile portion; 1-6 (10) mm thick (usually thinner than fertile area). 
SPORES 5.5-10 )( 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, not septate, hyaline 
(colorless) under the microscope. Asci lining at least the upper part of (and sometimes 
the entire) fruiting body. 
HABIT A T: Widely scattered to gregarious or occasionally tufted on ground, moss, or 
duff, usually under conifers; widely distributed. Along with N. vitellina (see comments), 
it occurs throughout much of the West, but is apparently absent in our area. I have seen 
large fruitings under spruce and fir in New Mexico and Oregon in the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: In my opinion, not worth collecting. McIlvaine, as usual, dissents: "Those 
fortunate enough to find this species will hunt for it again assiduously. Even raw, when cut 
in strips, it makes a picturesque and delicious salad." 
COMMENTS: The bright yellow color and highly irregular shape are usually enough to 
identify this species, which is also known as Spragueola (or Mitrula) irregularis. Club- 
shaped specimens can be mistaken for fairy clubs (Clavulinopsis), but bear their spores 
in asci rather than on basidia, are usually broader, and often have irregularly-shaped 
fruiting bodies growing nearby. Microglossum rufum is a farflung earth tongue with a 
bright yellow to orange fruiting body. It is much more uniform in shape (usually with a 
slender stalk 2-4 mm thick and a wider, flattened "head") and has much longer spores 
(20-40 microns). It is especially common in eastern North America in the summer and 
early fall. Other species: N. vilellina closely resembles N. irregularis. but is slightly smaller 
and paler, and differs microscopically. 
Spathulariaflavida (Fairy Fan) 
FRUITING BODY 1-10 cm tall, with a stalk and fertile "head." Fertile "head" very com- 
pressed or flattened laterally, spatula- or fanlike, 1-3 cm broad, decurrent (running down) 
on opposite sides of the stalk; surface (sides) smooth or wrinkled, sometimes lobed or 
contorted or with a notched apex, pallid when young becoming pale yellow to yellow, buff, 
or cinnamon-buff to brownish (or occasionally pale orangish). Flesh white, not gelatinous. 
ST ALK (I) 2-8 cm long, 2-10 mm thick, variable in shape but often thicker or swollen at 
base, usually hollow; surface smooth to finely mealy but not velvety, white to yellowish or 
colored like the "head" but usually paler, with white to pale yellow mycelium at base. 
SPORES 30-75 (95) )( 1.5-3 microns, very long and narrow (needle-like), smooth, with 
one to several septa (partitions) or none at all; hyaline (colorless) under the microscope 
but often yellow-brown in mass, especially when dry. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or even clustered, sometimes in lines or circles, on 
humus or rotten wood under conifers (especially pine) or sometimes hardwoods; wide- 
spread. It is common in the summer and fall in the Pacific Northwest and Southwest and 
occurs in northern California in the fall, winter, and spring, but I have yet to find it locally. 
EDIBILITY: Said to be edible, but rather tough. Captain Charles McIlvaine describes 
it as "tenacious but tender." 
COMMENTS: The peculiar flattened, paddle- or fanlike "head" that extends down oppo- 
site sides of the stalk is unique to this little mushroom and its close relatives (see next page). 
It might possibly be confused with Neolecta irregularis or a Microglossum. but is not as 
... .... 
...... . . 
'" . 
, 
\ \ 
, 
'.... 
... 
\ 
". 
, 
, 
Left: Spathulariaflavida is easily told by its flattened, paddle-like "head." Note how stalk of central 
specimen appears to be wedged into the "head," and how fertile surface can be wrinkled or smooth. 
Right: Cudonia circinans (see p. 873). Note incurved cap margin and clustered growth habit. 
brightly colored and has a more consistently compressed "head." S. c1avata is a synonym. 
Other species: S. spathulata is said to be similar but has smaller spores and a somewhat 
darker (yellow-brown to reddish-brown) fruiting body. Its cap ranges from flattened to 
rounded (as in Cudonia) but is fertile over its entire surface rather than just at the top. It 
was originally collected in Big Basin State Park, California, but I have not seen it there. 
S. (=Spathular;ops;s) velut;pes of eastern North America is a common and distinctive 
"fairy fan" with orange mycelium and a velvety dark brown to reddish-brown stalk that 
may be thicker at the bottom or top, plus a yellow to yellow-brown flattened "head" that 
is covered by a "veil" when very young and often retains "veil" remnants at maturity. 
LEOTIA & CUDONIA 
Small to medium-sized fungi found on ground or rotten wood. FRUITING BODY with a cap and 
stalk. CAP rounded to convex or lobed, the margin often inrolled; surface smooth or wrinkled, 
viscid when moist in Leotia. not viscid in Cudonia; variously colored. Flesh gelatinous in Leotia. 
not gelatinous in Cudonia. STALK smooth or scurfy or minutely scaly, well-developed. variously 
colored. SPORES spindle-shaped or needle-like, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope; some- 
times septate, smooth. Asci lining the upper surface of the cap, typically 8-spored, not amyloid, 
inoperculate, with a pore at the tip. 
THESE two genera are unique among the earth -tongues in possessing a well-developed 
and clearly differentiated cap and stalk. The cap is not just a swollen "head" as in Milrula 
or other earth tongues; instead, it has a sterile underside and an abrupt margin that sets 
it off from the stalk. In addition, Leolia is easily distinguished by its gelatinous to semi- 
gelatinous tissue. Cudonia, in contrast, is fleshy or tough but not gelatinous. It is apt to be 
mistaken for a small elfin saddle (Helvella), but its cap is usually convex or rounded and 
not as dramatically lobed as in that genus. 
Leolia and Cudonia used to be classified with other earth tongues in the Geoglossaceae, 
but are now placed alongside a number of genera (e.g., Bulgaria) in a larger family, the 
Leotiaceae. Both are widely distributed, but only Leolia is common in our area. They 
grow on the ground or on rotten wood, often in groups or clusters. Neither genus is worth 
eating, although Leolia might be useful as a lubricant! Two species of Leolia and one 
Cudonia are described here. 
872 
LEOTIA & CUDONIA 
873 
Key to Leotia & Cudonia 
I. Flesh gelatinous or semi-gelatinous; surface of fruiting body viscid or slimy when wet 2 
I. Flesh not gelatinous; surface not normally viscid ................................... 6 
2. Growing on submerged sticks in running water; small ................................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (see Vibressea truncorum under Mitru/a abietis. p. 870) 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Fruiting body small (0.5-3 cm tall), whitish to pinkish or brownish, sometimes with an ochra- 
ceous or lavender tinge; found on rotting hardwoods in eastern North America; rare ...... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . " Neocudonie//a (=Leotia) a/biceps 
3. Not as above; usually larger; often with yellow, ochre, or greenish shades; widespread .... 4 
4. Cap consistently and distinctly green or greenish ................................... 5 
4. Cap some shade of yellow, buff, ochre, or cinnamon, at times with a greenish tinge (olive-brown 
or olive-ochre, etc.) .............................................. L. /ubrica, p. 874 
5. Stalk white to yellow or orange ..................................... L. viscosa, p. 874 
5. Stalk pale green to green .......................... L. atrovirens (see L. viscosa. p. 874) 
6. Cap yellowish to olive-buff, sometimes with small"veil" fragments on margin; found in eastern 
North America, usually under hardwoods .............. C./utea (see C. circinans. below) 
6. Not as above; differently colored; widespread ...................................... 7 
7. Cap creamy to pinkish-buff, cinnamon-buff, vinaceous-buff, pale brown, or occasionally 
darker; found mainly in the late summer and fall; widespread ......... C. circinans, below 
7. Cap pinkish-buff to pinkish-cinnamon to grayish-brown or dark grayish-brown; found in 
western North America under conifers, usually in the spring and summer. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. montico/a & c. grisea (see C. circinans, below) 
Cudon;a c;rc;nans (Common Cudonia) 
FRUITING BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, usually rounded or convex, 
sometimes with a central depression and sometimes convoluted; surface wrinkled or 
smooth, creamy to pinkish-buff, cinnamon-buff, vinaceous-buff, pale brown, or occa- 
sionally darker; margin usually curved down and in toward the stalk. Underside sterile, 
often with radiating veins that extend up from the stalk. Flesh thin but firm, not gelati- 
nous, rather tough or leathery when dry. STALK 1.5-7 cm long, 2-12 mm thick (but 
usually less than 6 mm at apex), equal or more often thicker below, stuffed or sometimes 
hollow in age; drab to dark brown (usually darker than cap), usually minutely scurfy, often 
longitudinally striate or ridged, especially above. SPORES (28) 32-40 (46) )( 2 microns, 
very long and thin (needle-like), smooth, sometimes septate (partitioned), but usually not; 
hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or often in dense clusters in humus, soil, and on rotting 
wood; particularly common under conifers, but also found with hardwoods; widely 
distributed. It is said to be the most common member of its genus, but I have yet to find it 
in our area. In the Pacific Northwest it is fairly common in the late summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Poisonous, at least raw. It is said to contain high concentrations of MMH 
(see pp. 799 and 893 for details). 
COMMENTS: The small size, convex to somewhat convoluted cap, and non-gelatinous 
flesh are the hallmarks of this species. It is reminiscent of a dry Leotia. but is not as brightly 
colored. It can also be mistaken for an elfin saddle (He/vella), but the shape is different 
and it often forms dense groups or clusters untypical of He/vella (see photo on p. 872). 
C. monticola is a similar, pinkish-cinnamon to pinkish-buffto grayish-brown westerner. 
It is the largest Cudonia(upto 10 cm high, cap 1-3 cm broad), but has much smaller spores 
than C. circinans (only 18-25 microns long) and a frequently compressed oreven somewhat 
saddle-shaped cap. It is common under conifers in northern California and the Pacific 
Northwest, usually in the spring and summer (whereas C. circinans is more frequent in 
the fall). C. grisea also occurs under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but has a gray to 
874 
HELOTIALES 
dark grayish-brown or fuscous fruiting body and usually fruits in the spring. C. lutea is a 
yellowish to olive-buff eastern species that sometimes shows "veil" fragments on the 
margin of the cap. It grows scattered to gregarious, usually under hardwoods. 
Leotia /ubrica (Jelly Babies) Color Plate 215 
FR UITIN G BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 0.54 cm broad, round to convex to slightly 
lobed or knobby; surface smooth or wrinkled, viscid to slimy when moist (but sometimes 
drying out), buff to yellow, ochre, olive-ochre, or sometimes cinnamon or greenish-brown; 
margin usually curved in toward stalk, often lobed or wavy. Underside sterile, paler. Flesh 
gelatinous (at least the central core), often translucent. STALK 2-8 cm long, 0.3-1 cm 
thick, equal or somewhat thicker below, smooth or scurfy (with minute granules), hollow 
or more often filled with a gel; surface viscid when moist, colored like cap or sometimes 
yellower. SPORES 16-25)( 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped and sometimes curved, smooth, 
hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, septate (partitioned) at maturity. 
HABIT AT: Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff, soil, or very rotten wood under 
both hardwoods and conifers; widely distributed. It is the most common Leotia in North 
America, but is not as frequent in our area as L. viscosa. I usually find it in the winter and 
spring, but in other regions it fruits in the summer and fall. Alexander Smith describes 
finding massive clusters buried in sand dunes! 
EDIBILITY: Harmless but glutinous. It might be more useful as a lubricant than a 
condiment! 
COMMENTS: This farflung fungus is unlikely to be mistaken for any other. The com- 
bination of rounded or wrinkled cap. viscid fruiting body with gelatinous flesh, and overall 
yellowish to ochre-buff color set it apart. Greenish-tinged forms approach L. viscosa, 
and the two species may intergrade. 
Leotia viscosa (Chicken Lips) 
FR UITIN G BODY with a cap and stalk. CAP 0.5-3 cm broad, round to convex to slightly 
lobed or knobby; surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, viscid or slimy when moist, dark 
green to olive-green; margin usually incurved toward the stalk, often lobed or wavy. 
Underside sterile, usually pallid or paler. Flesh (at least the central core) gelatinous, 
often translucent. STALK 2-9 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or tapered slightly upward, 
Leotia viscosa, young specimens. Note the viscid-gelatinous stalk and flesh. As they mature the caps 
will grow larger. The greenish cap distinguishes this species from L. /ubrica (shown in color plate). 
.. , 
\ '. 
 
, 
, 
, 
. 
" 
/. 
, r 
LEOTIA 
875 
smooth, hollow or filled with a gel, viscid to slimy when moist; white to yellow or orange, 
sometimes with minute green dots or particles, especially above. SPORES 16-28 x 4-6 
microns, spindle-shaped and often slightly curved, smooth, usually septate (partitioned) 
at maturity, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in humus or on rotten wood; 
widely distributed. This is the most common Leotia in our area. It fruits in the winter and 
early spring under oak and various other trees. 
EDIBILITY: Harmless but gelatinous. 
COMMENTS: This gelatinous Ascomycete with the green head and white to orange stalk 
can hardly be confused with any other. In dry weather the surface of the cap and stalk may 
not be obviously viscid, but slicing open the fruiting body will usually reveal gelatinous 
tissue within. The nickname "Chicken Lips" was obviously given to it by the same person 
who dubbed Tricholomaflavovirens the "Man On Horseback!" Other species: L. atTo- 
viTens (=L. chloTocephala) is a similar but smaller eastern species with a greenish to dark 
green cap and green to pale green stalk. L. lubrica (see description) is usually yellower. 
BULGARIA & Allies 
Small to medium-sized fungi usually growing on wood or bark ofhardwoods. FR UITING BODY 
top-shaped to cup-shaped to nearly round to irregularly lobed; pinkish to reddish. purplish. dark 
brown, or black. Flesh gelatinous or rubbery-gelatinous. STALK absent or present only as a short 
narrowed base. SPORES elliptical to elongated, smooth or ribbed, septate or not septate; brown 
(or many of them brown) or black in Bulgaria. otherwise hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. 
Asci lining upper surface offruiting body, typically 8-spored, inoperculate, with amyloid pore in 
Bulgaria, otherwise not amyloid. 
THESE are gelatinous or rubbery-gelatinous, hardwood-inhabiting fungi with little or 
no stalk and a top-shaped to cup-shaped to irregular fruiting body. The gelatinous texture 
can lead to confusion with the jelly fungi, which bear their spores on basidia, and with 
Sarcosoma and allies, which have operculate asci. Since these differences are microscopic, 
the species treated here are also keyed out under those groups. One species, Bulgaria 
inquinans. is described here, and three others are discussed. They are placed with Leotia 
in the Leotiaceae, but lack the well-developed stalk of that genus. Because of their texture 
they are not worth eating except in dire emergencies. 
Key to Bulgaria & Allies 
1. Fruiting body usually irregularly lobed or brainlike, often forming confluent masses; found on 
beech in eastern North America .. Ascotremellafaginacea (see Bulgaria inquinans, p. 876) 
1. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Fruiting body shallowly cup-shaped to earlike or seaweed-like, reddish-brown to dark brown 
but not usually black (unless dried out), typically 2 cm broad or more; spores borne on basidia 
which usually line the lower (but sometimes the upper) surface of fruiting body; sterile sur- 
face minutely hairy or downy ........................ (see Auricularia auricula, p. 675) 
2. Not as above; spores borne in asci which line the upper surface of fruiting body .......... 3 
3. Upper (fertile) surface of fruiting body dark brown to black .......................... 4 
3. Upper surface of fruiting body pinkish to reddish, reddish-brown, purplish, or tan ....... 5 
4. Found on dead hardwoods; asci not operculate ............... Bulgaria inquinans, p. 876 
4. Found on ground or on dead conifers (rarely hardwoods); asci operculate (i.e., with "lids") 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (see Sarcosoma & Allies, p. 826) 
5. Fruiting body cup-shaped at maturity; fertile surface reddish-brown to brown; exterior with 
minute dark hairs; asci operculate (with "lids") .......... (see Sarcosoma & Allies, p. 826) 
5. Fruiting body usually more or less top-shaped, pinkish to reddish to purplish; asci not oper- 
culate ........ Ascocoryne sarcoides & Neobulgariapura (see Bulgaria inquinans. p. 876) 
""-  
' , - 
. . \' 
\ .. \."  
--- . . 
 . 
"" OJ .. 
\; 
I 
, 
< 
" 
" .. 
"-- 
....... 
. " 
. .. 
Bulgaria inquinans. These gelatinous specimens look like licorice drops. (If only they tasted like 
them!) The three on left are being viewed from the top, the one on the upper right, from the side. 
Bulgaria inqu;nans (Poor Man's Licorice; Black Jelly Drops) 
FRUITING BODY 1-4 cm broad and/ or high, rubbery; at first rounded to somewhat 
cylindrical to shallow cup-shaped or top-shaped, the top then broadening into a flattened 
or broadly convex, flabby "cap." Fertile (upper) surface blackish and often shiny when 
wet. Exterior or underside brown to blackish and roughened. Flesh gelatinous or at least 
very rubbery; pliant and tough, not brittle. STALK absent or present as a narrowed base, 
continuous with and colored like the exterior or underside of the "cap." SPORES 11-14 
x 6-7 microns, more or less kidney-shaped, smooth, not septate; brown or black in mass, 
but only the upper four in each ascus brown under the microscope, the other four hyaline 
(colorless); asci typically 8-spored, their tips blueing in iodine. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, in rows, or densely gregarious or clustered on dead hard- 
wood logs and branches, especially of oak; widely distributed and common. In our area 
it fruits throughout the mushroom season, especially on live oak and tanoak, and can be 
seen on almost any wintertime trek through the woods. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown, but as the common name implies, not worth eating except in 
desperation! 
COMMENTS: Also known as Phaeobulgar;a ;nqu;nans, the flabby, funky fruiting 
bodies of this fungus look something like licorice drops, or in the concise words of Judith 
Scott Mattoon, ..They remind me of rubber parts that fit into things by squeezing through 
and then popping back into shape-you know what I mean?" The texture is reminiscent 
oflndia rubber, or can be gelatinous, leading to confusion with the jelly fungi. However, it 
bears its spores in asci rather than on basidia, and can be told in the field by its distinctive 
shape and color. Its growth on dead hardwoods and smaller size distinguish it from the 
Bulgaria inquinans. These specimens were collected in dry weather and consequently are rubbery 
rather than gelatinous. Note the narrowed base beneath the fertile portion. 
\ '" . 
'1 
.' ., 
BULGARIA 
877 
conifer-loving "Starving Man's Licorice" (Sarcosoma mexicana and S. latahensis). Des- 
pite its uncanny resemblance to Sarcosoma, it is classified with the earth tongues because 
of its inoperculate (lidless) asci. Other gelatinous species: Ascocoryne (=Coryne) sar- 
coides is a widespread, more or less top-shaped, gelatinous, flesh-colored to dark purplish 
or reddish-brown species. It is smaller (up to 1 cm broad), has septate spores, and grows 
on dead wood. Neobulgaria pura (=Ascotremella turbinata) is a flesh-colored to reddish, 
top-shaped eastern species with non-septate spores. Ascotremellafaginacea is a larger, 
raisin-colored, gelatinous species that is lobed or brainlike and often forms continuous 
masses on beech trunks in eastern North America. All of these look like jelly fungi and 
are keyed out under that group. 
CIBORIA & Allies 
Small to minute fungifound on rollen wood. soil. or more often on plant stems. leaves. nuts. and 
other vegetable mailer. FRUITING BODY usually cup-shaped to disdike or cushion-shaped. 
with or without a stalk. Fertile (upper) surface variously colored, usually smooth. Underside sterile, 
with or without hairs. STALK if present long or short, usually very thin, sometimes arising from 
a swollen "tuber." SPORES variously shaped, usually but not always smooth and hyaline (color- 
less) under the microscope. Asci lining the upper surface of the fruiting body, usually 8-spored, 
inoperculate, with a pore at the tip which mayor may not be amyloid. 
THE above synopsis covers a vast group of minute but cute cuplike and disclike fungi that 
are seldom collected except by professional specialists. They differ from the many cup 
fungi in the Pezizales in having inoperculate (lidless) asci. Some, such as Ciboria, have 
long stalks attached to the substrate. Others, such as Sclerotinia, Whetzelinia, and M yrio- 
sclerotinia, have long stalks that arise from a tuberlike mass of tissue (sclerotium). Still 
others, like Dasyscyphus, have shorter, sometimes hairy stalks. Finally, there are many 
(e.g., Mollisia) that have no stalk at all. A large number of these fungi are parasitic on 
plant parts, but some are saprophytes. Without exception they are too small to interest the 
average mushroom hunter and are certainly too small to eat. The two genera described 
here, Ciboria and Chlorociboria, belong to different families (the Sclerotiniaceae and 
Leotiaceae, respectively). Several other related families are not treated here. 
Key to Ciboria & Allies 
I. Fruiting body blue to green or pallid with a blue or greenish tinge; growing on wood 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chlorociboria aeruginascens & others, p. 878 
I. Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Fruiting body minute, bright yellow to orange-yellow; found on rotten wood, usually in swarms; 
widely distributed ............................................... Bisporella citrina 
2. Not as above .................. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . o. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 
3. Stalk arising from a swollen "tuber" (sclerotium) Scierotinia, Whetzelinia, & Myrioscierotinia 
3. Not as above ................................................................. 4 
4. Fruiting body yellow-brown to brown, with a stalk; growing on willow and alder catkins .... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Ciboria amentacea, below 
4. Not as above .......................... Ciboria, Dasyscyphus, Mollisia, & many others 
Ciboria amentacea (Catkin Cup) 
FRUITING BODY with a stalk and cuplike cap. "Cap"O.5-1.2cmbroad,atfirstshallowly 
cup-shaped, expanding to nearly flat in age. Fertile (upper or inner) surface light brown to 
yellow-brown, smooth. Exterior of cup similar in color, also smooth. STALK 1-5 cm 
long, 1-2 mm thick, light brown to yellow-brown, equal, smooth, often curved, not arising 
from a sclerotium. SPORES 7.5-13 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. 
878 
HELOTIALES 
HABIT A T: Solitary or in small groups on old, fallen alder and willow catkins; widely 
distributed but seldom collected, usually fruiting in the spring. 
EDIBILITY: Who knows? 
COMMENTS: The growth on alder or willow catkins rescues this little brown cup fungus 
from the anonymity it so richly deserves. 
Chlorociboria aeruginascens (Blue Stain) 
FRUITING BODY 3-7(10) mm broad, at first cup-shaped, then becoming flat ordisc1ike 
or with a slightly elevated margin. Fertile (upper) surface bright to pale blue-green or 
turquoise, sometimes with a yellowish or orange-yellow tint developing in age; smooth or 
slightly wrinkled. Exterior (underside) similarly colored (but not yellowish). Flesh thin, 
also bluish-green. STALK usually present as a short, narrowed, typically off-center base; 
up to 3 (6) mm long and 1-2 mm thick, same color as rest offruitingbody. SPORES 6-10 x 
1.5-2 microns, spindle-shaped or elongated, smooth, with an oil droplet at each end. 
HABIT AT: Gregarious (several often arising from a common base) on dead or barkless 
wood (usually oak); widely distributed and quite common, but easily overlooked because 
of its diminutive dimensions. In our area it fruits mainly in the winter and early spring. 
EDIBILITY: Indisputably inconsequential. 
COMMENTS: This petite Ascomycete merits mention in this book because of its unusual 
color. C. aerug;nosa is a very similar, widely distributed species that is smaller (less than 
5 mm broad), has a shorter, more or less central stalk, and orange-yellow flesh. Both 
species can be detected when they are not fruiting because their mycelium stains the host 
blue-green. The stained wood was once used in the manufacture of inlaid wooden objects 
known as "Tunbridge Ware." Both species have also been placed in the genus Chloro- 
splenium. 
Flask Fungi 
G'l 
spores 0" 
PYRENOMYCETES 
THE Pyrenomycetes differ fundamentally from the Discomycetes (morels, cup fungi, 
earth tongues, etc.) because they bear their asci in flask-shaped "nests" called perithecia. 
The perithecia are usually imbedded in the fruiting body, but their necks or mouths often 
protrude like small pimples. 
The flask fungi are a varied lot, but only a few of them are conspicuous enough to be 
considered in this tome. The most common types, Xylaria and Daldinia, are tough, 
usually black, and grow on wood. Another distinctive group, Cordyceps, is parasitic on 
insects and truffles. Still another, Hypomyces, engulfs other mushrooms in a pimpled or 
powdery weft of tissue. The flask fungi treated here belong to a single order (Sphaeriales) 
within the Pyrenomycetes. They are unpalatable except for one species of Hypomyces. 
They fruit in moist weather, but the tougher types persist year-round. 
Key to the Pyrenomycetes 
I. Growing on wood (but wood sometimes buried) .................................... 2 
I. Growing on insects (including pupae or larvae), spiders, truffles, or other mushrooms (but the 
host sometimes buried inside rotten wood!) ....................................... 3 
PYRENOMYCETES 
879 
2. Fruiting body whitish to yellowish to pale ochre; rare ............... Podostroma, below 
2. Fruiting body gray to dark brown or black, but sometimes covered with a white powder; 
common ............................................... Xylar;a & Dald;n;a, p. 885 
3. Fruiting body clublike, threadlike, or with a cap and stalk; growing on insects, spiders, or 
certain truffles ................................................. Cordyceps, below 
3. Fruiting body a pimpled or powdery layer of tissue that covers or partially covers its host; 
growing on other mushrooms ...... _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hypomyces, p. 882 
PODOSTROMA 
THIS rare, wood-inhabiting genus is represented by a single boring species in our area, 
described below. 
Podostroma alutaceum 
FRUITING BODY 1-5 cm tall and 0.5-1 cm thick, cylindrical to club-shaped, without a 
well-defined cap. Surface dry, minutely roughened by the slightly protruding perithecia 
(fIasklike nests of asci), whitish to yellowish to pale ochre, usually paler (white) at the 
base. SPORES elongated, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, finely warted and 
septate (with one partition), breaking up into one-celled, round to elliptical segments 
averaging 4-4.5 x 3-4 microns. Asci 8-spored, but each spore breaking in two to make 16. 
HABITAT: Solitary or in small groups on rotting wood; widely distributed but rare. 
I have found it only once in our area, on dead oak in the late winter. 
EDIBILITY: Who cares? 
COMMENTS: This forgettable club like fungus can be recognized by its yellowish color, 
growth on wood, and presence of perithecia (flask like "nests" of asci) on the upper 
portion of the fruiting body. It is most likely to be mistaken for a fairy club (Clavaria or 
Clavulinopsis), but the above-mentioned features distinguish it. 
CORDYCEPS 
Small fungifound on insects (pupae. larvae. and adults). spiders. and certain truffles. FR UITING 
BO DY threadlike 10 club-shaped or with a differentiated" head" and stalk; often brightly colored 
but sometimes dull or dark; surface often roughened or minutely pimpled by projecting perithecia. 
STALK present, usually slender or very thin, arising from the host insect or truffle (which is often 
buried). SPORES threadlike, typically hyaline (colorless) under the microscope and smooth, 
multiseptate, but usually breaking up quickly into one-celled, barrel-shaped or elongated segments. 
Asci borne in perithecia (flasklike structures) imbedded in or projecting from the"head"(if present) 
or upper portion of the fruiting body. 
THESE small but fascinating clublike fungi are obligate parasites of insects, spiders, and 
certain truffles. As such they are easy to recognize, providing you dig them up carefully 
so they can be traced to their host, which is often buried in humus, soil, or rotten wood. 
When the host is overlooked or left behind, many species of Cordyceps can still be distin- 
guished from other club like fungi by their minutely roughened or pimpled fertile surface. 
Cordyceps is a fairly large genus and only a few species can be treated here. Most ofthem 
parasitize insect larvae, pupae, and adults. The mycelium develops inside the insect, 
killing it and devouring it. After the insect is completely mummified and emptied of 
nutrients, the mycelium fruits and then dies. As the insect is the sole source offood for the 
fungus, the size of the fruiting body is often dependent on the size of the host. Since insects 
880 
PYRENOMYCETES 
are more abundant in warm, humid weather, it's not surprising that Cordyceps is particu- 
larly prominent and diverse in eastern North America (where there are summer rains) and 
the tropics. In California and the Pacific Northwest, where the summers are drier, insect- 
eating species are comparatively rare, but those that parasitize truffles are more common. 
It should be emphasized, however, that even the "common" species of Cordyceps are rare 
in relation to other mushrooms. Most mycologists consider one or two fruiting bodies of 
Cordyceps a real find! 
Cordyceps are worthless as food because of their small size and infrequent occurrence. 
Their unique diet, however, makes them a fascinating group to study. Perhaps some day 
we will find a practical use for them in the control of certain insect pests. Three species of 
Cordyceps" are described here, and several others are keyed out. Also worth mentioning 
is the closely related genus, Claviceps. which parasitizes plants rather than insects or 
truffles. The most potent hallucinogenic compound known, LSD, was derived from 
Clav;ceps purpurea, better known as wheat ergot.. 
Key to Cordyceps 
1. Growing on truffles (species of E/aphomyces) ...................................... 2 
1. Growing on insects (adults, pupae, or larvae) or spiders ................ _ . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 
2. Fruiting body with a cap and stalk ......................... C. capitata & others, below 
2. Fruiting body clublike (lacking a distinct cap), usually with yellow mycelial threads at base 
or permeating the host .................:... C. ophioglossoides (see c. cap;tata. below) 
3. Fruiting body with a cap or "head" which is usually clearly delimited from the stalk or sterile 
portion of fruiting body ....................................................... 4 
3. Fruiting body lacking a differentiated "head" or cap, but often thicker toward the top .... 7 
4. Growing on beetles, moths, or butterflies (or their larvae or pupae) .................... 5 
4. Growing on ants or wasps ...................................................... 6 
5. Stalk typically yellow; cap ochre to mahogany .... C. gracilis (see C. myrmecophila. p. 881) 
5. Not as above; fruiting body brownish or tinged vinaceous; "head" warty ................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . .. C. entomorrhiza (see C. myrmecoph;/a. p. 881) 
6. Growing on ants .......................................... C. myrmecophila, p. 881 
6. Growing on wasps ...................... C. sphecocephala (see C. myrmecophila. p. 881) 
7. Fruiting body threadlike (less than 2 mm thick) ...................................... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C. unilateral is, C. clavulata, & others (see C. militar;s. p. 882) 
7. Fruiting body not threadlike .................................................... 8 
8. Fruiting body brown to purple-brown or blackish ..... C. ravenelii (see C. militar;s. p. 882) 
8. Fruiting body white to yellow, orange, or orange-red ................................ 9 
9. Growing on beetle (usually the larvae or pupae); fruiting body with sterile tip ............. 
. . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . _ C. melolanthae (see C. militar;s. p. 882) 
9. Growing on butterflies and moths (usually larvae or pupae); tip not sterile ... _ . . . . . .. .. to 
10. Fruiting body orange-buffto orange to orange-red ................... C. milita,;s, p. 882 
10. F roiting body whitish to yellow .............. C. washingtonensis (see C. militar;s. p. 882) 
C ordyceps capitata (T ruffle Eater) 
FRUITING BODY arising from certain underground truffles (Elaphomyces), 2-8 (12) 
cm tall, with a well-defined cap or "head" and stalk. Fertile "head" 0.5-2 cm broad and 
high, nearly round to convex or slightly conical; surface dark reddish-brown to brown, 
dark olive-brown, or even blackish, roughened or minutely pimpled by protruding peri- 
thecia (flasklike nests of asci). Flesh white. STALK 1.5-8 cm long, (0.2) 0.4-1.5 cm thick, 
more or less equal, sometimes slightly flattened, often bent or curved, occasionally forked 
(with two "heads"), rather tough; surface usually fibrillose of fibrillose-scaly, yellow to 
yellow-ochre to yellow-olive, sometimes darker (olive to olive-black) in age; base often 
CORDYCEPS 
881 
whitish. SPORES threadlike, hyaline (colorless) and smooth under the microscope, 
usually breaking up into one-celled segments averaging (8) 12-27 (32) )( 1.5-3 microns. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, tufted, or gregarious on ground, but arising from underground deer 
truffles (Elaphomyces species); widely distributed and one of the more common members 
of the genus. Scattered fruiting bodies are the norm, but sometimes it fruits prolifically. 
I have not found it in our area, but it may well occur(Elaphomyces certainly does). In the 
mixed coastal forests of northern California it can be found in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Possibly worth trying since it is larger than most species of Cordyceps. but 
I can find no information on it. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several Cordyceps species that grow only on Elaphomyces. 
The latter can occur several inches deep in the soil, but specimens close to the surface are 
more apt to be parasitized. The reddish-brown or darker cap which is sharply differen- 
tiated from the yellow to olive stalk are the principal fieldmarks. C. canadensis is a very 
similar truffle-eater with much larger spore segments; it is known from eastern North 
America and Europe. C. ophioglossoides is another species that parasitizes Elapho- 
myces. but it has a clublike fruiting body that lacks a sharply defined "head." The club is 
sometimes yellow when very young but soon becomes reddish-brown to olive-brown to 
nearly black except for a yellow base and yellow mycelial threads that extend into the host. 
It is said to be the most common Cordyceps in eastern North America, but is rather rare 
in California. 
Cordyceps myrmecophila (Ant Fungus; Ant Eater) 
FRUITING BODY arising from an ant (often buried), 0.8-5 (10) cm tall, with a thin stalk 
and small "head." Fertile "head" 2-8 mm broad, usually oval; surface ochre to ochraceous- 
salmon, sometimes with short longitudinal ridges or furrows in dry weather, minutely 
pimpled from the slightly projecting perithecia (flasklike nests of asci). STALK 0.8-9.5 
cm long, 0.5-] (2) mm thick, very thin and more or less equal, colored like the "head" or 
often paler (pale yellow, sometimes shading to white near base, or entirely white if not 
exposed to light). SPORES threadlike and multiseptate, smooth, hyaline (colorless) 
under the microscope, breaking into one-celled segments averaging 8-10 )( ].5 microns. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious on the mummified, often buried carcasses of ants 
(usually one per ant); widely distributed, fruiting in damp weather, usually around ant 
nests in the woods. Although rare, it is sometimes prolific when it fruits. It has been found 
in British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon (as well as Europe, China, and Brazil), and 
may well occur in California; there is certainly no shortage of potential hosts! 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: This is one of several Cordyceps species that are capitate (i.e., that have 
a differentiated "head") and parasitize insects. The ochre to yellow color and growth on 
ants distinguish it. As in other species, the length of the stalk depends largely on whether 
or not the host is buried, and if so, how deep. Other capitate species include: C. spheco- 
cephala, a very similar southeastern species that grows on wasps and has a very thin, 
creamy to yellow or yellow-brown fruiting body; C. entomorrhiza, brownish orvinaceous- 
tinged with a very warty "head," growing on beetle larvae in the Pacific Northwest, rare; 
and C. gracilis, growing on larvae of beetles, moths, and butterflies in eastern North 
America, with a yellow stalk and ochre to mahogany-colored "head," also rare. For 
capitate species that grow on truffles, see C. capitata. and for the club like (non-capitate) 
types that grow on insects, see C. militaris. 
882 
PYRENOMYCETES 
Cordyceps militaris (Caterpillar Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY arising from buried moth and butterfly larvae or pupae, 2-8 cm tall, 
cylindrical to spindle- or club-shaped (i.e., with a slightly swollen upper fertile region, but 
lacking a well-defined "head"); often with a longitudinal furrow. Upper (fertile) portion 
of club 2-6 mm broad, orange to orange-buff to orange-red, finely roughened or pimpled 
by the slightly protruding perithecia(flasklike nests of asci). ST ALK (sterile lower region) 
smooth, usually paler, often curved or wavy. SPORES threadlike and multiseptate, 
smooth, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, breaking up into one-celled, barrel- 
shaped segments averaging 2-6 x 1-1.5 microns. 
HABIT A T: Solitary to gregarious or clustered on buried pupae or less commonly larvae 
(caterpillars) of moths and butterflies; widely distributed. It is one of the more common 
species in the genus, but is rare in California. In eastern North America I have found it 
several times in-the summer and fall. 
EDIBILITY: Unknown. 
COMMENTS: The orange to orange-buff, club-shaped fruiting body that arises from 
mummified pupae or larvae is most distinctive. It might be confused with other clublike 
fungi (e.g., Clavulinopsis. Microglossum) if it isdug upcarelesslyorthehostis overlooked, 
but the pimpled upper portion (see photo on p. 883) will still identify it. Other species that 
parasitize insects and do not have a clearly defined "head" or cap include: C. wash- 
ingtonensis of the Pacific Northwest, also growing on moth and butterfly pupae or larvae, 
and very similar, but with a whitish to yellow fruiting body; C. melolanthae, growing on 
beetles (usually buried grubs), sometimes in huge numbers, in eastern North America, 
often larger than C. militaris. with a whitish to yellow to orange fruiting body that has a 
sterile tip; C. ravenelii, a rare eastern species with a brown to chocolate-brown, purple- 
brown, or blackish, club like fruiting body, also growing on beetle grubs; C. unilateralis, a 
minute (up to 3 cm tall and less than I mm thick) brown eastern and southern species that 
feeds on ants, bees, and wasps; and C. clavulata, growing on scale insects. There are many 
other species, particularly in eastern North America and the tropics; some can only be 
identified with a microscope. For species that parasitize insects and have a well-defined 
"head," see C. myrmecophila. 
HYPOMYCES 
Ubiquitous fungi that parasitize other mushrooms, partially or completely covering them in a layer 
of pimpled or powdery tissue. FRUITING BODY taking on the shape of its host, but disfiguring 
it; composed of a layer of tissue in which numerous perithecia are imbedded (but asexual stages 
lack perithecia). SPORES (sexual) elongated, smooth or warted, often I-septate, hyaline (color- 
less) under the microscope. Asexual spores of various shapes and sizes also produced by some 
species. Asci borne in perithecia (flasklike structures). 
THIS distinctive genus is parasitic on other mushrooms (mostly agarics and boletes), 
engulfing them in a pimpled or powdery layer of tissue. The actual fruiting bodies (peri- 
thecia) of Hypomyces are not large enough to qualify as mushrooms, but are given shape 
and substance by the mushrooms they grow on. Hypomyces can be found wherever 
suitable hosts occur, sometimes in epidemic proportions. Apparently the mycelium lives 
with or on the mycelium of its host and fruits at the same time. H. lactifluorum, sometimes 
called the"Lobster Mushroom" because of its bright red to orange color, is eaten by many 
people. Other species of Hypomyces are unpalatable and potentially dangerous, parti- 
cularly if the host is a poisonous mushroom disfigured beyond recognition. Two common 
species of Hypomyces are described here and several others are keyed out. 
"i' :-: 
'. 
"4" ,. 
.... 
,. 
. 
, t 
0+ 
; 
.4 
\..(. 
" 
'11 
,. 
. ..., '"' .....-.,:: 
 '", " 
.- 
,... 
t 
\ 
. 
., 
Left: Cordyceps militaris (see p. 882). Note the pimpled surface caused by protruding perithecia, and 
the insect on which it is growing (partly visible on left). (Alan Bessette) Right: Hypomyces chryso- 
spermum (see below) engulfs boletes in a white to bright yellow mass of tissue. 
Key to Hypomyces 
I. Growing on boletes, covering them in a white to bright yellow mass of tissue .............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H. chrysospermum, below 
L Not as above ................................................................. 2 
2. Growing on fruiting bodies of Russula and Lactarius, covering them in a minutely pimpled 
layer of bright orange to red or magenta tissue .................. H. lactiJluorum, p. 884 
2. Not as above ................................................................. 3 
3. Growing on gilled mushrooms (mostly Amanita, Lactarius, and Russula) .............. 4 
3. Growing on elfin saddles or coral fungi ........................................... 5 
4. Growing on fruiting bodies of Amanita, covering them in a white to flesh-colored or pinkish 
layer oftissue ............................... H. hyalinus(see H.lactifluorum, p. 884) 
4. Growing mostly on fruiting bodies of Lactarius and Russula (usually on the gills and upper 
stalk), covering them in yellow to greenish tissue H. luteovirens (see H. lactifluorum, p. 884) 
5. Growing on coral fungi (e.g., Ramaria) ... H. transformans(see H. chrysospermum, below) 
5. Growing on elfin saddles (e.g., Helvella) ... H. cervinigenus(see H. chrysospermum, below) 
Hypomyces chrysospermum (Bolete Eater) 
FRUITING BODY beginning as a white moldy-looking growth that attacks and quickly 
engulfs boletes, then turns bright yellow and powdery, then finally becomes reddish- 
brown (but this last stage rarely seen) and becomes pimpled. Flesh of the host often soft 
or mushy. SPORES in white stage 10-30 )( 5-12 microns, elliptical, smooth; in yellow 
stage, 10-25 microns, round, thick-walled, and warted; in final (sexual) stage, 25-30)( 5-6 
microns, spindle-shaped, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope and usually I-septate 
(partitioned). Perithecia only present in final stage. 
HABIT A T: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on boletes; widely distributed and very 
common in our area whenever boletes are out; also reported on Paxil/us and Rhizopogon. 
EDIBILITY: Not edible, possibly poisonous. It is often associated with bacterial decay. 
COMMENTS: This is the white to bright yellow fungus you see so often on boletes, and 
which you've probably cursed a hundred times for depriving you of your meal. The spores 
produced in the white and yellow stages are asexual; only those in the final stage are per- 
fect spores (sexually produced inside asci). This final stage is seldom seen, however, be- 
cause it occurs only after the host is decayed beyond recognition and is very unpleasant 
883 
\ 
, -.. 
;.. 
1f{ 
.... 
.. .. 
; .. 
..  .. " 
,...,. 
; ':t,. 
.. 
tt 
,'" ... 
. 
.. 
, 
.. 
, 
-."1>, > 
!-. 
Hypomyces hya/inus(specimens on right) disfigures various species of Amanita, in thiscaseA. rubes- 
cens (shown on left). See comments under H. lactifluorum for more details. 
to handle. The different stages of the fungus have been given different names, e.g., Sepe- 
don;um chrysospermum was originally applied to the yellow stage. Other species: In our 
area, H. cerv;n;genus commonly attacks the black fluted elfin saddle (Helvella lacunosa), 
covering it with white or pinkish tissue. H. transformans performs a similar transfor- 
mation on several species of coral fungi (particularly Ramaria). Neither of these should be 
eaten. For species that attack gilled mushrooms, see H. lactifluorum. 
Hypomyces lactifluorum (Lobster Mushroom) Color Plate 216 
FRUITING BODY growing on and engulfing gilled mushrooms {species of Russula and 
Lactarius) in a layer of roughened or pimpled, bright orange to orange-red to purple-red 
or occasionally yellow-orange tissue which is firm to the touch. Overall shape of the host 
mushroom and parasite often like an inverted pyramid. Flesh (of the host) crisp, white. 
SPORES 30-50 )( 4.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped or shaped like caraway seeds, hyaline 
(colorless) under the microscope, septate (with one partition), warted. Perithecia im- 
bedded in the tissue that covers the host, but protruding as small pimples. 
HABIT AT: Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woods, often partially buried in the duff, 
usually on the fruiting bodies of Lactarius and Russula (especially the large white species 
like R. brevipes); widely distributed. It is common in some regions, but rare in our area. 
The largest fruitings I've seen were under ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
EDIBILITY: Rated highly by many people and sold in markets in Mexico. There is no 
absolute assurance that the host species is edible, but I can find no mention of poisonings 
by this species. Perhaps it only attacks edible species! Material I sampled was fairly good. 
COMMENTS: This fungus is best recognized by its bright orange to reddish color and 
minutely pimpled surface. The gills of the host are often reduced to blunt, chanterelle- 
like ridges, but the pimpled appearance caused by the numerous perithecia and crisper 
texture distinguish it. The bright fluorescent color of H. lactifluorum make it the most 
spectacular member of its clan. H. luteov;rens is a somewhat similar yellow-green to 
greenish species that covers the gills and upper stalk of various Lactarius and Russula 
species. It is more common in our area thanL. lactifluorum, but not nearly as conspicuous. 
H. hyal;nus is a white to pinkish or flesh-colored species that attacks species of Amanita 
(particularly A. rubescens), turning them into pimpled or warty upright clubs (see photo 
above). It should not be eaten because its host might be deadly poisonous! It is common 
in eastern North America, but I have yet to find it on the west coast. 
884 
885 
XYLARIA& DALDINIA 
Very tough to hard or charcoal-like. wood-inhabitingfungi. FRU ITING BODY erect and cJublike 
or branched in Xylaria. or stalkless and hemispherical in Daldinia; usuaJJy black when mature. 
but sometimes covered with a white or grayish or brown powdery coating of asexual spores (coni- 
dia). Flesh tough or charcoal-like. usuaJJy white in Xylaria. concentricaJJy zoned in Daldinia. 
STALK present in Xylaria. absent in Daldinia. SPORES dark brown to black, usually spindle- 
shaped or elliptical, smooth; asexual spores (conidia) hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, 
smooth. Asci borne in flasklike structures (perithecia) imbedded in the fruiting body (usually 
upper portion). 
THESE tough, mostly black, wood-inhabiting fungi are very distinctive. The erect, club- 
like forms (Xylaria) might be confused with the black earth tongues (Geoglossum and 
Trichoglossum). but are much tougher or harder and have paler flesh. Daldinia. on the 
other hand, has a sessile (stalkless) fruiting body. It might be mistaken for a charred 
polypore or crust fungus, but its concentrically zoned interior, -pimpled exterior, and 
brittle, charcoal-like consistency are distinctive. Both Xylaria and Daldinia 
frequently produce spores asexually. These asexual spores (conidia) take the form of a 
white to gray or brown powder that coats the surface of the young fruiting body. The 
powder may disguise the black undersurface, but is easily rubbed or licked off. In mature 
specimens, numerous asci-containing flasks (perithecia) can be seen if the fruiting body 
is sliced open. 
Xylaria and Daldinia are very common, but much too tough to be edible. Identification 
of species is based largely on microscopic characteristics, but the genera are easily learned. 
Two widespread Xylarias and one Daldinia are described here. 
Key to Xylaria & Daldinia 
l. Fruiting body round to hemispherical or lumpy, with little or no stalk (not growing erect); 
flesh charcoal-like (hard but usually brittle) ............ Dald;n;a g,and;s & others, p. 887 
I. Not as above; fruiting body erect, clublike (unbranched) or antlerlike (branched) ........ 2 
2. Fruiting body slender, often branched and/ or covered with a whitish powder (at least over 
upper portion) .......................................... Xyla,;a hypoxylon, below 
2. Not as above ..... _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3 
3. Fruiting body very tough or hard, up to 3 cm thick; flesh inside usually white or pallid; 
surface often minutely warted or cracked .:...... _ . . Xyla,;a polymo,pha & others, p. 886 
3. Not with abovefeatures ..................... (see Geoglossum& T,;choglossum, p. 866) 
Xylaria hypoxylon (Candlesnuff Fungus) 
FRUITING BODY 2-8 cm high, very tough, erect, slender, cylindrical or narrowly club- 
like when young but usually becoming antlerlike(branched sparsely or forked at the tip) 
in age. Upper portion or tip (or occasionally entire surface) white and powdery when 
young, eventually becoming black and minutely roughened (use hand lens!). Flesh very 
tough, white or pallid. ST ALK (lower sterile portion of fruiting body) thin, usually 1-3 (5) 
mm thick, black, minutely hairy, very tough or wiry. SPORES (sexual) 10-14 x 4-6 
microns, bean-shaped, smooth, black in mass but brown under the microscope; asexual 
spores (conidia) smooth and elliptical or elongated, white in mass but hyaline (colorless) 
under the microscope. Perithecia imbedded in the upper part offully mature fruiting body. 
HABIT AT: Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on rotting logs, stumps, buried 
sticks, etc.; very widely distributed and common. In our area it occurs year-round in many 
habitats, but especially on oak and tanoak in the fall and winter. 
EDIBILITY: Much too tough to be of value. 
\\- 
1 
4' 
1" 
 
." 
Left: Xylaria hypoxylon. Antlerlike specimens such as these are typical, but unbranched ones also 
occur. At least the upper portion of black fruiting body is usually covered with white spore powder 
until fully mature. Right: "Dead Man's Fingers," Xylariapolymorpha. Note thick fruiting body with 
blunt tip and sterile base or stalk. These two specimens are black, but the picture is overexposed. 
COMMENTS: Also known as X ylosphaera hypoxylon, the candlesnuff fungus is easily 
told by its very tough, slender, antlerlike fruiting body that is black below and dusted with 
white powder above. The powdered appearance of young specimens is caused by masses 
of asexual spores (conidia) that form directly on hyphae instead of in asci. Later on, the 
asci form inside "flasks" (perithecia) at the top of the fruiting body. There are many 
Xylarias that more or less resemble this species (e.g., X. cornu-damae), but they are best 
differentiated microscopically. Some are short and cylindrical, others are branched or 
clustered. All grow on wood (sometimes buried) and are very tough, For thicker club- 
shaped species, see X. polymorpha. 
Xylariapolymorpha (Dead Man's Fingers) 
FRUITING BODY 2-8 cm tall, 0.5-3 cm thick, very tough and hard or carbonaceous; 
erect, club- or finger-shaped to somewhat irregular or twisted, the tip usually blunt or 
rounded and occasionally lobed. Outer surface hard and crustlike, usually wrinkled, 
roughened, and/ or cracked, black when mature but often covered witha whitish to grayish 
or brownish powder when very young. Flesh (interior) hard or corky, white or pallid. 
ST ALK present as a short sterile base, usually well-defined and narrower than fertile part; 
black. SPORES (sexual) 20-32 x 5-10 (12) microns, spindle-shaped, smooth, dark brown 
to black; asexual spores (conidia) when present smaller, elongated or elliptical, smooth, 
hyaline under the microscope. Perithecia imbedded in upper portion of fruiting body. 
HABIT AT: In groups or clusters on hardwood stumps, logs, etc., but often appearing 
terrestrial if the wood is buried; widely distributed and common, but apparently absent 
or very rare in our area. In eastern North America, where it favors beech and maple, the 
fruiting bodies usually appear in the spring and mature (blacken) by the summer. They 
last for months without decaying. 
EDIBILITY: Much too tough and rough to be edible. 
CO MMENTS: Also known as X ylosphaera po/ymorpha, this fungus is easily recognized 
by its hard, dark fingerlike fruiting bodies. They are much thicker than those of X. hy- 
poxylon. Geoglossum. and Tr;choglossum. and the white or pallid interior is also dis- 
tinctive. There are several very similar temperate and tropical species that are collectively 
called "Dead Man's Fingers." These are differentiated primarily on microscopic charac- 
teristics. One, X. long;pes, is similar but consistently slimmer (0.3-1 cm thick) than X. 
polymorpha. It occurs across the continent, usually on hardwoods. 
886 
{. 
1,. 
... 
11 
J 
Daldinia grandis. Note the concentrically zoned interior (shown in sectioned specimen at upper right) 
and minutely pimpled exterior. Charcoal-like consistency and growth on wood are also distinctive. 
Daldinia grandis (Crampballs; Carbon Balls; King A1freds Cakes) 
FRUITING BODY very tough and woody or charcoal-like, 1-6 em broad or sometimes 
larger, hemispherical to nearly round to somewhat lumpy or irregular, stalkless. Exterior 
black (or sometimes dark brown when young), roughened or pimpled by the perithecia, 
often cracked in age. Flesh (interior) brown to grayish-black, somewhat lustrous, with 
lighter and darker concentric zones; very brittle and charcoal-like. STALK absent. 
SPO RES (sexual) 14-17 (27) x 6.5-11 microns, elliptical or elongated, smooth, dark brown 
to black; asexual spores (conidia) minute, smooth, and hyaline (colorless) when present. 
HABIT A T: Scattered to gregarious or in masses on dead logs, branches, or bark of hard- 
woods; widely distributed. It is abundant year-round in our area, especially on oak. 
EDIBILITY: Unequivocally inedible-but perhaps useful as a substitute for charcoal! 
COMMENTS: The distinctive charcoal-like fruiting bodies of this fungus can be found 
on almost any walk through the woods. The pimpled surface of mature specimens (see 
photo) is caused by the protruding tips of the perithecia (flasks of asci). As in Xylaria, 
younger specimens are sometimes coated with pale, asexual spores (conidia). The nick- 
name "Crampballs," incidentally, can be attributed to the old folk belief that carrying 
one around under your armpits would cure cramps! Other species: D. concentr;ca is the 
common crampball of eastern N onh America. It is very similar to D. grandis. but has 
slightly smaller spores and is more apt to be dark brown to bronze-black when young 
(and black in age). D. vern;cosa is also similar, but usually has a narrowed base beneath 
the fertile ponion and an interior zoned with dark brown and white or gray. Other species 
can only be differentiated microscopically. 
"King Alfred's Cakes," Daldinia grandis. sharing a juicy log with Phellinus gilvus(see p. 582). 
...... 
.. 
I 
i__ . ." 
 "." 
..  
 
888 
MUSHROOM COOKERY 
The abundance boneless 
Without husk or scale or thorn, 
Granting us this festival of all-embracing freshness 
Pablo Neruda's tribute to the tomato is also a tribute to immediacy and 
vitality, that incomparable freshness that distinguishes a homegrown tomato Or 
cucumber or wild mushroom from its flavorless, mass-produced counterpart. 
The challenge in cooking wild mushrooms is to maximize their freshness and 
earthy essence while highlighting their individuality. After all, they are not one 
vegetable, but many-a pleasant surprise to people who are conditioned to 
mushrooms that smell and taste "mushroomy." The major constraint is that you 
must make do with what you have. Obviously, you can't cook boletus broth when 
you have a basketful of blewits, but you can make blewit burgers, or blew it 
biscuits, or a three-bean blewit salad. 
The most important thing to remember is that you can't expect wild mush- 
rooms to be special unless you take the time to make them special. They are 
ephemeral, temperamental, delicate. It is a relatively simple task to render the 
most marvelous mushroom tasteless. Likewise, many "mediocre" mushrooms 
are delightful when cooked with care and imagination. If you make a concerted 
effort to seek out, gather, identify, and eat wild mushrooms, it only makes sense 
to do them justice in the kitchen. Don't just throw them into the pot with a bunch 
of other vegetables-unless, of course, you want them to taste like a bunch of 
other vegetables. Different mushrooms call for different treatment; only then 
will they respond with their full measure of flavor. 
With each type you will go through a period of discovery and experimentation 
-succulent successes and unforgettable failures-followed by a process of 
adjustment and subtle refinement. Each kind of mushroom will gradually acquire 
its own culinary identity and cease to be a mushroom except in the botanical 
sense that broccoli is a plant. After all, when you're having broccoli, you don't sa y, 
"We're having steamed plants for dinner." Similarly, it will no longer be "mush- 
rooms" for dinner, but "chanterelles," or "poor people's truffle," or in the case 
of the cultivated mushroom, "Agaricus bisporus" (to be pronounced with a 
subtle insinuation of distaste). 
Strive for a marriage (but not a compromise!) between elegance and simplicity. 
Successful mushroom cookery doesn't require exotic foods, ora bottomless bank 
account, or idle afternoons, or a degree in gastronomical mechanics. It does 
require patience, sensitivity, enthusiasm, and imagination. There are no rigorous 
rules, but some basic do's and don'ts are summarized below. 
HELPFUL HINTS 
1. Don't eat a mushroom unless you're absolutely sure it's edible. In other words: 
"When in doubt, throw it out." 
2. You wouldn't eat a rotten egg, so don't eat a rotten mushroom. Food poisoning is 
a frequent cause of so-called "mushroom poisoning" 
3. You wouldn't eat five pounds of asparagus, so don't eat five pounds of mushrooms, 
no matter how delicious they are. Overindulgence (COLOR PLA TE 217) is another 
common cause of so-called "mushroom poisoning," particularly for those who 
.... f ' 
\ ..... ... 
.--, 
-<II J.. , .. 
"0 11 
,. 
 ,., 
"" 
" - 
 -'- \.. " 
- ... . 
. 
"'"'  
.......... . - - 
j 
, 1 
. 
"What was desire in the hills becomes fulfillment in the kitchen," says Angelo Pellegrini in The Savory 
Wild Mushroom. At left is fresh Agaricus campeslris. At right, a delicious cream sauce with white 
onions and sliced A. campeslris. 
don't eat mushrooms regularly. On the other hand, don't be stingy-most wild 
mushrooms cook down more than the commercial variety, so use them generously. 
4. When trying a species for the first time, eat only a small amount. Then wait for a few 
hours to see if you have an adverse reaction to it. Just as some people are allergic to 
eggs or chocolate or scallops or strawberries, some are adversely affected by certain 
kinds of mushrooms. Species to which many people are "allergic" (e.g., Laetiporus 
sulphureus, Lepiota species) should not be served to large groups. 
5. In the event of an "allergy," you'll want to pinpoint the culprit, so don't mix two or 
more species together unless you've eaten them before. 
6. As a rule, maggot-riddled mushrooms (see photo at bottom of p. 277) should not be 
eaten, especially when uninfested specimens are available. However, in the case of 
certain choice species ( e.g., Agaricus augustus), you may wish to remove the maggots 
with a knife (if there are only a few) or even lea ve them in (they're just a little extra 
protein). Use your own judgment on this matter. 
7. Use as little water as possible when cleaning mushrooms. They absorb it so readily 
that it dilutes their flavor and causes them to cook up slimy. On the other hand, 
there's nothing worse than gritty wild mushrooms (unless it's gritty domesticated 
mushrooms), so don't hesitate to use water if nothing else works. If you wash them, 
drain them on a paper towel before cooking. The best place to clean mushrooms is in 
the field (providing you already know their identity). Trim away all dirt with a knife 
or small brush, and don't mix dirty specimens with clean ones. Also, check for 
maggots and remove any that are present so they won't multiply and spread (even 
though maggots are the larvae of gnats or flies, they are able to reproduce partheno- 
genetically). 
8. Use mushrooms as soon as possible after picking them. Prolonged refrigeration 
deprives all vegetables (including mushrooms) of their freshness and fla vor. Species 
of Coprinus should be eaten the day they're picked, or they will digest themselves. 
There's an old saying to the effect that you should boil the water before harvesting 
the corn. Well, it's not a bad idea to melt the butter before picking the shaggy manes! 
889 
J.a 
" .." 
-- 
--:::::- 
-- 
" 
 
 
-.... 
 ....;..,..- 
 . 
'. ...,. 
,. 
. 
'J> 
. 
, 
-' 
 '\ I, 
r · 
' 'i' 
.... 
. . 
 
Left: One day's catch: Boletus edu/is. Amanita calyptrata. Ramar;a spp., and others. Right: Enjoying 
the day's catch (in this case, shaggy manes fried in egg batter and bread crumbs). 
9. During periods of heavy rainfall, most mushrooms will be waterlogged. These are 
apt to cook up insipid and slimy, but can be sliced and dried for later use (thereby 
concentrating their flavor). 
10. Don't steam or pressure-cook mushrooms. You want to get rid of excess moisture, 
not add to it. Pressure-cooked mushrooms bear an uncanny resemblance to slugs. 
11. Don't drown mushrooms in spices, butter, salt, garlic, or olive oil. All ofthese com- 
plement mushrooms nicely when used in moderation. Mushrooms and onions, for 
instance, are practically made for each other, but the mushrooms must always 
dominate in quantity because their flavor is more delicate. 
12. If you don't like a "choice" mushroom, give it a second and third chance. After all, 
a lot depends on how you cook it and in what condition it was found. The environ- 
ment can also have an influence. For instance, blewits that grow under cypress are 
often bitter-tasting. No one agrees on which kinds are best, but a species does not 
acquire a widespread reputation unless it has something special to offer. On the other 
hand, some relatively unknown mushrooms (e.g., Chroogomphus) are quite good. 
Improvise! 
PRESERVING MUSHROOMS FOR CONSUMPTION 
Most mushrooms have fickle fruiting habits, appearing in large numbers for one or two 
weeks, then disappearing for the rest of the year. To take advantage of their fleeting 
abundance, you have to harvest them while you can and then preserve them for later use. 
DRYING 
Drying mushrooms is the easiest and most satisfactory way to preserve them. Fleshy 
types like Boletus must be cut in thin slices; smaller species like Marasmius oreades can be 
dried whole. Don't use an oven. Circulation is more important than heat-you want 
moisture to be carried away. Spread out the mushrooms on screens and use a light bulb 
or hot plate as a heat source (unless it's arid enough to sun-dry them). Or string them up 
890 
r 
,, 
., 
" 
-:i 
<I 
.. 
... 
 , .... 
. - 
oS ,. .;. ,. 
1s ... .. 
. " -.. . 
.., 
 - .. 
 . . .... I 
t  
..  , 
A 
... \0 '!o 
I . 
..... 't ' . t \. 
- .....  
"'; " \ t 
..,:- I ,. " 
.. .. -.,... . " 
... ...-  ' 
.... 
A . ., 
..... 
. "'- 
.- . 
. 
.. 
:I 
.. 
.... 
- 
. 
. 
 \ 
Dried mushrooms make a marvelous addition to sauces, soups, and gravies. They should be stored 
in airtight jars to protect them from insects. This array of dehydrated delicacies includes Agaricus. 
Boletus. Chroogomphus. Cratere//us. C/itocybe. and Marasmius. 
on thread and hang them in a warm, dry place. Remove all maggots before drying mush- 
rooms, and try to get them as clean as possible without washing them. If necessary, they 
can be cleaned before use by placing them in a strainer and scalding them with water. 
When thoroughly dried (brittle), the mushrooms should be stored in an airtight jar to 
protect them from insects and mold. They will keep for months in this state. They can also 
be pulverized or powdered and used as a condiment. Certain mushrooms, such as Can- 
tharel/us cibarius and Laetiporus sulphureus do not dry well (they become too tough and 
leathery). Others, like Marasmius. Boletus. Leccinum. Craterel/us. Chroogomphus. 
Morchel/a. and Agaricus are excellent. 
There are several methods for reconstituting dried mushrooms, depending on the type 
of mushroom and kind of dish. They can be crumbled directly into soups or sauces, but 
should be soaked first if they're to be put in drier foods. An excellent method is to place 
dried pieces between wet paper towels overnight. This allows them to absorb moisture 
gradually while retaining their flavor. 
FREEZIN G 
Freezing is another excellent and easy way to preserve mushrooms, providing you saute 
them briefly beforehand. (If you freeze raw mushrooms, they will decompose as soon as 
they thaw out.) Practically all mushrooms freeze well-I have stored Amanita calyptrata 
for over one year without any noticeable change in flavor! The mushrooms should be 
stored in an airtight container (e.g., a ziplock bag). Mushroom sauces and stocks can also 
be frozen for later use. 
CANNIN G 
Canning is a big undertaking, and is only worthwhile when you have an enormous 
amount of mushrooms. A pressure canner, mason jars, and lids are required. Wash the 
mushrooms thoroughly and let them cook in their ownjuices for a while. Then pack them 
in sterilized pint jars, cover with boiling water, seal, and process at 10-15 pounds pressure 
for 30 minutes {a very necessary step because they can easily become tainted with botulism). 
A little ascorbic acid (vitamin C) can be added to retain color. Mushrooms will keep for 
years if canned properly, but failure to observe sterile procedures can be disastrous. In 
my experience, Cantharel/us. Tricholoma. Dentinum. Boletus. Hericium. and Agaricus 
can well. 
892 
MUSHROOM COOKERY 
PICKLING 
Pickling is just marinating on a larger and more elaborate scale. In Europe, mushrooms 
are often preserved under oil and vinegar. It is a fairly simple procedure, but obviously, 
the mushroom flavor is masked. Jars should be sterilized, but pressure cooking isn't 
necessary because of the acidic medium. I have successfully pickled Cantharellus. ClilO- 
cybe nuda. and Amanita calyptrata. 
SAL TING 
This is another technique that is popular in some parts of Europe. The mushrooms 
are cooked briefly and then packed in rock salt and stored in airtight jars in the refrigerator. 
Naturally they are salty this way, but the salt is easily dissipated by adding the mushrooms 
to soups or other watery dishes. 
MUSHROOM TOXINS 
MOST CASES of "mushroom poisoning" are the result of allergies. (idiosyn- 
cratic reactions or hypersensitivity), overindulgence (especially of raw mush- 
rooms), or food poisoning (ingestion of rotten mushrooms). All three usually 
result in nausea, vomiting, and/ or diarrhea. Another common type of "mush- 
room poisoning" is imaginary-people who have lingering doubts about the 
safety of their meal are apt to experience discomfort whether or not there is a 
physiological basis for it. All the more reason not to eat a mushroom unless 
you're absolutely certain it's edible! 
The two most common causes of mushroom poisoning are carelessness and 
ignorance. Despite what people say, mushroom experts do not die from mush- 
room poisoning. But of course, it is much more sensational for newspapers to say 
they do. Relatively few species are poisonous, but some of the most dangerous 
ones are exceedingly common, and almost any poisonous mushroom can be fatal 
to a small child or a person in poor health. Therefore it is useful to learn about the 
different kinds of mushroom poisoning, should you or a friend experience 
discomfort. A brief rundown of the major groups of mushroom toxins is pre- 
sented here. "Mushroom toxin," as defined here, is a compound which produces 
an abnormal effect on the human body. This definition encompasses mind- 
altering drugs such as psilocybin, whether or not they are ingested deliberately. 
As with any kind of poisoning, the two most important things to do are to seek 
immediate medical attention and identify the agent responsible. Idiosyncratic 
reactions to edible mushrooms are generally not serious enough to warrant a trip 
to the hospital, but if there is any doubt, consult a physician. 
AMANITA-TOXINS (AMATOXINS) 
Mushrooms: Amanita pha//oides. A. ocreata, A. verna, A. virosa, A. bisporigera; 
Conocybe li/aris; Ga/erina aUlumna/is, G. marginata, G. venenata; 
Lepiota castanea, L. he/veo/a, L.josserandii & close relatives. 
Poisoning by amatoxins is extremely serious, with a fatality rate of about 50%. It is 
doubly dangerous because the symptoms are delayed for 6-24 hours after ingestion of the 
mushroom, by which time the toxins have been absorbed by the body. 
There are several groups of amatoxins, at least in the Amanitas. Phallolysin was the 
first toxin discovered. It destroys red blood cells when injected into rats and has a very 
*In this book the term "allergy" is used loosely to describe an adverse reaction to a normally harmless mushroom 
even though it may not be a genuine hypersensitivity. 
MUSHROOM TOXINS 
893 
high mortality rate. However, it is unstable and apparently destroyed by cooking and/ or 
the human digestive tract. A group of complex cyclic polypeptides called phallotoxins 
comprise the second group. They are also fatal when injected intravenously (they attack 
the liver), but are apparently destroyed by the digestive tract. It is another group of poly- 
peptides, the amanitins, that are the culprits. They are twenty times more lethal than the 
phallotoxins. Their concentration varies tremendously from individual mushroom to 
individual mushroom, but an average fatal dose is about 2 ounces (fresh weight) of 
Amanita phalloides. 
All recent mushroom-induced fatalities in California have been caused by Amanita 
phalloides and A. ocreata. Both are large, handsome, tempting mushrooms, whereas 
the other deadly types (such as Galerina) are small and nondescript and therefore unlikely 
to be eaten. Of course, there is no excuse for eating any of these mushrooms if you take 
the time to learn about them. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
Amanitin poisoning usually manifests itself in four stages: (1) a latency period of 6-24 
hours after ingestion, during which time the toxin is actively working on the liver and 
kidneys, but the victim experiences no discomfort; (2) a period of about one day charac- 
terized by violent vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and severe abdominal cramps; (3) a period 
of about one day during which the victim appears to be recovering (if hospitalized, the 
patient is sometimes released!); (4) a relapse, during which liver and kidney failure often 
leads to death. There is sometimes more than one relapse. 
The effects of the toxin are centered on the liver and kidneys, but amanitin damages 
tissue throughout the body by inhibiting RN A synthesis within each cell. To make matters 
worse, the kidneys are apparently unable to eliminate amanitin from the body. The 
pancreas, adrenal glands, heart, lungs, muscles, intestines, and brain may be damaged, 
not only by the amanitin, but indirectly because of liver and kidney failure. It is a slow 
and painful way to die. 
There is no known antidote to amatoxin poisoning. Treatment is largely supportive and 
symptomatic-maintaining blood sugar and salts, eliminating urea by dialysis, and 
helping the body to get rid ofthe toxins. If you have any reason to think someone has eaten 
a deadly Amanita (or an amanitin-containing mushroom), don't wait/or the symptoms 
to appear! If the person is taken to the hospital soon after ingesting the mushrooms, at 
least some of the toxins can be removed before they are absorbed. 
GYROMITRIN (MONOMETHYLHYDRAZINE) 
Mushrooms: Several Gyromitra species (especially G. escu/enta & G. in/u/a), also 
many related Ascomycetes (e.g., Verpa, Cudonia, He/vella spp.) 
Gyromitrin's product of hydrolysis, monomethylhydrazine (MMH), is a very toxic 
carcinogenic compound used in the manufacture of rocket fuel. Gyromitrin poisoning has 
puzzled scientists for many years because of the very narrow threshold between complete 
absence of discomfort and severe poisoning or even death. This is due to the volatile nature 
of gyromitrin, which is removed by the process of cooking or drying providing it has a 
chance to escape. Gyromitras cooked in a closed pan can cause severe poisoning, and 
inhalation of the vapors is dangerous. Raw Gyromitras, of course, pose the greatest threat. 
The situation is complicated by differences in the toxicity of different geographical 
strains. Gyromitra esculenta has caused numerous fatalities in Europe, but not a single 
one in California. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
The symptoms, which appear 2-24 hours after ingestion, include headaches, abdominal 
distress, severe diarrhea, and vomiting. In severe cases the liver, kidney, and red blood 
cells are damaged (much as in poisoning by amatoxins), which may result in death. 
Treatment is largely supportive; a physician should be consulted. 
894 
MUSHROOM TOXINS 
MUSCARINE 
Mushrooms: Inocybe species; Clitocybe dealbata and seveal relatives; Omphalotus 
species, and certain red-pored species of Boletus. 
Muscarine was originally isolated in Amanita muscaria. but occurs in that mushroom 
in insignificant amounts. However, many Inocybes contain large amounts of muscarine- 
enough so that they can be fatal in large quantities. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
The effects, which manifest themselves 15-30 minutes after ingestion, are focused on 
the parasympathetic (involuntary) nervous system. They include excessive salivation, 
perspiration, tears, and lactation (in pregnant women), plus severe vomiting and diarrhea. 
These symptoms may be accompanied by visual disturbances, irregular pulse rate, de- 
creased blood pressure, and difficulty in breathing. The victim normally recovers within 
24 hours, but in severe cases, death may result from respiratory failure. Atropine is a 
specific antidote, but must be administered by a physician. 
IBOTENIC ACID/MUSCIMOL 
Mushrooms: Amanita muscaria. A. pantherina. A. gemmata. 
There are many contradictions in the literature regarding the principal toxins of 
Amanita muscaria and A. pantherina. Muscarine was originally believed to be the toxin, 
and then bufotenine was put forth as a candidate. It turns out, however, that the main 
active principle is ibotenic acid, which is converted by the human body into muscimol, a 
more powerful form that passes out in the urine. 
Amanita muscaria is apparently one of the oldest intoxicants known. Its use by certain 
Siberian peoples has been extensively documented and R. Gordon Wasson, in his book 
SOMA: The Divine Mushroom of Immortality. makes a convincing case for it being 
the mystical Soma plant of the RgVedas (sacred Hindu texts). It may have been used 
throughout Eurasia in ancient times, but if so, its use has been suppressed. Curiously, 
many Europeans fear A. muscaria more than its deadly cousin, A. phalloides. John 
Allegro's attempt to link it to the origins of Christianity (The Sacred Mushroom and the 
Cross) is far-fetched and abstruse. 
Amanita muscaria is erroneously listed in older books as deadly poisonous. It can be 
fatal in large doses, but so can practically any poisonous mushroom. According to most 
sources, A. pantherina is somewhat more dangerous, while A. gemmata is less so. Deli- 
berate ingestion of these mushrooms has increased now that it has been shown that they 
are not as dangerous as once believed. However, their effects vary greatly from person to 
person. As people's metabolisms are different and the concentrations of the toxins vary 
from mushroom to mushroom, there is no way of predicting what one's reaction wilJ be. 
Some people experience extreme discomfort, others have vivid dreams, still others ex- 
perience no effects whatsoever. The ingestion of these mushrooms is definitely not 
recommended here. Incidentally, not all of the toxins have been identified. For instance, 
neither pure ibotenic acid nor muscimol produce the nausea and vomiting that frequently 
occurs after eating A. muscaria. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
Symptoms normally appear 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion, and last for several 
hours. Nausea and vomiting are common, but the principal effects are on the central 
nervous system: confusion, mild euphoria, loss of muscular coordination, profuse 
sweating, chills, visual distortions, a feeling of greater strength, and sometimes halluci- 
nations, delusions, or convulsions. (An inordinate number of "trippers" mistake them- 
selves for Christ). Drowsiness is also a common phenomenon. In fact, those who ingest 
MUSHROOM TOXINS 
895 
A. muscaria frequently fall asleep ("'swoon"), to awaken hours later with little or 
no memory of their experiences. There is no "hangover" effect as with alcohol, but most 
people who try it (including myselO do not wish to repeat the experience. Since muscimol 
passes out through the urine, Siberian users "recycled" their A. muscaria by drinking their 
own urine. I know of no one in the United States who has tested this approach. 
Treatment of muscimol poisoning is largely supportive-reassuring the victim that the 
effects are temporary. In the mistaken beliefthat muscarine was the principal toxin, older 
texts prescribe atropine as an antidote. Atropine, however, is likely to exacerbate the 
effects of ibotenic acid/ muscimol. 
PSILOCYBIN/PSILOCIN 
Mushrooms: Psilocybe baeocyst;s. P. caerulescens. P. cubens;s. P. cyanescens. 
P. semilanceata and many others; also certain Panaeolus species (e.g., 
P. cyanescens. P. subbalteatus); certain Conocybe and Gymnopilus 
species; possibly Pluteus salicinus, P. cyanopus, and others. 
These indole derivatives are well known for their psychedelic properties, and "psilo- 
cybin mushrooms" are often consumed for recreational purposes. Several hallucinogenic 
. mushrooms played an important role in the religious and medicinal rites of Native 
Americans in Mexico and Central America. But the Spaniards suppressed their use to 
such an extent that their existence was seriously doubted by early 20th century botanists. 
The mushrooms were "rediscovered" in Oaxaca in the 1930's, and 20 years later they were 
identified as belonging principally to the genus Psilocybe. Since then their properties 
have been so publicized that Oaxaca has been inundated by pleasure-seeking gringos. It 
has subsequently been discovered that many psilocybin-containing mushrooms grow in 
the United States as well. 
Psilocin (a dephosphorylated version of psilocybin) is about ten times as active as psilo- 
cybin. Most psilocybin-containing mushrooms have only a trace of psilocin, but the 
human body coverts most of the psilocybin into psilocin. A blueing reaction associated 
with the presence of psilocybin and psilocin is caused by an enzyme that oxidizes psilocin. 
However, not all mushrooms that stain blue contain psilocybin or psilocin, and not all 
"psilocybin mushrooms" stain blue. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
Symptoms are similar to those of LSD. Shortly after ingestion, and for a duration of 
several hours, the "victim" experiences heightened color perception, visual distortions, 
rapdily shifting shapes and images, a "kaleidoscope effect" with eyes closed, elation or 
hilarity, and hallucinations or delusions. Nausea and vomiting are rare. Some people 
report the sensation of leaving their bodies, or of traveling into the future or past, or other 
highly subjective experiences. Others experience profound anxiety. 
In case of accidental ingestion or a "bad trip," the victim should be repeatedly assured 
that the effects are temporary. A factor to bear in mind is that transferring the person to 
an unfamiliar environment can be frightening, and that sedatives may worsen the effects, 
especially if administered forcibly. LSD, incidentally, was derived from another fungus, 
Claviceps purpurea (wheat ergot). 
GASTROINTESTINAL IRRITANTS 
Mushrooms: Many, including: Agar;cus californ;cus, A. hondens;s. A. placomyces. A. 
praeclaresquamosus. A. xanthodermus; Boletus satanas. B. erythropus. 
B. haemat;nus. B. pulcherr;mus. B. subvelutipes; Chlorophyllum molyb- 
d;tes; Entoloma species; Gomphus floccosus; Hebeloma species; many 
acrid and/ or purple- or yellow-staining Lactar;us species; Laet;porus 
896 
MUSHROOM TOXINS 
sulphureus and Lepiota rachodes & L. naucina (sometimes); Naema- 
tolomafasciculare; Omphalotus species; Ramariaformosa and relatives; 
many acrid Russula species; Scleroderma species; and several Tricholoma 
species (notably T. pardinum and T. pessundatum). 
As evidenced by the list, this is by far the largest and most prevalent group of mushroom 
toxins. Very few of the active principles have been identified, however, perhaps because 
they are rarely fatal. The most frequent culprits in gastrointestinal poisoning are the 
phenol-smelling Agaricus species and Chlorophyllum molybdites. undoubtedly because 
they closely resemble edible types. The most dangerous are Entoloma species, Hebelorna 
species, Tricholoma pardinum. Boletus satanas and close relatives (raw), Naematoloma 
fasciculare, and Chlorophyllum molybdites. "Allergic" reactions to edible mushrooms 
normally take the form of gastrointestinal upset. 
Symptoms and Treatment 
Symptoms usually appears shortly after ingestion (20 minutes-4 hours). They include 
nausea, vomiting, cram ps, and diarrhea, * which normally pass after the irritant is expelled. 
Severe cases. however. may require hospitalization. Treatment is largely supportive- 
helping the body to eliminate that which it is not equipped to handle. Though not as serious 
as other types of mushroom poisoning, gastrointestinal upsets are not to be taken lightly, 
as evidenced by the fact that many people acquire a lingering distaste for mushrooms after 
an all-night bout with nausea and diarrhea. 
MISCELLANEOUS TOXINS 
Coprinus atramentarius contains a disulfram-like compound (coprine) that reacts 
with alcohol in th Dody to produce acetaldehyde, which in turn produces a peculiar but 
transitory set of symptoms: reddening of the ears and nose, a metallic taste in the mouth, 
lightheadedness, rapid heart beat, a throbbing sensation, and sometimes nausea and 
vomiting. Recovery is normally spontaneous and complete. The alcohol needn't be con- 
sumed simultaneously with the mushrooms to have a synergistic effect-therefore anyone 
who indulges in alcohol regularly should not eat C. atramentarius. Individual reactions 
vary, suggesting that some people may be more sensitive or the mushrooms themselves 
may differ in coprine content. It has also been suggested that raw C. atramentarius does 
not actually contain coprine, but that it is formed in the process of cooking. Similar 
alcohol-related effects have been reported for Clitocybe clavipes. 
Paxillus involutus is said to be toxic raw, but is eaten by many people (especially Euro- 
peans) after being pickled or parboiled. However, the human body apparently develops 
a sensitivity to it, manufacturing antibodies that destroy red blood cells. Thus, someone 
who has eaten it for years can suddenly be poisoned (even fatally!). 
Cortinarius orellanus. C. gentilis. and some close relatives are commonly fatal. They 
contain toxins which, like the amatoxins, attack the liver and kidneys. Symptoms do not 
appear for up to three weeks after ingestion of the mushrooms, making diagnosis and 
treatment much more difficult. Some of these Cortinarii occur in the United States. As 
they are difficult to identify, all dry-capped Cortinarius species are best avoided. 
Naematolomafasciculare, a common wood-loving mushroom, can also cause liver and 
kidney damage. Fortunately, it is rarely eaten because of its bitter taste. There is also 
evidence to suggest that the substrate on which a mushroom is growing can affect its 
edibility. The edible honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea), for instance. will often 
cause digestive upsets when growing on buckeye. 
Last but not least, there is the danger of contamination by pesticides and other environ- 
mental poisons. Always be aware of this possibility, especially when picking mushrooms 
in towns, along well-traveled roads, and in forests, fields, or range land where herbicides 
and pesticides are used. 
*The literal translation of the Japanese name for certain poisonous Tricholomas is "Unable to Cross the Valley"- 
presumably because one is unable to cross the valley after eating them! 
 
( 
t 
, 
Russula cyanoxantha, a robust mushroom with brittle flesh and white gills. The cap color is ex- 
tremely variable (see description on p. 94). Maggot-free specimens such as these are unusual. 
 
 
. 
- 
" 
." 
., 
-'\ 
 
Lactar;us uv;dus (see p. 75) is one of several purple-staining milk caps. The cap is usually sticky or 
slimy, but in one mountain-loving variety it is practically dry. Note how the stalk snaps open cleanly 
like a piece of chalk-a characteristic feature of Lactar;us and Russula. 
Melanoleuca evenosa group (see p. 171) is reminiscent of a Russula or Tr;choloma but has a fibrous 
stalk and amyloid white spores. Look for it in the spring under mountain conifers soon after the 
snow melts. Note how the gills are crowded and whitish. 
. 
,.. 
. 
. "1I i ',,:¥ 
;,.. 
......' .,. 
" 
Two agarics that typically grow in dense clusters. Top: Clitocybula familia (see comments under 
Collybia acervata. p. 215) grows on rotting wood. These are young specimens; as they mature the 
caps will broaden somewhat. Below: Lyophyllum decastes group (see p. 174) is usually but not 
always terrestrial. This cluster is rather unusual because.-the caps have watery spots. 
, 
Abnormalities are common in mushrooms. They are the result of environmental influence or im- 
proper development; they are not inherited or passed on. One widespread abnormality is the develop- 
ment of a small rosette of gills ("rose gill") on the cap surface. In extreme cases, an entire mushroom 
may ride "piggy-back" on another, like these Russulas (left). Albino individuals also occur. In this 
cluster of Craterellus cornucopioides (right), half is normally colored and half is whitish! Other ab- 
normalities include aborted, parasitized, or sterile specimens and failure of the cap or gills to form. 
.. 
'\ "' 
....... , 
4' Jt t. 
,"" 
. ! 
I .. 
\ 
. 
899 
WHAT IT ALL MEANS 
(A Short Dictionary of Scientific Names) 
Otidea, Ramaria, Tricholomopsis, V olvariella 
Exidia, Stropharia, Hygrophoropsis, Arcangeliella 
You may groan at the sight or sound of scientific names, but the paucity of common names 
for mushrooms forces us to use them. As explained in the chapter on classification(p. 8), 
many people are intimidated by scientific names because they are derived from Latin and 
Greek. "How do you remember all those names?" I am repeatedly asked. Yet posers ofthis 
question have usually mastered many scientific names without realizing it: 
Asparagus, Magnolia, Sassafras, Eucalyptus 
Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, Chrysanthemum, Citrus 
Since that which is understood is more likely to be remembered than that which is not, 
learning the meanings of scientific names can increase your ability to remember them. 
By refusing to be intimidated, you can demystify the names of mushrooms while you are 
demystifying the mushrooms themselves. 
Scientific names can be divided into three categories: descriptive, honorary, and 
geographical. (A fourth possible category, nonsensical, needs no elaboration.) 
Descriptive names are the most numerous as well as the most helpful. They can aid in 
the identification process because they usually tell us something significant about the 
mushroom, its habitat, or time of growth. For example: 
Flav- means yellow, and it is a safe bet that Hygrocybeflavescens, Tricholoma 
flavovirens, Boletus flaviporus, and Russula claroflava are at least partially 
yellow. (They are.) Similarly, Macrocystidia cucumis(macro=large, cucumis 
=cucumber) has giant cystidia (sterile cells) on its gills and smells like cucum- 
ber, and Hypsizygus tessulatus (hyps=high up, zygus=yoked or joined, 
tessulatus=mosaic-like) grows high up on elms and develops mosaic-like 
scales m its cap as it matures. 
You will soon discover that many of the longest and most "difficult" names are actually 
composed of shorter, more familiar elements-familiar because the English language 
is a thicket with many Latin roots. For instance: 
Climacodon is derived from climac- (ladder, as in the English word climax) 
and odon (tooth or teeth, as in the English word orthodontist), and the Greek 
element derm (skin) appears in many mushroom names (xanthodermus, 
calyptroderma. Dermocybe, etc.) as well as English words like dermatolo- 
gist, epidermis, and pachyderm. 
A few descriptive names, unfortunately, are apparent misnomers, for they bear no obvious 
relation to the mushroom and may even contradict it: 
Appendiculat- means with a fringe or small appendage, but Boletus appendi- 
culatus has neither. Although alnicol- means alder-dweller, Lactarius al- 
nicola favors conifers and oaks (but may have originally been collected in a 
mixed forest containing alder). 
Honorary names usually commemorate a mycologist, mycologist's best friend, or 
mushroom collector. In most cases an -ii. -i. or -ae is added to the person's name if it is a 
species (e.g., kauffmanii. barrowsii. smithii), or an -a. -ea, or-ia ifit is a genus( e.g., Barssia). 
Other suffixes, particularly diminutives or those meaning "pertaining to," can also be 
added (e.g., booniana. Longula. Lenzites). 
900 
SCIENTIFIC NAMES 
Honorary names are usually recognizable as such because they don"t sound Latin. 
Some, however, may not be obvious, particularly those that honor Europeans. Examples: 
Hohenbuehelia is named after the Austrian botanist Hohenbuhel, Arcan- 
geliella and Battarrea after the Italian mycologists Arcangeli and Battarra, 
and Galiella and Rozites after the French mycologists Le Gal and Roze. 
One major drawback of an honorary name is that it tells us nothing about the mushroom 
itself. On the other hand, precisely because it tells us nothing it cannot be misleading! 
Geographical names are formed by adding an adjective suffix to the name of a particular 
region or locality. Most are self-evident (e.g., californicus, marylandensis, cubensis, 
mexicana, olympiana). Some are Latinized, however (e.g., novaboracensis, of New York, 
suecica, of Sweden) and others are obscure (e.g., hondensis, named after bustling La 
Honda, California, and pitkinensis, which immortalizes populous Pitkin, Colorado). 
Geographical names can be deceptive because they usually indicate where a species was 
discovered rather than where it occurs. For instance, Longula texensis, originally col- 
lected in Texas, and Suil/us sibiricus, first found in Siberia, are both widely distributed 
in western North America. 
SUFFIXES 
Suffixes can have specific meanings, vague meanings, multiple meanings, or no 
meaning at all. Some suffixes simply transform nouns into adjectives. Others indicate 
possession, likeness, size, action, or degree. Still others designate gender-a concept 
familiar to anyone who has studied French or Spanish. Thus a single root word can have 
several forms depending on the gender and spelling of the word(s) with which it is used. 
Example: 
Brunne-, the root word for brown, becomes brunneus (masculine form) in 
Boletus olivaceobrunneus, brunnea (feminine form) in Leptonia vinaceo- 
brunnea, brunneum (neuter form) in Tricholoma albobrunneunm, and 
brunneo-, brunnea-, or brunnei (combining forms), as in Clitocybe brunneo- 
cephala. Suffixes with specific meanings can also be attached, as in brun- 
nescens (".becoming brown") or brunneola (".less than brown, brownish"). 
As you can see, it is not necessary to know all the quirks and nuances of Latin and Greek 
grammar in order to recognize root words such as brunne in their various manifestations. 
Since suffixes are sundry and sometimes difficult to recognize, the more common ones 
are listed separately. However, common prefixes as well as most suffixes with very specific 
meanings (e.g., odon=tooth, pes=foot or stem, osm-=odor) can be found in the dictionary 
of word elements. 
The dictionary is for descriptive names only. It does not include people or places, self- 
evident words such as giganteus (gigantic), caninus (canine), parasitica (parasitic), or 
fragilis (fragile). Nor does it include names whose meanings are obscure, debatable, or 
unknown. A hyphen indicates that the root word can have various endings (see discussion 
of suffixes). 
Space does not permit listing all the root words used in naming mushrooms, but with 
the help of the dictionary and the material preceding it, you should be able to make sense 
out of most of the scientific names in this book-and enrich your English vocabulary in 
the process! Examples: 
(I) cortin=curtain, arius=with or pertaining to, thus Cortinarius means 
..with a curtain." 
(2) cybe=head, con=cone, derm=skin, ino=fiber, clit=sloping, psi/=smooth, 
thus Conocybe means ..cone head," Dermocybe means ..skin head," Ino- 
cybe means ..fiber head," Clitocybe means ..sloping head," and Psi/o- 
cybe means ..smooth head." 
LATIN AND GREEK SUFFIXES 
901 
(3) lyc=wolf, perdon=f1atulence, thus Lycoperdon means "wolf fart." 
(4) vermicul=little worm, osus=full of, thus vermiculosus means "full oflittle 
worms" (i.e., maggoty). 
(5) canthar=drinking cup, el/us is a diminutive suffix, thus Cantharel/us 
means ..little drinking cup." 
(6) paxil/=small stick or stake and -us is a masculine gender ending, thus 
Paxil/us means "small stick" or'.small stake." 
(7) leuc=white, thus Leucopaxil/us means ..white Paxil/us." 
(8) a as a prefix means without,phyl/=leaves or gills,phor=bearing or bearer, 
ales denotes an order offungi, thus Aphyl/ophorales means ..order offungi 
not bearing gills." 
(9) orth=straight, odont=teeth, ist is an English suffix meaning ..one who," 
thus orthodontist means '.one who straightens teeth." 
(10) succ=juice or sap, ulent=full of, thus succulent means "full of juice." 
Common Suffixes 
Note: Some suffixes, particularly those with feminine endings, may not be in alpha- 
betical order because they are listed under their masculine form. For instance, -ata 
is listed under -atus, and -aria is listed under -arius. 
-a. most common feminine gender ending 
-abi/is: see -bi/is 
-abu/um, -aeu/um: see -bu/um 
-aeeae: denotes a family of fungi or plants 
-ace us, -aeea, -aceum: color of, made of, with 
quality of, closely resembling, relating to 
(e.g., o/ivaceus, olive-colored) 
-acius, -acia, -acium. pertaining to, pos- 
sessing 
-ae: named after, pertaining to (e.g., annae) 
-aeus, -aea, -aeum: belonging to 
-ago: (I) resembling, similar to (2) made of, 
color of 
-ales: denotes an order of fungi or plants 
-a/is, -ale: belonging to, pertaining to, relating 
to, characteristic of 
-aneus, -anea, -aneum: made of, color of, 
resembling 
-ans: implies action (like -ing in English, e.g., 
radicans, rooting) 
-anus, -ana, -anum. pertaining to, charac- 
teristic of( often connotes position, e.g., 
montanus, of the mountains) 
-arion: diminutive 
-aris, -are: belonging to, pertaining to 
-arius, -aria, -arium, -arum: pertaining to, 
possessing, furnished with, relating to, 
(e.g., Cortinarius, with a curtain) 
-ascens: becoming, almost, somewhat (e.g., 
purpurascens, becoming purple) 
-atieus, -atiea, -atieum: denotes place of 
growth or origin (e.g., si/vatieus, growing 
in the woods) 
-ati/is, -ali/e: denotes place of growth (e.g., 
saxati/is. growing among rocks) 
-alor: see -tor 
-alUS, -ala, -alum: (I) possessing, furnished 
with (e.g., armi//atus, ringed or with a 
ring) (2) resembling, similar to (e.g., 
ovatus, egglike) 
-ax: apt or tending to 
-bi/is: capable of, able to, tending to (e.g., 
mutabi/is. able to change) 
-bu/um: instrument, container, agent, means 
-bundus, -bunda, -bundum: implies action 
-ceae: see -aceae 
-eellus, -cella, -cel/um: diminutive 
-ci//us, -cilia, -cilium: diminutive 
-co/us, -co/a, -eo/um: inhabitant, dweller(e.g., 
cortieo/a, bark dweller) 
-eu/us, -eu/a,. -eu/um: diminutive (e.g., auri- 
cu/a, small ear) 
-cundus, -eunda, -cundum: able to, tending to 
(e.g., rubicundus, tending to redden) 
-e: (I) gender ending (usually feminine)(2) see 
-ae 
-ea: see -eus 
-ellus, -ella, -ellum: diminutive (e.g., Can- 
tharellus, small cup) 
-ens: see -ans 
-ensis, -ense: indicates place of growth or 
origin (e.g., arvensis, growing in fields) 
-enus: belonging to 
-er, -eres: provided with 
-eseens: becoming, almost, somewhat (e.g., 
rubeseens, becoming red or almost red) 
-estris, -ester, -estre: indicates place of growth 
or origin (e.g., eampestris, growing in 
fields) 
902 
-etes: (I) denotes class or larger grouping of 
fungi (2) one who is 
-ettus, -etta, -ettum: diminutive 
-etum: denotes collective place of growth 
-eus, -ea, -eum: (I) pertaining or belonging 
to (2) color of, made of, similar to (e.g., 
mel/eus. honey-colored) 
-formis, -forme: resembling, especially in 
shape or form(e.g., strobiliformis. shaped 
like a pine cone) 
-genus, -gena, -genum: born of, originating 
from 
-i: see -ii 
-ia: (I) see -ius (2) see -a (3) see -ae 
-iacus, -iaca, -iacum: pertaining to 
-iae: see -ae 
-ianus, -iana, -ianum: see -anus 
-ibi/is: see -bi/is 
-icans: becoming, almost, closely resembling 
(e.g., nigricans, becoming black) 
-icius, -icia, -icium: (I) made of, pertaining to 
(2) implies or denotes action 
-icos: pertaining to 
-icus, -ica, -icum: belonging to, pertaining to 
(e.g., californicus, of California) 
-ides: resembling, similar to 
-idion, -idius, -idia, -idium: diminutive (e.g., 
Gomphidius, little peg) 
-idus. -ida, -idum: (I) resembling, similar to 
(2) becoming, almost(e.g.,albida, whitish) 
-iellus, -iella, -iel/um: diminutive 
-iensis, -iense: see -ensis 
-ii: named after (e.g., kauffmanii) 
-i/is, -i/e: able to, capable of, with property of 
(e.g.,fragi/is, able to be broken) 
-iIIus, -ilia, -ilium: diminutive 
-imos: pertaining or relating to 
-imus, -ima, -imum: superlative 
-inans: becoming, almost 
-ineus, -inea, -ineum: color of, made of, 
similar to (e.g.,ferruginea, color of rust) 
-inius, -inia, -inium: named after, relating to 
-inos: (I) made of (2) see -inius 
-inus, -ina, -inum: (I) pertaining or belonging 
to, possessing, resembling (2) diminutive 
-ioides: see -oides 
-ion: (I) diminutive (2) denotes occurrence 
-ior: (1) comparative (e.g., strictior, very 
straight) (2) see -ios 
-ios: pertaining or relating to 
-is: pertaining or relating to 
-isce, -iscus, -iscos: diminutive 
-issimus, -issima, -issimum: superlative (e.g., 
speciosissimus, showiest) 
-istos: comparative or superlative 
-itas: see -it ius 
-ites, -itis: pertaining to, named after 
-iticus, -itica, -iticum: (I) possessing, fur- 
nished with (2) capable of, able to 
-itius, -itia, -itium: (I) with quality or color of, 
similar to (2) implies action or result 
LATIN AND GREEK SUFFIXES 
-ius, -ia, -ium: (I) pertaining to, characteristic 
of, resembling (e.g., reg ius, pertaining to 
kings) (2) occasionally used as diminu- 
tive or comparative 
-ivus, -iva, -ivum: (1) possessing, furnished 
with(2) pertainingto(3 ) capable of,able to 
-izans: becoming like, resembling 
-/imus: see -rimus 
-ma, mus: indicates action or result 
-nel/us, -nella, -nel/um: diminutive 
-odes: see -oides 
-oides, -oideus, -oidea, -oideum: resembling, 
similar to (e.g., phalloides, like a phallus) 
-olentus, -olenta. -olentum: see -ulentus 
-olus, -ola. -ole, -olum: (I) diminutive (2) less 
than, somewhat (e.g., luteolus, yellowish) 
-on" neuter gender ending 
-onius, -onia, -onium: pertaining or related to 
-opsis: resembling, similar to (e.g., Tricho- 
lomopsis, like Tricholoma) 
-orius, -oria, -orium: capable of, able to (e.g., 
tinctorius, able to dye) 
-orum: pertaining to 
-os: masculine or feminine gender ending 
-osus, -osa, -osum: denotes fullness, abun- 
dance, marked degree of development 
(e.g., succosa, full of juice) 
-otus, -ota, -otium, -otum.o (1) resembling, 
similar to, possessing,. furnished with 
(2) see ot- in dictionary 
-rim us. -rima. -rimum: superlative (e.g., pul- 
cherrimus. most beautiful) 
-ros: pertaining to 
-tatos. -tate. -taton: superlative 
-ter: agent or means 
-teros. -tera, -teron: comparative 
-tes, -tis. -tor, -tra. -tria. -tron, -tros. -trum. 
-trus: denotes agent, means, tool, or object 
(e.g., necator, killer) 
-ua: see -uus 
-ugo: (1) made of(2) able to, capable of(3) 
disease or rust 
-ulentus. -ulenta. -ulentum: denotes full- 
ness, abundance. marked degree of de- 
velopment 
-ulus, -ula. -ulum. -ullus: (I) pertaining to 
(2) diminutive (3) denotes lesser degree of 
development (e.g., dulcidulus, slightly 
sweet) 
-um: most common neuter gender ending 
-unculus. -uncula, -unculum: diminutive 
-urus, -ura: (1) implies result or action (2) 
pertaining to 
-us: most common masculine gender ending 
-usculus, -uscula, -usculum: diminutive 
-ustris, -uster, -ustre: see -estris 
-utus, -uta, -utum: possessing, furnished with 
-uus, -ua, -uum: implies result or possibility 
of action 
-ydrion, -yllion. diminutive 
-ys: comparative or superlative 
903 
Dictionary of Selected 
Latin and Greek Word Elements 
A 
a-, ab-, ad-, etc.: prefix meaning without, 
absent, or away from 
abies, abie-, abiet-: fir, firs 
acanth-: thorn, prickle 
acer-: (1) maple (2) acrid, sharp 
acerb-: bitter, sour 
acerv-: heap 
acet-: vinegar 
acetabulum: vinegar cruet 
acicul-: bristle, needle, splinter 
acr-: acrid 
acumin-, acumen-: sharp point 
acut-: sharp, pointed, acute 
adust-: scorched 
aegerit-: pertaining to poplar 
aereus: copper, bronze 
aerug-: blue-green, green, or deep green 
aest-: summer 
affin-: related; adjacent 
agaric-: ancient term for mushroom 
agath-: pleasant, good, excellent 
agglutin-: glued 
agr-: field 
alb-: white 
aleur-: wheat flour 
alli-: garlic 
aln-: alder 
alutace-: leather-colored (yellowish-tan) 
amab-: pretty 
amanita-: ancient term for mushroom 
amar-: bitter 
amentace-: pertaining to catkins 
amethyst-: violet (amethyst) 
amianth-: unpolluted, spotless 
ammo-: sand 
amoen-: pleasant, lovely 
amygdal-: almond 
amylo-: amyloid (containing starch) 
ananas: pineapple 
andros-: a tiny herb or plant 
angi-: vessel 
angust-: small, narrow 
annul-: ring, annulus 
anth-: flower 
anthrac-: coal, charcoal 
apothec-: storehouse 
appendiculat-: with a small appendage, 
appendiculate 
apt-: fastened, bound 
aqu-: watery 
arachn-: spider or spider web 
arai-, arae-: thin, narrow 
arane-: spider or spider web 
arcularius: maker of small chests 
aren-: sand 
areol-: a small open space 
areolat-: areolate (cracked like dry mud) 
argent-: silver 
argill-: clay 
argillace-: clay-colored (dull yellow-brown) 
argyr-: silver 
armen-: apricot, apricot-color 
armill-: bracelet, ring 
arquat-: (1) bowed, arched (2) rainbow- 
colored 
arv-: field(s) 
asc-: bladder, bag, wineskin 
asper-, aspr-: rough 
aster-, astr-: star 
astragalin-: pertaining to goldfinch 
ater-, atr-: black, very dark 
atrament-: ink 
atrat-: clothed in black 
attenuat-: narrowed, tapered, reduced 
augean-: pertaining to Augeos, who main- 
tained an uncleaned stable for 30 years 
august-: majestic, august 
aur-: see aure- and auri- 
auranti-: orange 
aurat-: gilded, ornamented with gold 
aure-: gold, golden 
auri-, auric-: ear 
auriscalpium: ear scrape 
austr-, austral-: southern 
avellan-: avellaneous (pale gray tinged with 
pink) 
azur-: azure, blue 
B 
baccat-: (1) set with pearls or berries (2) soft, 
pulpy 
badi-: reddish-brown 
bae-: slim, small 
balsam-: balsam, fir 
balte-: belt, girdle 
basidi-: basidium or basidia (derived from 
word for little base or pedestal) 
(derived from little base 
basi/ar-: fixed at the base of something, basal 
bell-: pretty, handsome 
benzoin-: resinous 
betul-: birch 
bi-: prefix meaning two, double, twice 
biennis: lasting two years 
bol-: throw, thrower 
bolaris: with little lumps of paint 
bolbit: cow dung 
bolet-, bolites: ancient words for a superior 
kind of mushroom 
bombyc-: silky 
boreal-: northern 
bOlry-, bOlryt-: bunch of grapes 
bovista: ancient term for puffball (probably 
derived from word for ox) 
904 
brev-: short, brief 
brum-: winter 
brunne-: brown, dark brown 
buf-: toad 
bulb-: bulb 
bulbos-: with a bulb, bulbous 
bulg-: wine skin, leather bag 
bUlyrace-: buttery 
byssised-: seated in or pertaining to a mass 
of fine threads or filaments 
C 
caelat-: chiselled, carved 
caerul-: blue, deep blue 
caes-: glaucous, light gray, blue-gray 
caesar-: caesarean, regal 
caespitos-: cespitose (tufted or clustered) 
calamislrat-: curled 
calig-: boot 
cal/isl-: beautiful 
calo-: beautiful 
calv-, calval-: bald, hairless 
calyc-: cup, bud, calyx 
calyplr-: protective cap or hood 
camar-: arched, curved, vaulted 
camp-: fields, plains, countryside 
campan-: bell 
campanul-: little bell 
can-: hoary, pale gray, whitish 
cancell-: lattice-work 
candid-: shing, bright, white, clear 
canthar-, canth-: drinking cup 
caperal-: wrinkled, folded 
capill-: hair 
capn-: smoke 
capr-: goat 
capreol-: (I) wild goat (2) tendril 
carbon-: coal, charcoal 
carchar-: rough, jagged 
carn-, carne-: flesh, flesh-colored 
carp-: fruit, fruiting body 
cary-, caryc-: nut tree or nut (especially walnut 
or hickory) 
caSlan-: chestnut, chestnut-colored 
catalhelasma: running down 
calin-: small bowl, basin, hollow 
caud-: tail 
caul-: stalk, stem, stipe 
cav-, cavi-: hollow, cavernous 
cedr-: cedar (Old World cedar, Cedrus) 
cedrel-: cedar woods, cedars 
celer-: swift 
cenlUncul-: a patchwork cloth 
cep-: (I) onion (usually cepa) (2) head (see 
ceps) 
cephal-: head 
ceps: heads 
cer-: horn 
cerace-: waxy 
cerea-: wax 
cerebr-: brain 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
cerrusal-: as if painted with white lead 
cerv;n-: pertaining to deer; fawn-colored 
chael-: long hair or bristle 
chamal-: false 
chamonixia-: on the ground (?) 
chei/-: lip, brim, margin 
che;m-: winter 
chelidon-: russet (colored like a swallow's 
throat) 
chelis: (I) hoof or cla w (2) cloven 
chil-: lip, brim, margin 
chion J : snowy 
chlamyd-: mantle, cloak 
chlor-: green, greenish, greenish-yellow 
choir-: sow, pig 
chondr-: (I) cartilaginous (2) granular 
chro-: (I) color (2) superficial appearance, 
skin 
chrom-: bright color, e.g., chrome-yellow 
chrys-: golden, gold 
cibar-: food 
cibor-: drinking vessel or cup 
cilial-: ciliate (fringed with hairs) 
cilic-: cloth made of goat's hair 
cincinnal-: curly, with curled hairs 
cinere-: ash-colored, smoky, of cinders 
cingul-: girdle, belt, collar 
cinnabarin-: red, cinnabar-colored 
cinnamom-: cinnamon-colored 
c;rcell-: small ring 
circin-: circular, or bent like the head of a 
crosier 
cirrhal-: frayed, fringed, curled 
cilrin-: lemon-yellow 
clar-: clear, light, brilliant 
clalhr-: iron grating, latticework 
claud-: lame, closed 
clav-: club 
clavat-: clavate (club-shaped) 
clav;cul-: small key 
cl;mac-: ladder 
Clil-: sloping 
clype-: round shield 
coccin-: scarlet, red 
cochleat-: like a snail shell 
cocos-: coconut 
cognat-: related, kindred 
col-: dweller, inhabitant (usually a suffix) 
cole-: sheath 
coli-: sieve, colander 
col/inil-: smeared or covered with slime 
collyb-: small coin or coin-shaped pastry 
columb-: dove 
com-: hair 
comat-: covered with hair 
con-: (I) cone (2) prefix meaning with 
conchal-: shell-shaped, shell-like 
concinn-: neatly arranged or joined 
concrescens: congealed 
confluens: confluent; running together 
confragos-: rough, scaly 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
con;gen-: growing on or born from cones 
connat-: born together 
connex-: connected 
conn;vens-: blended together, converging 
consobr;n-: cousin 
controvers-: turned against, in opposite 
directions 
copr-: dung 
cor-: see cor;- 
cordy-: club, cudgel, swelling 
cor;-: leather 
corn-: horn 
corn;culat-: with little horns 
cornucop;-: horn of plenty 
coron-: crown 
coronill-: little crown, garland 
corrug-: wrinkle, wrinkles 
cort;c-: (I) bark or hard crust (2) cork 
cort;n-: curtain 
corv;n-: shiny black (like a raven) 
coss-: wood worm 
cost-: rib 
cotone-: color of wild olives or quince 
cotyl-: cup, cup-shaped 
cran;-: skull, cranium 
crass-: fat, thick, big, heavy 
crater-: cup, crater 
cren-: notch 
crenulat-: notched, scalloped 
crep-, crep;d-: shoe, slipper 
cretace-: chalky 
cr;n-: hair 
cr;n;tus: long-haired, very hairy 
cr;sp-: curly, crisped 
cr;st-: crest 
croc-: saffron-colored 
croco/it-: wearing saffron 
cruent-: gory, blood-colored 
crust-: crust, crusty 
crustul;n-: thin bread crust 
crypt-: hidden, secret 
cucull-: hood, cap 
cucum-: cucumber 
cudon;a: pertaining to a leather helmet 
cumatil-: colored like a wave or sea water 
cusp;dat-: with a sharp tip, pointed 
cyan-: blue, deep blue 
cyath-: cup 
cyb-, cybe: head 
cycl-: circle, wheel 
cypt-: stooped forward 
cyst-: blister, bladder, cyst 
D 
dacry-: a tear (as in weeping) 
daedal-: pertaining to maker of labyrinth, 
beautifully wrought 
dal-: fire-brand, charred wood 
dasy-: shaggy, hairy 
dauc-: carrot 
dealbat-: whitewashed 
decastes: by tens 
905 
decept;v-, decip;ens: deceiving 
decolorans: fading 
decor-: beautiful, befitting, elegant 
decurrens: decurrent (running down) 
de/ibut-: grease, greasy 
de/ica: weaned, without milk 
delicat-: dainty, pleasing 
delph-: womb 
delphus: brother 
dendr-, dendron: tree 
dens-: crowded, thick, compact 
dent-: tooth, teeth 
derm-: skin 
destruens: destroying 
detonsus: sheared, clipped 
d;-: prefix meaning two, twice 
d;baphus: dyed twice 
d;cty-: net 
difform-: deformed 
dilatat-: dilated, enlarged 
d;pl-: prefix meaning double 
d;sc-: disc 
d;scised-: seated in a disc 
d;sco;d-: (1) disc-shaped (2) descriptive term 
for one color at the center of another color 
d;ss;mulans: one who is disguised 
don-, dont-: tooth, teeth 
dry-: oak 
dryad-: (I) wood nymph (2) oak 
dulc-: sweet 
dur-: hard, resistant, durable 
duracin-: hard-fruited 
E 
eburne-: ivory 
ecc;/ia: rolled up 
ech;n-: hedgehog, sea-urchin (hence spiny, 
prickly) 
edodes: food 
edu/is: edible 
elaph-: deer 
elasm-: thin plate or gill 
elat-: raised, tall 
elegan-, elegans: elegant, choice 
encephal-: brain 
end-, endo-: within. inner. inside (prefix) 
ent-: rolled inward 
enteron-: internal 
ep-: see ep;- 
eph;pp;-: mounted as on a horse 
ep;-: prefix meaning on or upon 
ep;pteryg;a: surmounted by a small wing 
ereb-: dark 
er;c-: heath 
er;cet-: heaths 
er;nace-: pertaining to hedgehog 
erub-: red, reddish 
erythr-: red, reddish 
esculent-: edible, good to eat 
eury-: large, broad, wide 
evanescens: evanescent, withering away 
evenos-: without veins 
906 
ex-: prefix meaning without, beyond, on 
the outside, or possessed of 
excels-: lofty 
excor-: peeled, flayed 
exid-: staining, exuding, perspiring 
exim-: extraordinary, distinguished 
F 
fag-: beech 
fall-,fallax: deceptive 
farin-: flour, meal 
farinace-: farinaceous (like fresh meal) 
fascicul-: bundle 
fastigiat-: pointed, gabled 
fav-: honeycomb 
fell-: very bitter (bile) 
fenn-: Finland 
fer-: bearer, carrier, bearing (usually a suffix) 
ferr-: iron 
ferrug-: rust, rusty 
jibr-: fiber 
jibriJ-: fibril (fine fiber or hair) 
jibros-: fibrous 
jibul-: pin or clasp 
jid-: divided, forked 
jil-: thread 
jim-: dung 
jimbriat-: fringed 
jimet-: dung heap 
jirm-: firm, strong 
jistul-: tube or pipe 
jlabell-: small fan 
jlamm-: flame 
jlav-: yellow 
jlocc-: woolly 
jlu-: secreting fluid, letting flow (usually a 
suffix) 
foc-: fire 
foenisecii-: pertaining to hay-making or 
la wn-mowing 
foetens,foetid-: fetid, stinking 
foli-: leaf or leaves (gills) 
fomes,foment-,fomit-: tinder 
form-: shape, form, appearance 
formos-: lovely, shapely, beautifully formed 
fornicat-: arched or vaulted 
fract-,frag-: break 
frond-: leaf, frond 
fruct-: fruit 
fulg-: shine 
fulig-: soot 
fulmin-: lightning 
fulv-: fulvous (fox-colored, reddish-yellow, 
tawny) 
fum-: smoke, smoke-color (gray, usually 
mixed with brown) 
funalia: made of rope 
furc-: fork, forked 
furfur-: bran, scurf 
fus-: spindle 
fusc-,fusco-: dark, dusky, fuscous 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
G 
gal-, galact-: milk 
gale-, galer-: helmet or fur cap 
gambos-: large-hocked, with a swollen base 
gan-: shiny, lustrous 
gaster-, gastr-: stomach, belly 
gausapat-: woollen cloth 
ge-: see geo- 
gemmat-: gemmed 
gen-: (I) born of, originating from (2) race 
genea: derived from gen-, or from ancient 
word for compact, knobby bodies 
gentil-: of the same race 
geo-: earth 
geotrop-: positively geotropic, i.e., erect 
ger-: bearer, carrier, bearing (often a suffix) 
gibb-: humped, rounded 
gigas-: giant 
gilv-: pale yellow, dull yellowish 
glaber, glabr-: hairless, smooth 
glandul-: gland 
glauc-: glaucous (pale grayish-bluish-green) 
or silvery 
gleb-: gleba (derived from word for clod) 
gli-: glue 
glischr-: glutinous, sticky 
gloeo-: glutinous, sticky 
gloss-: tongue 
glyc-, glycy-: sugar, sweet 
gomph-: bolt, peg, stake, nail 
gon-: joint, angle 
gracil-: gracile (slender, thin) 
gramin-: grass, grain 
gramm-: sign, mark, line 
gran-: seed, grain 
granul-: granule (fine grain) 
grav-: heavy, strong, pregnant with 
grifola: braided fungus 
gris-, grise-: gray 
gumm-: gum 
gutt-: drop, droplet 
gymn-: naked 
gyr-: round; a circle 
H 
haem-, haemat-: blood, blood-red 
haemorrhoid-: bleeding 
hal-: salt, sea 
hapal-: soft-boiled, tender 
hebe-: blunt, obtuse 
helv-: see heJveol- 
helvella: ancient term for an aromatic herb 
helveol-, helvol-: light bay, pale reddish, 
blonde, honey-colored, "the dingy color 
of oxen" 
hemi-: half 
hepat-: liver 
hericium-: pertaining to hedgehog 
hetero-: prefix meaning irregular, dif- 
ferent, other 
hiem-: winter 
hirn-: jug 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
hirsUl-; hirsute (hairy) 
hirr-; bristly or shaggy with weak hairs 
hispid-; hispid (roughened by stiff hairs), 
shaggy, spiny 
hol-, holo-; entire, whole 
hort-; garden, gardens 
humil-; low, stunted, humble, dwarfish 
hyal-; clear, transparent, colorless 
hydn-; ancient term for an edible mush- 
room or tuber (truffle) 
hydr-; water 
hygr-; moisture, humidity 
hymen-; membrane, hymenium 
hyp-; see hypo- 
hyper-; prefix meaning above, beyond, over 
hyph-; fringed with tissue, webbed, woven 
hypn-; tree-moss 
hypo-; prefix meaning below, under, 
beneath, not quite, less than normal 
hyps-; high up 
hysgin-; red vegetable dye 
hyster-; womb 
hystrix, hystric-; porcupine 
IJK 
iamh-; violet 
icterin-; jaundiced (pale yellow or greenish- 
yellow) 
ign-; fire 
il/in-; smeared 
il/ot-; dirty, unwashed 
il/udens; (I) deceiving (2) emitting light 
im-; see in- 
imbricat-; covered with tiles or scales, 
shingled 
impatiens; quickly ripening 
impolit-; unpolished (matt), rough 
impudic-; shameless, immodest 
in-; prefix meaning not, lacking, on, toward, 
intensely, to cause to become 
inaurat-; gilded, covered with gold 
incarnat-; flesh-colored 
indic-; pertaining to India or indigo 
indigo; dark blue or purple-blue 
indusi-; garment, overall 
infract-; humble, subdued, uniform 
inful-: priest's cap or hood 
infundibul-; funnel 
ino-; fiber 
inquinans; polluting, staining 
insign-; illustrious, distinctive, well-marked 
;nsuls-; tasteless, unattractive 
integr-; entire, whole, renewed, 
imyb-; chicory, endive 
invers-; inverted, upside down 
involut-; rolled up, inrolled 
io-, iod-; violet 
irin-; pertaining to iris 
irpex; harrow, wolfs teeth 
irradians; radiant, radiating 
ischn-; slender, thin, weak 
ithy-, ithys-; straight, erect 
907 
jub-; mane, crest 
junonius; pertaining to Juno, wife of Jupiter 
L 
lacc- paint 
lacer-; tear, lacerate 
lachn-; wool, woolly 
lachrim-; tears (as in weeping) 
laciniat-; torn, frayed 
lacrim-, lacrym-; tears (as in weeping) 
lact-; milk 
lacun-; cavity, pit 
laet-; bright, gay, pleasing, abundant 
laev-; smooth 
laevigat-; polished, smooth 
lag-; hare, rabbit 
lame/l-; plate or plates (gills) 
lamin-, lamn-; thin plate 
lan-; wool 
lani-; (I) wool (2) to tear into pieces 
lanuginos-; downy 
larg-; large, wide 
laric-; larch 
lat-; broad, large 
larer-; brick 
laterit-; brick-colored, bricklike 
laurocerasi; pertaining to English laurel 
leccinum; Italian term for fungus 
lei-; smooth 
lem-; (I) pliable, tenacious (2) sticky, viscid 
lenticul-; (I) lentil (2) small lens 
lentig-: freckle, speck 
leo-: lion 
leot-; smooth 
lepi-; scale 
lepid-; agreeable, pretty, neat 
lepide-; scaly 
lepis-; scale 
lepist-; wine pitcher or goblet 
lepor-; rabbit or hare 
lepr-; rough, scurfy, scaly 
lept-; thin, fine, delicate 
leptonia; fine like a small coin 
leuc-; white, light 
levi-, levigat-; see laev-, laevigat- 
liber-, libr-; free 
lign-; wood 
ligny-; ash, soot 
ligul-; little tongue 
limac-, limax; slug, slime 
limb-; border, edge 
liquiriti-; licorice 
lith-; stone 
livid-; livid, lead-colored (an indefinite gray 
or bluish-gray color) 
loma-; margin, edge 
loricat-; armored 
lubric-; lubricous, slippery, smooth 
lucid-; glossy, polished, clear 
luculem-; clear, beautiful 
lup-; wolf 
908 
/urid-: lurid, unclean, dingy, or an indefinite 
color "between purple. yellow, and gray" 
- McIlvaine 
/ute-: yellow 
/yc-, /yco-: wolf 
/yo-, /yso-: prefix meaning loose, free, 
dispersed, or dissolving 
M 
macr-: large, long 
macu/-: spot, stain, blotch 
madid-: moist, soaked 
magn-: great 
magnat-: of magnates (dignitaries) 
mamm-: nipple, teat, breast 
mappa: napkin 
marasm-: withered, emaciated 
marg-, margin-: margin, edge, border 
marzuo/-: pertaining to March 
mastruc-: sheepskin 
maur-: dark, obscure 
maxim-: largest, greatest 
med-: middle, medium 
meg-: prefix meaning large or great 
me/a-, me/an-, me/aen-, me/as: black 
me/eagr-: speckled 
me//e-: pertaining to honey, honey-colored 
merd-: dung 
mer-, meri-: a part 
mesenter-: middle intestine 
met-, meta-: (I) prefix denoting change (2) 
prefix meaning between, next to, etc. 
metric-: measure, measuring 
micr-: small 
mi/itar-: soldierlike, occurring in troops 
miniat-: painted with red lead 
minut-: minute 
mir-, mirab-: admirable, marvelous 
mit-, mitis: mild, tender, harmless 
mitr-: miter, headdress, cap 
mokusin: a region in China 
mo//-: soft, tender 
mo/yb-: lead or pertaining to lead 
monach-: monk or nun 
mont-: mountain(s) 
morb-: disease 
morche//-: German term for edible fungus 
or morel 
morph-: form, shape 
muc-: slime, mucus 
mucid-: slimy 
mucronat-: with a sharp tip, pointed 
mu/ti-: prefix meaning many 
multiplex: many pieces 
mund, mundu/-: neat, clean 
mur-: mouse 
muricat-: (I) roughened by many short 
spines (2) pointed 
musca-: a fly 
musci-, muscu-, musco-: moss 
mut-, muta-: change 
mutinus-: a phallic deity worshipped by 
Roman brides, hence a penis 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
my-: see myo- 
myc-: fungus, mushroom 
mycena: ancient term for mushroom 
myo-, myos-: mouse 
myri-: myriad, countless, many 
myrm-, myrmec-: ant 
myx-: mucus, slime 
N 
naemat-: with threads 
nan-: dwarf 
nap-: turnip 
nasc-, nascens: arising, beginning 
nauc-: nut shell 
nebu/-: vapor, cloud, fog, mist, smoke 
necator: killer 
nemor-: of the woods, sylvan 
neo-: prefix meaning new 
neo/ecta: new selection (?) 
nid-: nest 
nidor-: fume 
nidoros-: reeking, with a bad or burnt smell 
nidu/-: little nest 
nidu/ans: nesting 
nidus: nest 
nige//-: blackish, dark 
niger, nigr-: black 
nit-, nite/-: shining, bright, trim 
nitid-: glossy, spotless 
niv-: snow 
no/a-: little bell 
not-: back, buttock 
nub-: cloud, clouds 
nud-: naked, bare 
o 
ob/ectabi/-: beguiling, delightful 
obscur-: dark, dusky 
occidenta/-: western 
ochr-, ochrac-: ochre, ochraceous 
ocrea-: sheath, boot, greave 
ocu/-: eye 
odon-, odont-: tooth, teeth 
officina/-: with pharmaceutical use 
o/ea-: the olive tree 
o/ens-: smelling (usually a suffix) 
o/id-: fragrant, smelly 
o/ig-: little, small, few 
o/ivace-: olive-colored 
all-: pot or jar 
ompha/-: navel (umbilicus) 
ono-: donkey 
onust-: full, loaden down 
onych-: onyx 
ophi-: snake, serpent 
orbicu/-: flat and round (disclike) circular 
orce//-: small vase 
oreades: pertaining to mountain nymphs 
or fairies 
ore//an-: pertaining to mountains 
ori-: of the mountains 
oricha/c-: copper-colored 
oriental-: eastern 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
orrh-: straight 
os-: see oss- 
osecanus-: whitened like bone 
osm-: smell, scent, perfume, odor 
oss-: bone 
ostre-: oyster 
ot-: (I) ear (used as suffix or prefix) (2) see 
list of suffixes 
ov-: egg 
ovat-: egg-shaped, oval 
ov;n-: ovine (pertaining to sheep) 
ox-, oxy-: sharp 
oxyd-: oxide, oxidizing 
oz-: branch 
p 
pachy-: thick 
paleace-: chaffy (with small weak scales) 
pal/ens, pallid-: pale, pallid 
pa/m-: palm (of a hand) 
palud-: swamp, marsh, bog 
palustr-: marshy, pertaining to swamps 
panaeolus: variegated, all-variegated 
pann-: rag 
pan us: tumor 
pap;l;o-: butterfly 
papill-: nipple, papilla, pimple 
par-, para-: prefix meaning near, beside, 
related to 
parc-, parci-: stingy, spare, sparse 
pard-: leopard 
pargamen-: pertaining to parchment 
parv-: small, little, pretty, dainty 
patel-: dish 
pauc-: few 
pauper-: poor 
paxill-: small stake, small stick, peg 
pect;n-: comb 
ped-, pedes: foot or base 
ped;ades: of the plains, of the soil 
pelargon-: pertaining to geranium 
pel;-: livid, dark 
pell-, pelli-: skin 
pelliculos-: with a well-developed pellicle 
pellucid-: shining through, pellucid, glossy 
penetrans: penetrating 
pen;o-: fabric 
pepl-: (1) skirt, robe, coat (2) gilded 
per-: prefix meaning intensely or very 
percom;s: very courteous or elegant 
perd-. perdon: flatulence 
perenn-: perennial, lasting, year-round 
perfor-: pierce 
per;-: prefix meaning around, all around, 
enclosing 
perlat-: widespread, enduring (may also be 
a corruption of word for pearl) 
peronat-: sheathed, booted, rough-booted 
pers;c-: peach 
personat-: masked 
pes: foot or base (stalk) 
pessundat-: ruined 
909 
petal-: petal or leaf 
petasat-: with a wide-brimmed hat, having 
a cap on 
pez;za. ancient term for a mushroom with 
little or no stalk 
phae-: dark, dusky 
phall-: swollen, puffed up, phallic 
phallus: rod, phallus 
phan-, phaner: appearing, visible 
phell-: cork 
phil-: loving, fond of, friend of 
phleb-, phlep-: vein(s) 
phlegm-: mucus 
phloe-: rind, bark 
phlog-: flame, flame-colored, reddish 
phoen;c-: red, purple-red, crimson 
phol-, pholid-: scale 
phor-: bearer or carrier, bearing (usually 
a suffix) 
phragm-: palisade, hedge, fence 
phyc-: algae, seaweed 
phyl-: tribe, race 
phyl/-: leaf or leaves (gills) 
phys-: (1) s.mall bladder, bubble (2) growth 
p;c-: magpIe 
p;cea-: spruce 
p;ci-: pitch-black (pertaining to pitch) 
p;coao coated with pitch or tar (black) 
p;cr-: bitter, pungent 
p;ct-: painted, streaked, embroidered 
pi/-, pi/e-: (I) usually means pileus or cap 
(2) pi/e- can also mean hair (3) pi/a can 
mean ball or bullet 
p;n-: pine 
p;net-: pine wood 
pingu-: (I) fat or grease (2) fat or stout 
piperat-: peppery 
p;pt-: easily detachable, falling off 
p;r;-: see pyr- . 
pis-: pea 
p;stil-, pistill-: pestle 
p;thy-: wide-mouthed jar 
plac-: a flat round plate, i.e., flat 
placid-: mild, gentle 
placit-: pleasing 
platy-: broad, wide, flat 
plect-: plaited, twined, twisted 
pleur-: side, beside, on the side 
plex: (I) pieces (2) a knitting or interweaving 
plicat-: folded, pleated 
plinth-: brick, block 
plum-: feather or long hair 
plumb-: lead or lead-color 
plute-: bracket, shed, penthouse, parapet 
pocillator: cup-bearer 
pod-, podi-: foot, base (stalk) 
pog-, pogon: beard 
poli-: gray, hoary 
poly-: prefix meaning several, many, much 
pom-: fruit tree 
ponderos-: heavy, ponderous 
910 
popul-: poplar, cottonwood, aspen 
por-: pore, pores 
porphyr-: (1) purple (2) reddish-brown or 
russet 
porrigens: extending forward, projecting 
horizontally, spreading, stretching out 
portentos-: portentous, prodigious 
prae-: prefix meaning before or very 
praeclare-: very clearly 
praecox: early, premature 
pras-: leek, leek-green 
prat-: meadow, meadows 
pre-: see prae- 
privignus: step son 
pro-: prefix meaning before 
procer-: lofty 
prolix-: stretched, elongated 
prote-: a sea god who could change shape at 
will, i.e., protean 
proto-: prefix meaning primary or giving 
rise to 
proxim-: nearest, next 
pruinos-: with a fine bloom, frosted 
prun-: plum 
psall-: ring or collar, fringed or curb 
psamm-: sand 
psathyr-: fragile, brittle 
pseud-: prefix meaning deceptive, similar 
to, easily confused with, false (often used 
before the name of a similar mushroom) 
psil-: naked, bare, hairless, smooth 
psitt-: parrot 
pter-: wing, membrane 
pterid-: fern 
pteryg-: wing, fin, membrane 
ptych-: fold or layer, leaf 
pub-: hair 
pubescens: downy, pubescent 
pudic-, pudor-: modest, rosy 
puellaris: pertaining to girl, i.e., pretty 
pulch-, pulcher-, pulchr-: beautiful 
pulver-: powder, dust 
punct-.. fine spot, dot, or puncture 
punctat-: punctate (finely spotted or dotted) 
punic-: red or purple-red, pomegranate-red, 
garnet-red 
pur-: clean, pure 
purpur-: purple 
pus-: (I) foot, base, or stalk (2) also seepusil- 
pusil-, pusill-: very small, little, weak 
pustul-: pustule, pimple 
pycn-: thick, dense, compact, strong 
pyr-: (I) pear (especially pyri-) (2) fire 
(especially pyro-) 
pyram-, pyramid-: pyramid, pyramidal 
pyren-: kernel, pit (of a fruit) 
pyrr-, pyrrh-: flame-colored, reddish 
pyx-, pyxid-: a small box 
QR 
quadr-: four, fourfold (usually a prefix) 
querc-: oak 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
racem-: branched like a grape stalk 
rach-: misspelling of rhac- 
radi-: ray, spoke, plate 
radians: (I) with rays or spokes (2) radiant 
radic-: root 
radul-: scraper 
ram-: branch 
raphan-: radish 
rasil-: shaved, scraped, worn smooth 
recis-: cut off, cut back 
reg-: king, royalty 
renidens: shiny 
repand-: folded backward, turned up 
resim-: turned up or bent back 
ret-: net 
reticulat-: reticulate (netted) 
rhac-: rag 
rhach-: spine or backbone 
rhacodes: ragged, shaggy 
rhe-: flow, let flow, exuding, flowing 
rhen-: Rhine 
rhiz-: root 
rhod-: rose, rose-colored (pink or red) 
rhopal-: club, stick 
rim-: crack, fissure 
ringens: gaping 
ripa-: stream bank 
rivul-: channel, groove, stream 
robinia: locust tree 
robust-: robust, stout, strong 
ros-: rose 
rostr-: beak, snout 
rot-: wheel 
rotul-: little wheel, pinwheel 
rub-, ruber: red 
rubel-: almost red, reddish 
rubig-: rusty, reddish-brown 
rubr-: red 
rud-: uncombed, made of untreated wool, 
rough 
ruf-: rufous (reddish) 
rug-: wrinkle 
russ-: (I) reddish (2) Russian 
rutil-: ruddy or warm red 
S 
sacc-: sac, sack 
sacchar-: sugar, sugary, sweet 
saep-: hedge 
saev-: sa vage 
salic-, salix: willow 
salmon-: salmon-colored 
sandarac-: flesh-color 
sangui-, sanguin-: bloody, blood-red 
sapine-: fir or pine 
sapon-: soap 
sarc-: flesh, fleshy 
sardoni-: very bitter, acrid 
sarx: flesh 
sax-: stone, rock 
scaber, scabr-: rough, scurfy, pertaining to 
scaber(s) 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
scamb-: bow-legged (i.e., curved or bent) 
scaur-: with swollen ankle or foot 
sch;z-: split 
sciss-: cut 
sc/er-: hard 
sc/eroto;d-: pertaining to a sclerotium (tuber 
or knot of tissue) 
sco/ec-: worm 
scord-, scorodon-: garlic 
scrob;cu/at-: scrobiculate (pitted) 
scUl-: shield 
SCUle/-: dish 
scyph-: cup 
seb-, sebac-: tallow, grease 
sec-: an enclosure or nest 
secund-: conforming, following 
sejunct-: disjoined, separated, severed 
sem;-: prefix meaning half or less than 
sem;ta/-: of footpaths, byways 
semot-: remote 
sep-: see saep- 
separans: distinctive 
separat-: separated, separate, apart 
septemr;ona/-: northern (from a northern 
constellation) 
sepu/chr-: tomb 
sepu/t: buried 
sequo;a-: redwood 
ser-: (I) whey, serum (2) to fasten or bind 
ser;-: silk 
ser;a/-: in rows 
serotin-: late 
serp-: snake 
serru/-: finely serrate (toothed like a saw) 
s;b;r-: Siberia 
s;cc-: dry 
s;/v-: woodland, forest 
s;m-: flattened or concave 
s;mb/-: beehive 
s;n-: curve, bay 
s;nap-: mustard 
s;ndon-: muslin 
s;nop;c-: reddish-ochre 
s;nu-, sinus: curve, bend, bay 
s;nuat-: sinuate (notched gills) 
s;str-: rattle 
smaragd-: emerald, green 
som-: body 
sord;d-: sordid (dingy, filthy, foul) 
soror-: pertaining to sister 
spad-, spad;c-: (I) bright brown (the color of 
a fresh date) (2) shaped like a palm frond 
or spade 
sparass;s: torn to pieces, lacerated 
spathu/-: little spade or blade, spatula 
specios-: beautiful, showy 
spectabil-: notable, remarkable, visible 
sperm-: seed (spore) 
sphaer-: sphere, round 
sphagn-: sphagnum, moss 
sphec-: (I) wasp (2) lichen 
sph;nct-: a tightening, tightly bound 
sp;n-, sp;nu/-: spine, thorn 
91l 
sp;ss-: thick, massive, compact 
sp/endens: polished, glittering, resplendent 
spong-: spongy 
spor-: spore, seed 
spret-: despised, scorned, rejected 
spum-: foam, froth 
squam-: a scale 
squamu/-: small scale 
squarros-: squarrose (with upright scales, 
rough, scurfy) 
ste//-: star 
ster-: hard 
sterquil-: dung heap, dung pit 
stich. marked, lined, dappled, dotted 
st;p-: stalk or stem (stipe) 
st;pt;c-: close, dense (also see stypt;c-) 
stom-: mouth 
stram;n-: straw-colored 
str;at-: striate (finely furrowed or lined) 
str;ct-: very straight, erect (usually narrow) 
str;gos-: strigose (with coarse flattened, rigid 
hairs or bristles) 
strobil-: pertaining to pine cone, or to 
something twisted 
strom-: bed, mattress 
stroph-: (I) belt or pectoral band(2)a turning 
or twisting 
stypt;c-: astringent (also see st;pt;c-) 
su-: pig, swine 
suav-: sweet, agreeable 
sub-: common suffix meaning (I) somewhat 
or almost (2) below or under 
subt;/-: fine, delicate, minute 
succ-: juice, sap 
sudor-: sweat 
sudorif;c-: sweat-producing 
suec-: Sweden 
sui//us: an ancient term for fungus (derived 
from word for swine) 
su/c-: furrow or groove 
summ-: summit, top 
surrect-: rising, erect 
sy/v-: woodland, forest 
synaps-, synapt-: joined together 
T 
tabac-: tobacco (color, odor, etc.) 
tabescens: decomposing 
tab;d-: decomposed 
tard-: slow 
tect-: roof, cover 
te/amon-: belt or supporting band; web 
tenac-, tenax: tenacious 
tener-: tender, delicate 
tenu-, tenu;-: thin 
tephr-: ashes, ash-colored, gray 
terfez-: Arabic word for truffle 
terr-: earth 
tessu/at-: mosaic-like, checkered 
testace-: testaceous (brick-colored) 
thec-: case or box 
thej-, the;-: sulfur, brimstone 
912 
thraust-: easily crumbled, fragile, brittle 
thrix: hair 
thuj-, thy-: cedar (arbor-vitae, not Cedrus) 
tigr-: tiger 
tinct-: tinted, dyed 
toga-: toga (robe) 
IOment-: wool or hair 
torminos-: causing dysentery 
toros-: muscular, i.e., bulging or swollen 
IOrqu-: necklace, collar 
tortil-: twisting, winding 
torul-: (I) tuft of hairs (2) bulge or swelling 
torv-: wild, savage 
tost-.. toasted 
trabe-: beam, timber 
trachy-: rough 
trag-: goat 
tram-, trama: (I) the woof(as in weaving) 
(2) something thin 
trametes: one who is thin 
tremel/-: trembling 
tri-: prefix meaning three, thrice 
trich-: hair(s), fiber(s) 
trivial-: common, vulgar 
trul/isat-: plastered 
trunc-: trunk (as of a tree) 
truncat-: truncate (appearing chopped off) 
tsuga-: hemlock 
rub-, tuba-: trumpet or tube 
tuber: (I) a tuber (2) a bump or knob 
rul-, tulo-: see tyl- 
tumid-: swollen 
tunic-: tunic, garment 
turbinal-: shaped like a top 
turmal-: a troop 
turp-: vile, ugly 
tyl-, tylo-: (I) swelling, bump, cushion. 
pillow (2) knob or callus on a club 
typh-: (I) smoke, cloud (2) a plant used for 
stuffing beds 
tyr-: cheese 
u 
ud-: wet, moist, damp 
uligi-: moisture 
uliginos-: full of moisture; boggy, swampy 
ulm-: elm 
umbel/-: umbrella or sunshade 
umbilic-: umbilicus (navel) 
umbon-: knob (derived from a word for 
shield) 
umbr-: dark, shade 
ungu-: grease 
ungul-: hoof 
uni-: prefix meaning one, single 
urbic-: urban, of the city 
und-, undul-: wave 
urens-: burning 
urs-: bear 
ustal-: russet (derived from word for burnt) 
uter-, utri-: wine skin, womb 
uvid-: damp, humid 
LATIN AND GREEK DICTIONARY 
v 
vacc-: cow 
vaccini-: huckleberry 
vagin-: sheath, scabbard 
valens: powerful, strong, robust 
valid-: powerful, robust 
vaporari-: pertaining to humid places 
vari-: change, changing 
variat-: variable 
variegat-: variegated, multicolored 
vas-: vessel. vase 
vel-: .veil 
vel/-: fleece, wool 
vel/ere-: covered with fleece, woolly 
velut-: velvet, velvety 
ven-: vein 
venen-: poison 
venet-: colored like sea water 
ventr-: belly 
ventricos-: ventricose (swollen, bulging) 
venust-: handsome, elegant 
verm-: worm 
vermicul-: little worm 
vern-: spring, of spring 
vernicos-: varnished 
verp-: rod, penis 
verruc-: wart 
vers-: changing 
versicolor: multicolored 
vesc-: (I) edible (2) feeble 
vesicul-: small bladder, blister 
vestit-: dress, attire 
veternos-: weak, lethargic 
via-: way, biway 
vibec-, vibic-: bruise 
viet-: wrinkled, wilted, shrunken 
vill-: shaggy hair 
villatic-: rustic, rural 
vin-, vini-: wine (especially red wine) 
viol-: violet 
vir-, virens, virid-: green 
virg-: stripe, streak 
virgin-: virgin (i.e., white or pure) 
virid-: greenish 
viros-: poisonous 
visc-, viscid-: viscid (sticky) 
vitel/-: egg yolk 
vitil-: coiling, twining 
volemus: filling the palm of the hand, or 
flowing enough to fill the hand 
volva-: wrapper, womb (volva) 
vor-: devour, devourer, eater 
vulgar-: common, known, usual 
vulp-: fox 
WXYZ 
xanth-: yellow 
xer-: dry 
xerampelin-: colored like a dry vine leaf 
xyl-, xylon: wood, wooden, woody 
zanth-: see xanth- 
zon-: band or zone (usually concentric) 
zyg-: yoked (connected, joined. attached) 
913 
GLOSSARY 
acanthocytes needle-like crystalline de- 
posits on mycelium of certain mushrooms 
acrid taste burning or peppery 
acute pointed or sharp 
adnate gills attached broadly to stalk (p. 
17) 
adnexed gills attached narrowly to stalk 
(p. t 7) 
agaric a mushroom with gills 
alveolate surface of spore or cap with 
broad pits (p. 842) 
amyloid staining blue, gray, or black in 
iodine solution (e.g., Melzer's reagent) 
anastomosing gills connected by cross- 
vems 
angular spores 4- to 6-sided, with corners 
or angles 
annulus ring or collar of tissue on stalk 
formed by ruptured veil 
apex top 
apical at or near the top 
apical pore in certain Gasteromycetes, 
the mouth at the top of the spore case 
through which spores are released; in 
spores. a germ pore 
apiculate furnished with an apiculus 
apiculus short projection on either end of 
a spore 
apothecium the fruiting body of an 
Ascomycete in which the asci are ar- 
ranged in an exposed hymenium 
appendiculate margin of cap fringed or 
adorned with veil remnants or other tissue 
appressed flattened down or pressed 
against 
areolate cap surface cracked into plaques 
or blocks (like dried mud) 
ascocarp fruiting body of an Ascomycete 
ascus (pI., asci) saclike mother cell in 
which spores of Ascomycetes are formed 
(pp. 4, 782) 
autodigestion self-digestion 
basal at or near the base 
basidiocarp fruiting body of a Basidio- 
mycete 
basidium (pI., basidia) a cell, usually 
club-shaped, on which spores of Basidio- 
mycetes are formed (p. 4) 
bolete a fleshy mushroom with tubes on 
underside of cap 
boletivore one with an inordinate fond- 
ness for eating boletes (p. 546) 
brown rot carbonizing decay 
buff an indefinite pale color: pale dull 
yellow or very pale tan 
bulbous stalk with an enlarged base (p. 
17) 
BUM Boring Ubiquitous Mushroom 
button a young fruiting body before it has 
opened up 
butt rot a rot confined to the base or roots 
of the tree 
cap the caplike part of the fruiting body 
which supports the spore-bearing surface 
capillitium modified threadlike, of ten- 
branched hyphae enmeshed in the spore 
mass of many Gasteromycetes 
capitate furnished with a rudimentary 
cap or head 
carbonizing decay a cellulose-decom- 
posing decay 
carminophilous see siderophilous 
cartilaginous with the texture of carti- 
lage; tough or rind like, not fleshy 
cellular tissue composed of round or pear- 
shaped cells (p. 19) 
cellulose a compound composed of glu- 
cose units; it is a major constituent of 
wood and of plants' cell walls 
cespitose (caespitose) tufted or clus- 
tered 
chlamydospores thick-walled asexual 
spores formed by breaking up of hyphae 
chrysocystidia cystidia with a highly re- 
fractive golden content as seen in KOH 
clamp connection a small bump, loop, 
or swollen area formed at the cross-wall 
between hyphae in the process of cell 
division 
clamps mycological jargon for clamp con- 
nections 
class a grouping of related orders 
clavate club-shaped 
club-shaped stalk thickened noticeably 
toward base (p. 17); basidia thickened 
toward spore-bearing end 
collarlike type of volva formed when the 
universal veil breaks around the circum- 
ference of the cap, forming a collar or free 
rim near base of stalk (p. 264) 
914 
columella internal stalk; a sterile column 
of tissue projecting into the spore mass of 
certain Gasteromycetes 
complex stalk folded or convoluted in 
cross-section; a group of closely related 
species or forms 
compound fruiting body with more than 
one cap and/ or stalk arising from a 
common base 
conidia asexual spores formed by the 
pinching off of hyphae 
conifer a cone-bearing tree; one that has 
needles like a pine or redwood, or scales 
like a cypress 
conk a woody, usually perennial poly- 
pore 
context the flesh of the cap or stalk 
convergent gill hyphae projecting up- 
ward toward the cap as seen in cross- 
section; converging toward the center (p. 
19) 
convex cap rounded or domed (p. 17) 
convoluted wrinkled like a brain 
coprophilous dung-loving; growing on 
dung 
cortina a veil with a silky or cobwebby 
texture 
cuticle the skin or surface layer ofthe cap, 
more specifically one differentiated from 
the flesh 
cystidium (pI., cystidia) specilized ster- 
ile cells projecting from the gills, tubes, 
cap, or stalk (p. 19) 
daedaloid pores elongated or meander- 
ing like a labyrinth; mazelike 
decurrent gills running down the stalk (p. 
17) 
decurved margin of cap curved down- 
ward 
delignifying decay a lignin and cellulose- 
decomposing rot 
deliquescing gills dissolving into a fluid; 
liquefying 
depressed cap concave, i.e., the center 
sunken below the level of the margin (p. 
17) 
dextrinoid staining brown or red-brown 
in iodine solution (e.g., Melzer's reagent) 
dichotomous forking or dividing in pairs 
differentiated different; not the same 
throughout. 
disc center of the cap 
distant gills widely spaced 
GLOSSARY 
divergent gill hyphae projecting down- 
ward (away from cap) as seen in cross- 
section; diverging from the center (p 19) 
division a group of related classes 
dry cap or stalk neither viscid nor hygro- 
phanous 
duplex flesh of two distinct textures 
eccentric stalk off -center 
echinulate spores spiny like a sea urchin 
egg the button stage of a mushroom with 
a universal veil (e.g., Amanita); also, 
spore-containing capsule in a bird's nest 
fungus 
elliptical spores rounded at both ends 
with sides curved slightly 
endemic native to a region and generally 
restricted to it 
endoperidium the inner layer of the 
spore case in puffballs and their allies 
entire gills with even edges: not serrated 
or toothed 
epigeous growing on or above the grond 
epiphragm the thin membrane covenn 
the nest of many young bird's nest fungi 
equal stalk of more or less uniform thick- 
ness throughout (p. 17) 
ericaceous pertaining to the heath family 
erumpent fruiting body erupting through 
the ground but scarcely rising above it 
evanescent transitory; disappearing 
exoperidium the outer layer of the spore 
case in puffballs and their allies 
expanded cap fully developed; spread 
out 
fairy ring a circle or arc of mushrooms (p. 
7) 
family a group of related genera 
farinaceous odor like fresh meal or 
cucumber 
fetid (foeti d) ill-smelling 
fibril a fine fiber or hair 
fibrillose covered with or composed of 
fibrils 
fibrous composed of tough, stringy tissue 
filamentous tissue composed of thread- 
like cells or filaments (p. 19) 
flaccid lacking firmness; flabby 
flesh the tissue of the cap or stalk; the 
meaty portion 
fleshy having substance (e.g., a fleshy 
fungal fructification) or soft as opposed to 
tough 
GLOSSARY 
floccose woolly or cottony; dry and 
loosely arranged 
fluted stalk ribbed; with longitudinal 
ridges 
free gills not attached to stalk (p. 17) 
friable easily crumbling 
Friesian pertaining to Elias Fries (the 
"father" of mushroom taxonomy) and to 
his classification system based on macro- 
scopic features 
fructification fruiting body 
fruiting body the reproductive structure 
of a fungus; a mushroom 
fulvous fox-colored 
fungophile one who loves fungi 
fungophobe one who fears fungi 
fungi (pI., fungi) any member of a large 
group of organisms that lack chlorophyll, 
reproduce by means of spores, and have a 
filamentous vegetative phase 
funiculus the cord attaching peridiole to 
the "nest" of certain bird's nest fungi 
furfuraceous scurfy; roughened by mi- 
nute particles 
fuscous an indefinite dark smoky color, 
sometimes with a slight violet tinge 
fusiform spores spindle-shaped; elonga- 
ted and tapering from the middle to both 
ends 
gastroid like a Gasteromycete, i.e., not 
forcibly discharging its spores 
gelatinous jelly-like in consistency or ap- 
pearance 
generic pertaining to genus 
genus (pI., genera) a group of closely 
related species 
germ pore a soft spot in wall of certain 
spores, through which initial germination 
takes place 
gills spore-producing blades on underside 
of an agaric 
glabrous bald 
glandular dots resinous spots or smears 
on stalk of certain boletes (Color Plate 
120) 
gleba the spore mass of a Gasteromycete 
globose spherical 
glutinous slimy or very sticky 
granulose covered with granules 
gregarious growing close together but 
not in clusters 
915 
habitat natural place of growth 
hardwood used here in a broad sense to 
denote any tree that is not a conifer 
heart rot a rot of the heartwood 
homogeneous the same throughout; not 
differentiated 
humus decaying organic material in or on 
soil 
hyaline spores colorless under the micro- 
scope 
hygrophanous cap surface changing co- 
lor markedly as it loses moisture; usually 
watery-looking when wet and opaque 
when dry 
hygroscopic sensitive to moisture 
hymenium a layer or palisade of spore- 
bearing cells 
hypha (pI., hyphae) a threadlike fungal 
cell, the basic structural unit of any 
mushroom 
hypogeous fruiting underground 
incurved cap margin curved inward to- 
ward stalk 
indeterminate growth that ceases and 
begins anew according to weather con- 
ditions, frequently creating a zoned or 
lumpy cap 
indusium netlike skirt in certain stink- 
horns 
inferior annulus located near base of stalk 
innate a part of; not superficial or easily 
removed 
inner veil see partial veil 
inrolled cap margin curved in toward gills 
and rolled up; tucked under 
interwoven gill hyphae entwined or tan- 
gled as seen in cross-section; not forming 
a regular pattern (p. 19) 
JAR Just Another Russula 
KOH chemical symbol for potassium 
hydroxide (potash) 
lamellae the gills 
lamellulae short gills that extend only 
part way to stalk 
lateral stalk attached to side of cap 
latex a juice or milk. as in Lactarius 
LBJ Little Brown Job (p. 33) 
LBM Little Brown Mushroom (pp. 32-33) 
leathery tough, pliant, not easily break- 
ing 
lignicolous wood-inhabiting 
916 
lignin a major constituent of wood 
lubricous somewhat slippery or greasy to 
the touch but not viscid or slimy 
lumper a taxonomist with a broad species 
or genus concept 
lutescent becoming yellow 
macroscopic discernible without a micr- 
oscope 
margin the edge of the cap or gills 
marginate gills with edges differently 
colored than faces 
marginate-depressed bulb with a raised 
rim 
mealy having a granular appearance or 
smelling like fresh meal 
median ring at or near middle of stalk 
Melzer's reagent an iodine test solution: 
44 parts water (by weight), 3 parts 
potassium iodide, I part iodine, and 40 
parts chloral hydrate (poisonous!) 
membranous membranelike; skinlike 
metagrobolizing puzzling, bewildering, 
confounding, confusing, perplexing 
micrometer see micron 
micron microscopic unit of measure equal- 
ing 0.00 I mm 
microscopic discernible only with a mi- 
croscope 
montane of the mountains 
mushroom the fruiting body of a fungus, 
especially one which has gills; also, a 
fungus that produces a fleshy fruiting 
body 
mush rump a hump in the humus caused 
by a developing mushroom 
mycelium a complex network of hyphae; 
the vegetative portion of a fungus 
mycologist one who studies fungi 
mycology the study of fungi 
mycophagist one who eats mushrooms 
mycophile one who loves mushrooms 
mycophobe one who despises or fears 
mushrooms 
mycorrhiza a mutually beneficial rela- 
tionship between a fungus and the 
rootlets of a plant (especially trees), in 
which nutrients are exchanged 
naked without hairs or other tissue 
nodulose spores covered with small 
bumps or nodules 
notched gills abruptly ad nexed , as though 
a small wedge-shaped piece of tissue had 
been removed at juncture to stalk (p. 17) 
GLOSSARY 
oblong spores elongated, with approx- 
imately parallel sides 
obtuse blunt; not pointed 
ochraceous yellow or yellow-orange with 
a brownish tinge 
order a group of related families 
ornamentation any discontinuity (warts, 
ridges, etc.) on the surface of the cap, 
stalk, or spore 
outer veil see universal veil 
oval spores or cap egg-shaped 
pallid very pale; an indefinite whitish 
color 
parallel gill hyphae arranged more or less 
parallel to each other as seen in cross- 
section (p. 19) 
paraphyses unspecialized sterile cells (p. 
782) 
parasitic feeding on another living or- 
gamsm 
partial veil protective tissue stretching 
from the stalk to the cap margin in many 
young mushrooms 
pedicel a slender stalk 
pellicle a viscid skin that usually peels 
easily 
pendant hanging down; also, annulus 
skirtlike 
percurrent columella or stalk extending 
through the spore mass to the top of the 
fruiting body 
peridiole small spore capsule in certain 
Gasteromycetes 
peridium the wall of the spore case in 
many Gasteromycetes 
perithecium a flask-shaped "nest" of asci 
(in the Pyrenomycetes) 
peronate sheathlike; also. a sheathing an- 
nulus or veil 
persistent persisting; not evanescent 
phenolic odor reminiscent of phenol 
pileate with a pileus or cap 
pileus the cap of a mushroom 
pip-shaped shaped like an apple seed 
plane cap having a flat surface (p. 17) 
pocket rot a rot producing hollow poc- 
kets in a tree 
polymorphic with many shapes or forms 
polypore any of a large group of mostly 
tough, wood-inhabiting fungi which bear 
their spores in pores 
pores the mouths of the tubes in boletes 
and polypores 
poroid resembling pores 
GLOSSARY 
potato chip conditions see footnote on 
p.35 
pruinose powdery or appearing finely 
powdered; dandruffy 
pseudocarp something that resembles a 
mushroom but isn't 
pseudorhiza a rootlike extension of the 
stalk; a "tap root" 
pubescent minutely hairy; downy 
pulverulent appearing powdered 
punctate dotted with minute scales or 
points 
putrescent readily decaying 
radially arranged pores or pits arranged 
in rows which normally radiate like the 
spokes of a wheel 
recurved curved up and back 
resupinate lying flat on substrate; with- 
out a stalk or well-defined cap 
reticulate stalk marked with lines crossed 
like the meshes of a net; netted (p. 489); 
spores with a network of ridges 
rhizomorph a rootlike or stringlike bun- 
dle of mycelial hyphae 
ring see annulus 
rivulose marked by riverlike lines 
rufescent becoming reddish 
rufous brownish-red 
rugose wrinkled 
saclike volva shaped like a sack, pouch, 
or cup (p. 264) 
saprophytic feeding on dead or decaying 
matter 
sap rot decay of the sapwood 
scabers tufted hairs or short projecting 
scales on stalk (Color Plates 145-147) 
scabrous roughened by scabers 
scales pieces of differentiated tissue on 
the cap or stalk, often of a different color 
than background 
scaly furnished with scales; volva with 
concentric rings or scales at base of stalk 
(p. 264) 
sclerotium a knot or tuber of hyphae, 
usually underground, in certain mush- 
rooms; a resting stage that fruits periodi- 
cally 
scrobiculate stalk pitted with conspicu- 
ous spots 
seceding gills breaking away from stalk 
as the cap expands 
secotioid resembling Secotium. a genus 
of gastroid agarics; reminiscent of an 
undeveloped or aborted agaric 
917 
septate partitioned; with one or more 
cross-walls 
serrated gill edges toothed like a saw 
sessile lacking a stalk 
setae pointed, elongated, thick-walled 
sterile cells 
sheath like annulus or veil sheathing the 
stalk (p. 312) 
siderophilous basidia with granules that 
darken when heated in acetocarmine 
simple fruiting body unbranched, not 
compound; stalk not complex 
sinuate gills notched (p. 19) 
sinuous crooked or curved 
skirtlike annulus hanging down like a 
skirt (p. 312) 
sordid dingy or dirty in appearance 
spawn the mycelium 
species (sp.) a particular kind of or- 
ganism; the fundamental unit of tax- 
onomy 
sphaerocyst a round or swollen cell in 
certain mushrooms (e.g., Russula. Lac- 
tarius) 
spines pendant spore-bearing "teeth" in 
the teeth fungi 
splitter a taxonomist with a narrow genus 
or species concept 
spore the reproductive unit of a fungus, 
usually a single cell 
spore case the large chamber that holds 
the spores in puffballs and related fungi 
(Gasteromycetes) 
squamose furnished with scales; scaly 
squamulose furnished with small scales 
stalk the stemlike structure that supports 
the cap in most mushrooms 
stellate star-shaped; with rays 
sterigma (pI., sterigmata) prong on the 
basidium on which a spore forms 
sterile not producing spores; infertile 
sterile base the sterile chambered base 
beneath the spore mass in many puffballs 
stipe the stalk 
stipitate furnished with a stalk or stipe 
striate marked by lines; finely furrowed 
stuffed stalk stuffed with a pith 
subdistant gills fairly well spaced 
subperonate somewhat or slightly pero- 
nate 
substrate the material to which a fruiting 
body is attached 
subtomentose finely or somewhat to- 
mentose 
918 
sulcate conspicuously furrowed; deeply 
striate 
superficial scales or warts easily remova- 
ble; not innate 
superior ring located at or near top of 
stalk 
tacky slightly sticky but not truly viscid 
tawny the color of a lion 
taxonomy the classification of organisms 
to reflect their natural relationships 
tenacious tough 
terrestrial growing on the ground 
tide pool conditions see footnote on p. 
35 
toadstool a mushrom. especially one 
that is poisonous 
tomentose covered with soft hairs 
top rot a rot confined to the top of a tree 
translucent-striate cap with the gills 
showing through to give a striate (lined) 
appearance 
truncate appearing chopped off or flat- 
tened at one end 
trunk rot decay found throughout the 
trunk of a tree 
tuberculate with low bumps 
tuberculate-striate striate with small 
bumps 
tubes the tubelike structures on the under- 
side of boletes and polypores, in which 
spores are produced 
turbinate top-shaped 
GLOSSARY 
umber a deep dull brown 
umbilicate cap with a navel-like central 
depression (p. 17) 
umbo a knob or bump at center of cap (p. 
5) 
umbonate cap furnished with an umbo 
(p. 17) 
universal veil a protective layer of tissue 
that envelops all or most of the young 
fruiting body of certain mushrooms 
veil a protective tissue (see partial and 
universal veils) 
ventricose stalk swollen at or near the 
middle 
vinaceous the color of fine red wine or 
slightly paler 
viscid slimy or sticky to the touch. at least 
when moist 
volva remnants of the universal veil at the 
base of the stalk in certain mushrooms, 
usually in the form of a sack, collar, or 
series of concentric rings or scales (p. 264) 
volval patch a large patch of universal 
veil tissue on the cap 
warts small pieces of universal veil tissue 
dep'osited on the cap; also, any wartlike 
scale or protuberance 
white rot a delignifying decay 
YAM Yet Another Mycena 
zonate cap or flesh concentrically zoned 
Leucopaxillus amarus, a common but bitter-tasting brown-capped agaric. Note how some specimens 
have a ribbed cap margin. Gills and flesh are white. See p. 168 for details. 
j 
, 
... 
,. 
" 
J 
919 
BIBLIOGRAPHY: 
Suggested Readings 
and Primary References 
N on-Technical Literature 
(N ote: Publications dealing with specific groups of fungi are listed under 
"Technical Literature," even though they may be written for amateurs) 
Field Guides 
Biek, David (1984). The Mushrooms of Northern California. Redding, Calif: S pore Prints. 
Bowers, Jeannette & David Arora (1984). Mushrooms of the World Coloring Book. 
New York: Dover. 
Guzman, Gaston (1978). Hongos. Mexico City: Limusa. 
Kauffman, C. H. ( 1918). The Gilled Mushrooms (Agaricaceae) of Michigan and the Great 
Lakes Region. New York: Dover(1971 reprint). 
Krieger, Louis C. (1936). The Mushroom Handbook. New York: Dover (1967 reprint). 
Lange, Morton & F.B. Hora(1963). A Guide 10 Mushrooms and Toadstools. New York: 
E.P. Dutton. 
Largent, David, Harry Thiers, Roy Watling, & Daniel Stuntz (1973-). How to Identify 
Mushrooms to Genus (5 vols.). Eureka: Mad River Press. 
Lincoff, Gary (1981). The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Mushrooms. 
New York: Alfred Knopf. 
McIlvaine, Charles & Robert Macadam (1902). One Thousand American Fungi. 
New York: Dover (1973 reprint). 
McKenny, Margaret & Daniel Stuntz (1971). The Savory Wild Mushroom. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press. 
Miller, Orson K. (1972). Mushrooms of North America. New York: E.P. Dutton. 
Moser, Meinhard (1983). Keys to Agarics and Boleti. England: Roger Phillips. 
Phillips, Roger (1981). Mushrooms and Other Fungi of Great Britain and Europe. 
London: Pan Books. 
Ramsbottom, John (1953). Mushrooms and Toadstools. London: Collins. 
Rinaldi, Augusto & Vassili Tyndalo (1974). The Complete Book of Mushrooms. New 
York: Crown. 
Smith, Alexander (1949).. Mushrooms in Their Natural Habitats. New York: Hafner 
(1973 reprint). 
Smith, Alexander (1975). A Field Guide to Western Mushrooms. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 
Smith, Alexander, Helen V. Smith, & Nancy Smith Weber (1979). How to Know the 
Gilled Mushrooms. Dubuque: William Brown. 
Smith, Alexander, Helen V. Smith, & Nancy Smith Weber (1981). How to Know the 
Non-Gilled Mushrooms, 2nd edition. Dubuque: William Brown. 
Smith, Alexander & Nancy Smith Weber (1980). The Mushroom Hunter's Field Guide 
(revised). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Weber, NancySmith& AlexanderSmith(1985). A Field Guide to Southern Mushrooms. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Wright, Greg (1981). Key to the Gilled Mushrooms and Boletes of Southern California. 
Published by the author. 
920 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Cookbooks 
Grigson, Jane (1975). The Mushroom Feast. New York: Alfred Knopf. 
Puget Sound Mycological Society (1973). Oft Told Mushroom Recipes (republished as 
Wild Mushroom Recipes). Seattle: Pacific Search. 
Poisonous & Hallucinogenic Mushrooms 
Duffy, Tom & Paul Vergeer (1977). California Toxic Fungi. Mycological Society of 
San Francisco. 
Lincoff, Gary & D.H. Mitchel (1977). Toxic and Hallucinogenic Mushroom Poisoning. 
New York: Van N ostrand Reinhold. 
Stamets, Paul(1978). Psilocybe Mushrooms and Their Allies. Seattle: Homestead Books. 
Mushroom Cultivation 
Harris, Bob(1976). Growing Wild Mushrooms. Berkeley: Wingbow Press. 
Stamets, Paul & J.S. Chilton (1983). The Mushroom Cultivator: A Practical Guide to 
Growing Mushrooms at Home. Olympia: Agarikon Press. 
Miscellaneous 
Bo, Liu & Bau Yun-sun (19g0). Fungi Pharmacopoeia (Sinica). Oakland, Calif: Kinoko 
Company. 
Jaeger, Edmund C. (1955). A Sourcebook of Biological Names and Terms. Springfield. 
Illinois: Charles C. Thomas. 
Rice, Miriam & Dorothy Beebee(1980). Mushroomsfor Color. Eureka: Mad River Press. 
Wasson, R. Gordon (1968). Soma: The Divine Mushroom of Immortality. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
Wasson, Valentina & R. Gordon Wasson(1957). Mushrooms. Russia and History (2 vols). 
New York: Pantheon. 
Technical Literature 
General 
Bigelow, H. & H. Thiers, editors (1975). Studies on Higher Fungi. Germany: J. Cramer. 
Miller, O.K. & D.F. Farr(1975). An Index of the Common Fungi of North America. Liech- 
tenstein: J. Cramer, Bib. Myco.44. 
Petersen, R., editor (1971). Evolution in the Higher Basidiomycetes: An International 
Symposium. Knoxville: Univ. of Tennessee Press. 
Richardson, M. & R. Watling (1968). Keys to Fungi on Dung. Bull. of the Brit. Myco. 
Soc. 2: 18-43. 
Saylor, H., P. Vergeer, D. Desjardin, & T. Duffy. California Mushrooms 1970-1980. 
Fungus Fair and Foray Collections. Myco. Soc. of San Francisco. 
Shaffer, R.L. (1968). Keys to Genera of Higher Fungi. 2nd edition. Ann Arbor: Univ. of 
Michigan Biological Station. 
Singer, R. (1975). The AgaricalesinModern Taxonomy. 3rd edition. Germany: J. Cramer. 
Snell, W.H. & E.A. Dick (1957). A Glossary of Mycology. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard 
U niv. Press. 
Watling, R. & A.E. Watling (1980). A Literature Guide for Identifying Mushrooms. 
Eureka: Mad River Press. 
R ussulaceae & Hygrophoraceae 
Hesler, L.R. & A.H. Smith (1963). North American Species of Hygrophorus. Knoxville: 
Univ. of Tennessee Press. 
SUGGESTED READINGS AND PRIMARY REFERENCES 
921 
Hesler, L.R. & A.H. Smith (1979). North American Species of Lactarius. Ann Arbor: 
Univ. of Michigan Press. 
Largent, D. (1985). The Agaricales of California, 5: Hygrophoraceae. Eureka: Mad River. 
Methven, A.(1985). New and Interesting Species of Lac tar ius from California. Mycologia 
77: 472-482. 
Shaffer, R. (1962). The Subsection Compactae of Russula. Brittonia 14: 254-284. 
Shaffer, R. (1964). The Subsection Lactarioideae of Russula. Mycologia 56: 202-231. 
Shaffer, R. (1970 ). Notes on Subsection Crassotunicatinae of Russula. Lloydia 33: 49-96. 
Shaffer, R. (1972). North American Russulas of Subsection Foetentinae. Mycologia64: 
1008-1053. 
Tricholomataceae 
Baroni, T. (1983). Tricholoma manzanitae- A New Species from California. M ycotaxon 
18: 299-302. 
Bigelow, H.E. (1970). Ompha/ina in North America. Mycologia 62: 1-32. 
Bigelow, H.E. (1982). North American Species of C/itocybe, Part 1. Liechtenstein: 
J. Cramer. 
Desjardin, D.E. (1985). New Marasmioid Fungifrom California. Mycologia 77: 894-902. 
Gilliam, M.S. (1975). New NorthAmericanSpeciesofMarasmius. Mycologia67: 81 7-844. 
Gilman, L. & O.K. Miller (1977). A Study of the Boreal, Alpine, and Arctic Species of 
Melanoleuca. Mycologia 69:927-951. 
Halling, R.E. (1983). The Genus Co//ybia in the Northeastern United States and Adjacent 
Canada. New York Bot. Gar. Myco. Mem. 8 (Germany: J. Cramer). 
Lennox,J.W.(1979). Co//ybioid Genera in the Pacific Northwest. Mycotaxon9: 117-231. 
Miller, O.K. & L. Stewart (197 I). The Genus Lentine//us. Mycologia63: 333-369. 
Mueller, G. (1984). New North American Species of Laccaria. Mycotaxon20: 101-116. 
Singer, R. & A.H. Smith(1943). A Monograph of the Genus Leucopaxillus. Pap. Mich. 
Acad. Sci. 28: 85-132. 
Smith, A.H.(1947). North American Species ofMycena. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Mich. Press. 
Smith, A.H. (1960). Tricholomopsis in the Western Hemisphere. Brittonia 12: 41-76. 
Smith, A.H. (1979). The Stirps Ca/igata of Armillaria in North America. Sydowia 8: 
368-377. 
Smith, A.H. & R. Singer(1945). A Monograph of the Genus Cystoderma. Pap. Mich. 
Acad. Sci. 30: 71-124. 
Thiers, H.D.& W.J. Sundberg(1976). Armillaria in the Western United States. Madrono 
23: 448-453. 
Entolomataceae & Pluteaceae 
Hesler, L.R. (1967). Entoloma in Southeastern North America. Germany: J. Cramer. 
Homola, R.L. (1972). Section Ce//uloderma of the Genus Pluteus in North America. 
Mycologia64: 1211-1247. 
Largent, D. (1970-1974). Studies in the Rhodophy//oid Fungi I: Madrono 21: 32-39; 
II: Mycologia62: 437-452. 
Largent, D. (1971-). Rhodophy//oid Fungi of the Pacific Coast I: Brittonia23: 238-245; 
II: Northwest Sci. 46: 32-39; III.. Mycologia 66: 987-1021. 
Largent, D. (1977). The Genus Leptonia on the Pacific Coast of the United States. 
Germany: J. Cramer, Bib. Myco. 55. 
Shaffer, R. (1957). Volvarie//a in North America. Mycologia49: 545-579. 
922 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Amanitaceae, Lepiotaceae, & Agaricaceae 
Bas, C. ( 1969). Morphology and Subdivision of Amanita and aM onograph on its Section 
Lepidella. Persoonia 5: 285-579. 
Freeman; A.E.H. (1979). Agaricus in Southeastern United States. Mycotaxon 8: 50-118. 
Isaacs, RF.(1963).A Survey of Agaricus in Washington, Oregon, and California. Master's 
Thesis, University of Washington; unpublished. 
Jenkins, D. ( 1977). A Taxonomic and Nomenclatural Monograph of the Genus Amanita, 
Section Amanitafor North America. Germany: J. Cramer, Bib. Myco. 57. 
Kerrigan, R. (1979-1985). Studies in Agaricus l. Mycologia 71: 612-620; II: Mycologia 
77: 137-141; III: Mycotaxon22: 419434. 
Kerrigan, R. (1982). The Genus Agaricus in Coastal California. Master's Thesis, San 
Francisco State University; unpublished. 
Smith, H.V. (1944). The Genus Limacella in North America. Pap. Mich. Acad. Sci. 30: 
125-147. 
Sundberg, W. The Family Lepiotaceae in California. Master'sThesis, San Francisco State 
University; unpublished. 
Thiers, H.D. (1982). The Agaricales (Gilled Fungi) of California: Amanitaceae. Eureka: 
Mad River Press. 
Coprinaceae & Strophariaceae 
Guzman, G. (1983). The Genus Psilocybe. Liechtenstein: J. Cramer. 
Smith, A.H. (1951). The North American Species of Naematoloma. Mycologia 43: 
467-521. 
Smith, A.H. (1972). The North American Species of Psathyrella. N.Y. Bot. Gar. Myco. 
Mem.24. 
Smith, A.H. & L.R. Hesler(l968). The North American Species of Pho/iota. NewY ork: 
Hafner. 
Van de Bogart, F. (1976-1979). The Genus Coprinus in Western North America I: Myco- 
taxon 4: 233-275; II: Mycotaxon8: 243-291; III: Mycotaxon 10: 155-174. 
Cortinariaceae & Gomphidiaceae 
Ammirati, J.F. & A.H. Smith (1977). Studies in the Genus Cortinarius II: Section 
Dermocybe, New North American Species. Mycotaxon5: 381-397. 
Hesler, L.R. (1969). North American Species of Gymnopilus. New York: Hafner, Myco. 
Mem.3. 
Hesler, L.R. & A.H. Smith (1965). North American Species of Crepidotus. New York: 
Hafner. 
Miller, O.K. (1964). Monograph of Chroogomphus. Mycologia 56: 526-549. 
Miller, O.K. (1971). The Genus Gomphidius. Mycologia 63: 1129-1163. 
Smith, A.H.(l939). Studies on the Genus Cortinarius I. Contr. Mich. Univ. Herb. 2: 142. 
Smith, A.H.(1957). A Contribution TowardsaMonographofPhaeocollybia. Brittonia9: 
195-217. 
Smith, A.H., V.S. Evenson, & D.H. Mitchel(l983). The Veiled Species of Hebel om a in the 
Western United States. Ann Arbor. Univ. of Michigan Press. 
Smith, A.H. & J. Trappe (1972). The Higher Fungi of Oregon's Cascade Head Experi- 
mental Forest and Vicinity I. Mycologia 64: 1138-1153. 
Stuntz, D. Macroscopic Field Key to Some of the More Common SpeciesofCortinarius 
Found in Washington. Pacific Northwest Key Council. 
Stuntz, D. Interim Skeleton Key to Some Common Species of Inocybe. Pacific North- 
west Key Council. 
Thiers, H.D. & A.H. Smith (1969). Hypogeous Cortinarii. Mycologia 61: 526-536. 
SUGGESTED READINGS AND PRIMAR Y REFERENCES 
923 
Boletaceae 
Singer, R. (1977). The Boletineae of Florida. Liechtenstein: J. Cramer, Bib. Myco. 58. 
Smith, A.H. & H.D. Thiers (1964). A Contribution Towards a Monograph of North 
American Species of Suillus. Published by the authors. 
Smith, A.H. & H.D. Thiers (1971). The Boletes of Michigan. Ann Arbor: Univ. of 
Michigan Press. 
Smith, A.H., H.D. Thiers,&O.K. Miller(1965). TheSpeciesofSuillusand Fuscoboletinus 
of Priest River Experimental Forest and Vicinity, Priest River, Idaho. L1oydia28: 
120-138. 
Snell, W.H. & E.A. Dick (1970). The Boleti of Northeastern North America. Germany: 
J. Cramer. 
Thiers, H.D. (1975). California Mushrooms: A Field Guide to the Boletes. New York: 
Hafner. 
Thiers, H.D. (1976). Boletes of the Southwestern United States. Mycotaxon 3: 261-273. 
Thiers, H.D. (1979). The Genus Suil/us in the Western United States. Mycotaxon 9: 285-296. 
Wolfe, c.B. (1979). Austroboletus and Tylopilus Subgenus Porphyrel/us with Emphasis 
on North American Species. Liechtenstein: J. Cramer, Bib. Myco. 69. 
Polyporaceae, Stereaceae, & Allies 
Canfield, E.,R. & R.L. Gilbertson (1971). Notes on the Genus Albatrel/us in Arizona. 
Mycologia 63: 964-971. 
Gilbertson, R.L. (1976). The Genus Inonotus in Arizona. N.Y. Bot. Gar. Mem. 28: 67-85. 
Gilbertson, R.L. (1981). North American Wood-Rotting Fungi That Cause Brown Rots. 
Mycotaxon 12: 372-416. 
OverhoIts, L.O.(1953). The Polyporaceaeofthe United States, Alaska, and Canada. Ann 
Arbor: U niv. of Michigan Press. 
Stuntz, D. (1980). Trial Field Key to the Pacific Northwest Polypores. Pacific Northwest 
Key Council. 
Welden, A.L. (1971). An Essay on Stereum. Mycologia 63: 790-799. 
Hydnaceae 
Hall, D. & D.E. Stuntz (1971-72). Pileate Hydnaceae of the Puget Sound Area I' Myco- 
logia63: 1099-1128; II- Mycologia 64: 15-37; III. Mycologia 64: 560-590. 
Harrison, K.A. (1964). New or Little Known North AmericanStipitate Hydnums. Canad. 
Jour. Bot. 42: 1205-1234. 
Clavariaceae & Cantharellaceae 
Bigelow, H.E. (1978). The Cantharel/oid Fungi of New England and Adjacent Areas. 
Mycologia 70: 707-756. 
Marr, C. & D. Stuntz(1973). Ramaria in Western Washington. Germany: J. Cramer, Bib. 
Myco.38. 
Petersen, R.H. (1968). The Genus Clavulinopsis in North America. N.Y. Bot. Gar. Myco. 
Mem.2. 
Petersen, R. H. (1971 ). Notes on Clavarioid Fungi IX. Persoonia 6: 219-229. 
Petersen, R.H. (1971). The Genera Gomphus and Gloeocantharel/us in North 
America. Nova Hedw. 21: 1-118. 
Petersen, R.H. (1975). Ramaria subgenus Lentoramaria. Leichtenstein: J. Cramer, Bib. 
Myco.43. 
Petersen, R.H. (1981). Ramaria subgenus Echinoramaria. Leichstenstein: J. Cramer, 
Bib. Myco. 79. 
Scates, C. (1982). Trial Key to the Species of Ramaria in the Pacific Northwest. Pacific 
Northwest Key Council. 
924 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Wells, V.L. & P.E. Kempton (1968). A Preliminary Study of Cia variadelph us in North 
America. Mich. Botanist 7: 35-57. 
Lycoperdales & Sclerodermatales 
Coker, W.e. & J.N. Couch (1928). The Gasteromycetes of the Eastern United States and 
Canada. Chapel Hill: U niv. of North Carolina Press. 
Guzman, G. (1970). Monografia del Genero Scleroderma. Darwiniana 16: 233407. 
Long, W.H. & D.J. Stouffer(1948). Studies in the Gasteromycetes XVI' The Geastraceae 
of the Southwestern United States. Mycologia40: 547-586. 
Ramsey, R. (1980). Lycoperdon nettyana, a New fuffballfrom Western Washington 
State. Mycotaxon 16: 185-188. 
Smith, A. H. (1951 ). Puffballs and Their Allies in Michigan. Ann Arbor: U niv. of Michigan 
Press. 
Zeller, S.M. (1947). More Notes on Gasteromycetes. Mycologia 39: 282-312. 
Tulostomatales, Podaxales, & Allies 
Long, W.H. (1940-1946). Studies in the Gasteromycetes 1. Dictyocephalos (with O.A. 
Plunkett): Mycologia32: 696-709; VII: Schizostoma(with D.Stouffer): Mycologia 
35: 21-32; VIII: Battarrea laciniata: Mycologia 35: 546-556; X: Tulostoma: Myco- 
logia 36: 318-339; XIV: Ch lamydop us (with D. Stouffer): Mycologia 38: 61929. 
Long, W.H. (1946). The Genus Phellorina. Lloydia 9: 132-138. 
McKnight, K. (1985). The Small-Spored Species of Podaxis. Mycologia 77: 24-35. 
Rea, P.M. (1942). Fungi of California I: Battarrea. Mycologia34: 563-573. 
Thiers, H.D. & R. Watling (1971). Secotiaceous Fungifrom the Western United States. 
Madrono21: 1-9. 
Hymenogastrales & Allies 
Fogel, R. (1985). Studies on Hymenogaster. Mycologia 77: 72-82. 
Singer, R. & A.H. Smith(1960). Studies in Secotiaceous Fungi IX: The Astrogastraceous 
Series. Mem. of Torrey Bot. Club 21: 1-112. 
Smith, A.H. & R. Singer(1959). Studies in Secotiaceous Fungi/V: Gastroboletus, Trunco- 
columella, Chamonixia. Brittonia II: 205-223. 
Thiers, H.D. (1979). New and Inreresting Hypogeous and Secotioid Fungifrom Cali- 
fornia. Sydowia Ann. Myc. 2:8: 361-390. 
Trappe, J. (1975). A Revision of the Genus Alpova with Notes on Rhizopogon and the 
Melanogastraceae. Beih. Nova Hedw. 6: 279-309. 
Zeller, S.M. (1939). New and Noteworthy Gasteromycetes. Mycologia 31: 1-31. 
Zeller, S.M. (1941). Further Notes on Fungi. Mycologia 33: 196-214. 
Zeller, S.M. (1944). Representatives of the Mesophelliaceae in North America. Myco- 
logia 36: 627 37 . 
Phallales & N idulariales 
Arora, D. & W. Burk (1982). Clathrus archeri, a Stinkhorn New to North America. 
Mycologia 74: 501-504. 
Blanton, R.L. & W. Burk(1980). Notes on Pseudocolusfusiformis. Mycotaxon 12: 225-234. 
Brodie, H.J. (1975). The Bird's Nest Fungi. Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press. 
Burk, W.R. (1979). Clathrus ruber in California and Worldwide Distributional Records. 
Mycotaxon 8: 463468. 
SUGGESTED READINGS AND PRIMARY REFERENCES 
925 
Dring, D.M. (1980). Contributions Toward a Rational Arrangement of the Clathraceae. 
Kew Bulletin 35: 1-96. 
Rea, P.M. (1955). The Genus Lysurus. Pap. Mich. Acad. Sci. 40: 49-66. 
Pezizales 
Denison, W.C. (1961). Some Species of the Genus Scutellinia. Mycologia 51: 605-635. 
Dissing, H. (1966). The Genus Helvella in Europe. Dansk. Bot. Ark. 25: 1-172. 
Kanouse, RB. (1948). Studies in the Genus Otidea. Mycologia 41: 660-677. 
Kempton, P .E. & V.L. Wells (1970). Studies on the Fleshy Fungi of Alaska IV: A Prelimi- 
nary Account of the Genus Helvella. Mycologia 62: 940-959. 
Korf, R. (1973). Discomycetes and Tuberales (Chapter 9, Vol. IV A of The Fungi: An 
Advanced Treatise, edited by Ainsworth, Sparrow, and Sussman). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Larsen, H.J.& W.e. Denison(1978). A Checklist of the Operculate Cup Fungi{Pezizales) 
of North America West of the Great Plains. Mycotaxon 7: 68-90. 
McKnight, K.H. (1969). A Note on Discina. Mycologia 61: 614-630. 
Seaver, F.J. (1928). The North American Cup Fungi: Operculates. New York: Hafner 
(1961 reprint). 
Seaver, F.J. (1942). The North American Cup Fungi: Inoperculates. New York: Hafner. 
Tylutki, E.E. (1979). Mushrooms of Idaho and the Pacific Northwest: Discomycetes. 
Moscow, Idaho: U niv. of Idaho Press. 
Weber, N.S. (1972). The Genus Helvella in Michigan. Mich. Botanist II: 147-201. 
Tuberales 
Burdsall, H.H. (1968). A Revision of the Genus Hydnocystis (Tuberales) and of the 
Hypogeous Species of Geopora (Pezizales). Mycologia 60: 496-525. 
Gilkey, H.M. (1916). A Revision of the TuberalesofCalifornia. Univ. of Calif. Publ. Bot. 
6: 275-356. 
Gilkey, H.M. (1954). Tuberales. North American Flora 2, I: 1-36. 
Parks, H.E. (1921). California Hypogeous Fungi- Tuberaceae. Mycologia 13: 301-314. 
States, J.S. (1983). New Records of Hyp ogeo us Ascomycetes in Arizona. Mycotaxon 16: 
396402. 
Trappe, J. M. (1975). The Genus Fischerula (Tuberales). Mycologia 67: 934-941. 
Trappe, J.M. (1979). The Orders. Families, and Genera of Hypogeous Ascomycotina 
(Truffles and Their Relatives). Mycotaxon 9: 297-340. 
Helotiales 
Mains, E.B. (1954). North American Species of Geoglossum and Trichoglossum. 
M ycologia 46: 586-631. 
Mains, E.B. (1955). North American Hyaline-Spored Species of the Geoglossaceae. 
Mycologia 47: 846-877. 
Mains, E.B. (1956). North American Species of the Geoglossaceae, Tribe Cudonieae. 
Mycologia 48: 694-710. 
Pyrenomycetes 
Child, M. (1932). The Genus Daldinia. Ann. Missouri Bot. Garden 16: 411486. 
Mains, E.B. (1940). Species ofCordyceps. Mycologia 32: 310-320. 
Mains, E.B. (1947). New and Interesting Species of Cordyceps Mycologia 39: 535-545. 
926 
GENERAL INDEX 
Note: This index includes topics, persons mentioned or quoted in the text, scientific 
names other than those listed in the "Genus and Species Index," and selected common 
names-those which are best known or most likely to be remembered. 
Bold face numbers indicated detailed treatment of the subject; if the treatmentcovers 
several consecutive pages, only the first is given. 
*-Indicates a photograph or illustration without accompanying text other than 
the caption. 
To avoid the confusion that results from using two sets of numbers, color plates are 
not included; they are listed on the page where the subject is described. 
A 
Abnormalities 898* 
Acacia 40 
Admirable Bolete 521 
Agaricaceae 310 
Agaricales 57, 58 
Agarics 52*,57,58 
Agaricus (section) 313 
Alder 39, 42 
Alder False Truffle 757 
Allegro, John 894 
Allergies to Mushrooms 892, 896 
Almond Mushroom 336 
Alpine Jelly Cone 674 
Amadou 581 
Amanitaceae 262 
Amanitas 263 
egg stage 262* 
Amanita-Toxins 892 
Amanitins 893 
Amatoxins 892 
Amethyst Laccaria 172 
Ammirati, Joseph 430,455 
Angel Wings 135 
Anise Agaricus 340 
Anise Mushroom 162 
Annulus 16 
different types (Agaricus) 312 
Anonymous Amanita 275 
Ant Fungus 881 
Ants 30,31 
Anywhere and Everywhere, Mush- 
rooms Found 47 
Aphyllophorales 57, 548 
Apple Bolete 528 
Apricot Jelly Mushroom 672 
Artist's Conk 576 
Artist's Fungus 576 
Arvenses 313, 731 
Asci 4*, 782 
Ascobolaceae 817, 834 
Ascomycetes 4, 55*, 782 
Ascomycotina-see Ascomycetes 
Ascus-see Asci 
Aspen 42 
Aspen Bolete 540 
Astrogastraceous Series 742 
Auriculariales 669 
Autodigestion 342, 343* 
B 
Balsamiaceae 852 
Banana Slug 28*, 29* 
Banded Agaricus 321 
Barrows, Chuck 314,331,340,529 
Bartelli, Ingrid 787 
Basidia 4*,6* 
in jelly fungi 669* 
Basidioles 5,6* 
Basidiomycetes 4, 52-54*, 57 
Basidiomycotina-see Basidiomycetes 
Basidium-see Basidia 
Basket Stinkhorn 770 
Bay Laurel 40 
Bearded Milk Cap 73 
Beefsteak Fungus 553 
Beefsteak Morels 799 
Bell Morel 794 
Bell-Shaped Panaeolus 356 
Ben's Bitter Bolete 524 
Bigelow, Howard 154,207 
Big-Foot 788 
Big Laughing Mushroom 410 
Bigwood, Jeremy 294 
Birch 41 
Birch Bolete 541 
Birch Conk 584 
GENERAL INDEX 
Birch Polypore 584 
Bird's Nest Fungi 54*, 778 
Bitorques 313 
Bitter Bolete 523 
Bitter Hedgehog 620 
Bitter Polypore 560 
Black Chanterelle 665 
Black Cup Fungus 829 
Black Diamond 842* 
Black Earth Tongues 866 
Blackening Russula 89 
Blackfellow's Bread 564 
Black-Foot 562 
Black Jelly Drops 876 
Black Jelly Roll 672 
Black-Leg 562 
Black Morel 786*, 790,959* 
Black Truffle 854 
Black Witch's Butter 672 
Blah Ramaria 651 
Bleeding Agaricus 325 
Bleeding Coral Mushroom 653 
Bleeding Milk Cap 68 
Bleeding Mycena 231 
Blewit 9,10,11,153 
Blue-Capped Polypore 558 
Blue Chanterelle 668 
Blue-Green Anise Mushroom 161 
Blue Leg 154 
Blue Stain 878 
Blue-Staining Slippery Jack 504 
Blusher, The 276 
Blushing Amanita 276 
Bohemian Truffle 712 
Bolbitiaceae 466 
Boletaceae 488 
Bolete Eater 883 
Boletes 52* , 488 
Boletivores 84, 546 
Booted Amanita 279 
Boring Brown Bolete 517 
Boring Brown Cup Fungus 821 
Boring Ubiquitous Mushrooms 209, 
417,451,455,463 
Bracket Fungi 52*, 549 
Brain Mushroom 801 
Bread Molds 782 
Brown Crumbly Rot 578 
Brown Field Mushroom 319 
Brown Rot 550 
Brown Witch's Butter 673 
Bufotenine 894 
Bulbopodium 418,441 
Bull Nose 800 
BUM's 209,417,451,455,463 
Burk, William 686, 769, 776 
Burned Areas, Mushrooms of 45 
Butter Bolete 525 
Buttery Collybia 216 
Button Mushroom 319 
Butt Rot 550 
C 
Cabaniss, Michael 539 
Caesar's Amanita 284 
Caldwell, Katy 306 
California Agaricus 327 
Candlesnuff Fungus 885 
Candy Cap 80 
Canning Mushrooms 891 
Cannon Fungus 781 
Cantharellaceae 658 
Cantharellales 548 
Cap 15 
cuticle 19* 
shape of 17* 
Carbon Balls 887 
Carbonizing Decay 550 
Caterpillar Fungus 882 
Cauliflower Mushroom(s) 657 
Cedar 41 
Cep 530 
Champignon 318 
Chanterelle 662 
Chanterelles 52*, 658 
Chaplin, Charlie 168 
Chemical Characteristics of Mush- 
rooms 20 
Chestnut Bolete 510 
Chicken Lips 874 
Chicken of the Woods 572 
Chinquapin_ 38 
Chrome-Footed Bolete 533 
Classification 8 
Clavariaceae 630 
Cleaning Mushrooms 889 
Cloud Ears 669 
Club Corals 632 
Club Fungi 53*, 630 
Coccoli 284 
Cocconi 285 
Coccora 265,284 
Cole, C. 185 
Collecting Mushrooms 11,26 
Colorful Earth Tongues 868 
Comb Hericium 615 
928 
Commercial Collecting 26 
Commercial Mushroom-see Culti- 
vated Mushroom 
Common Collybia 215 
Common Dung Cup 823 
Common Earthball 708 
Common Puffball 693 
Common Puffballs 690 
Common Stink horns 766 
Compactae 84 
Compost, Shalom 325 
Conch Rot 583 
Cone Heads 470 
Conical Waxy Cap 116 
Conifer Coral Hericium 614 
Coniophoraceae 604 
Conks 574 
Constricted Grisette 289 
Cookery, Mushroom 888 
Coprinaceae 341 
Coprine 896 
Coral Fungi 53*, 630,645 
Corn Silk Inocybe 457 
Corticiaceae 604 
Cortinariaceae 396 
Cortinarius (subgenus) 418,446 
Cosmopolitan Mushrooms 47 
Cottonwood 39,42 
Cousteau, Jacques 573 
Cracked Cap Bolete 519 
Cramp balls 887 
Crater Cup 829 
Crepidotaceae 396, 405 
Crested Coral 641 
Crocodile Agaricus 334 
Crown Coral Mushroom 642 
Crown Fungus 825 
Crust Fungi 53*, 604 
Cryptic Globe Fungus 585 
Cultivated Mushroom 319 
Cultivation of Mushrooms 30 
Cup Fungi 55*, 783, 817 
Cypress 36 
Cystidia 5,6*, 19*,20 
Czarnecki Family 176 
D 
Dacrymycetales 669 
Dark Bolete 534 
Darwin, Charles 766 
Deadly Cortinarius 444 
Deadly Galerina 401 
Deadly Parasol 308 
Dead Man's Fingers 886 
Dead Man's Foot 712 
GENERAL INDEX 
Dead Man's Hand 710 
Death Angel-see Destroying Angel 
Death Cap 269 
Deer Mushroom 255 
Deer Truffles 862 
Delicious Milk Cap 68 
Delignifying Decay 550 
Dermocybe (subgenus) 418 
Desert Shaggy Mane 725 
Deserts, Mushrooms of 46 
Desjardin, Dennis 207,208,210,214, 
854 
Destroying Angel 271 
Devil's Dipstick 771 
Devil's Eggs 765 
Devil's Stinkhorn 770 
Devil's Urn 829 
Dickenson, Emily 3 
Dictionary of Scientific Names (Latin 
and Greek Word Elements) 899,903 
Discomycetes 783 
Disturbed Ground, Mushrooms of 45 
Dog Stinkhorn 771 
Domicile Cup Fungus 822 
Donkey Ears 832 
Douglas-Fir 35 
Dow, Anne 547 
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan 2 
Dryad Saddle 561 
Drying Mushrooms 20, 890 
Dry Rot Rungus 610 
Dunce Caps 470 
Dung Mushrooms 42 
Dutra, Frank 484 
Dyeing 418,454,455,571,712 
Dyer's Polypore 570 
E 
Early Agrocybe 469 
Early Morel 793 
Ear Pick Fungus 629 
Earthballs 707 
Earth Fan 608 
Earth Nuts 854 
Earthstars 54*, 677, 699 
Earth Tongues 55* , 865 
Edibility of Mushrooms 23, 265 
Elephant Ears 799,803 
Elfin Cups 805 
Elfin Saddles 55*, 783, 796, 805 
Emetic Russula 97 
Enokitake 220 
Entolomataceae 238 
Erving, Julius 8 
Eucalyptus 39 
GENERAL INDEX 
Evenson, Verna Stucky 466 
Everson, Bill 526 
Eyelash Pixie Cup 839 
F 
Fairy Bonnet 352 
Fairy Clubs 634 
Fairy Fan 871 
Fairy Fingers 637 
Fairy Hair 636 
Fairy Ring Mushroom 7*, 208, 510 
Fairy Rings 6,209,687 
Fairy Stool 568 
Fairy Tub 821 
False Chanterelle 479 
False Morel 801 
False Morels 796, 799 
False Sparassis 824 
False Tinder Polypore 581 
False Truffles 54*, 739, 844 
False Turkey Tail 605 
Fan Pax 476 
Fat-Headed Black Morel 791 
Felted Heart Rot 580 
Felt-Ringed Agaricus 326 
Fetid Russula 92 
Field Mushroom-see Meadow Mush- 
room 
Field Puffball 695 
Fir 41 
Fires 45 
Flask Fungi 55*,878 
Flesh 16 
Flower Pot Parasol 302 
Fluted Black Elfin Saddle 815 
Fluted Brown Elfin Saddle 814 
Fluted White Elfin Saddle 816 
Fly Agaric 265,282 
Fly Amanita 282 
Fogel, Robert 748 
Foxfire 196 
Fragrant Russula 92 
Freezing Mushrooms 891 
Fried Chicken Mushroom 174 
Fries, Elias 58,418 
Frost's Bolete 528 
Fungi 4 
role in environment 6 
Fungophobia 1 
Funnel Chanterelle 665 
Fuzzy Truffle(s) 846 
G 
Garden Mushrooms 43 
929 
Garlic Mushroom 207 
Gasteromycetes 57, 676 
Gastroid Agarics 53*, 724 
Gastroid Agaricus 729 
Gastroid Boletes 544 
Gastroid Coprinus 727 
Gastroid Cortinarius 734 
Gastroid Lepiota 731 
Gastroid Liberty Cap 734 
Gastroid Milk Cap 738 
Gastroid Pholiota 735 
Gastroid Pine Spike 732 
Gastroid Russula 737 
Gastrointestinal Irritants 895 
Gelatinous Coral Mushroom 655 
Gemmed Amanita 281 
Gemmed Puffball 693 
Geneaceae 849 
Geode Truffles 849 
Geoglossaceae 866, 868, 872 
Gerry, Eric 733 
Giant Gel Cup 828 
Giant Gymnopilus 410 
Giant Horse Mushroom 333 
Giant Puffball 678*, 682 
Giant Puffballs 680 
Gilbertson, Robert 543 
Gilkey, Helen 843, 858 
Gilled Bolete 480 
Gilled Mushrooms 52*,57,58 
Gilled Polypore 589 
Gills 16 
arrangement of hyphae in 19* 
attachment to stalk 17* 
cross-section of 6* 
Girolle 663 
Glistening Inky Cap 348 
Glutinous Gomphidius 482 
Goat's Foot 560 
Golden Fairy Club 638 
Golden Pholiota 390 
Golden Waxy Cap 115 
Gomphaceae 630 
Gomphidiaceae 481 
Granulated Slippery Jack 502 
Greek 899 
Green Earth Tongue 870 
Greening Goat's Foot 559 
Green-Spored Parasol 295 
Grisette 288 
Gristly Truffle 857 
Guzman, Gaston 707 
Gypsy Mushroom 412 
Gyromitrin 893 
930 
H 
Habitats 34 
Half-Free Morel 791 
Hall, Joseph 29 
Hallucinogenic Mushrooms 29,31, 
265,282,354,358,359,368,370-374, 
409,410,894,895 
Harding, Paul 69 
Hard-Skinned Puffballs 707 
Haymaker's Panaeolus 360 
Hays, William Delisle 1 
Heart Rot 549 
Hedgehog Mushroom 618 
Hedgehog Mushrooms 616 
Helotiales 865 
Helvellaceae 796,848 
Hemlock 40 
Henis, M. 185 
Hen of the Woods 564 
Hesler, L.R. 64,385 
Hideous Gomphidius 482 
Hole in the Ground 847 
Honey Mushroom 34*, 196 
Hongo, Tsuguo 90 
Hooded False Morel 802 
Horn of Plenty 666 
Horsehair Fungus 208 
Horse Mushroom 332 
Hortenses 313 
Huckleberry 40 
Hydnaceae 611 
Hygrophoraceae 103 
Hygroscopic Earthstar 705 
Hymenium 57, 783 
Hymenochaetaceae 604 
Hymenogastrales 739 
Hymenomycetes 57 
Hyphae 5, 19* 
UK 
Ibotenic Acid 894 
Identifying Mushrooms 14 
Incense Cedar 41 
Indecisive Bolete 535 
Indian Paint Fungus 613 
Indigo Milk Cap 69 
Indoor Mushrooms 44 
Inky Cap 9,347 
Inky Caps 342 
Inocybium 455 
Inrolled Pax 477 
Insects 28, 29 
Insidious Gomphidius 482 
GENERAL INDEX 
Iodine Polypore 560 
Irregular Earth Tongue 871 
Isaacs, Bill 314,331 
Ivory Waxy Cap 119 
Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom(s) 147 
Jacobs, Jim 752 
JAR's 84 
Jelly Babies 874 
Jelly Fungi 53*, 669 
Jenkins, David 265 
J ochelson, Vladimir 29 
Judas' Ear 675 
Juniper 41 
Just Another Russula 84 
Kerrigan, Rick 314,323,324,332, 
379, 729 
Keys 21 
dichotomous (initial key) 52 
pictorial key to gilled mushrooms 61 
pictorial key to major groups of 
fleshy fungi 52 
King Alfred's Cakes 887 
King Bolete 530 
Kurokawa 556 
L 
Laboulbeniomycetes 47 
Lackluster Laccaria 172 
Landslide Mushroom 374 
Larch 40 
Larch Boletes 505 
Lantern Stinkhorn 776 
Largent, David 242,244,248,249,251 
Latex 63, 64 
Latin 9,899 
Latticed Stinkhorn 773 
Lawn Mushrooms 43 
Lawrence, D.H. 2 
LBJ's 33* 
LBM's 32 
Lenin, V.S. 3 
Leotiaceae 872,875,877 
Lepidellas 265,275 
Lepiotaceae 293 
Leprocybe 418 
Leucogastrales 759 
Liberty Cap 370 
Lichen Agaric 223 
Lilac Inocybe 461 
Lincoff, Gary 373,821 
Ling Chih 577 
Linnaeus 785 
Lion's Mane Hericium 615 
Little Brown Jobs 33* 
GENERAL INDEX 
Little Brown Mushrooms 32 
Little Helmet 352 
Lizard's Claw Stinkhorn 777 
Lobster Mushroom 884 
Long, W.H. 714 
Lorchels 799 
LSD 895 
Luminescence 146, 148, 196 
Lumpers 10 
Lupine, Bush 40 
Lycoperdales 677 
M 
Macroscopic Characteristics 14 
Madrone 38 
Maggots 28,29,889 
Magic Mushroom 373 
Magpie Mushroom 346 
Man On Horseback 179 
Mantis, Praying 28* 
Manure Mushrooms 42 
Manzanita 38 
Manzanita Bolete 539 
Maple 39,41 
Marr, Currie 645 
Marsh, Ben 525 
Marshall, Nina 769 
Marshmallow Polypore 600 
Matsutake 49*,189,191,192 
Mattoon, Judith Scott 576*,876 
Mcilvaine, Charles 113, 123, 141,355, 
376,419,445,584,690,700,765,768, 
769,802,866,871 
Meadow Mushroom 318 
Medicinal Value of Mushrooms 30 
Melanogdstraceae 756 
Melzer's Reagent 20 
Menser, Gary 854,861 
Methven, Andrew 79 
Mica Cap 348 
Microscopic Characteristics 19 
Milazzo, Ciro 145,553 
Milk Caps 64 
Miller, Luen 123 
Miller, Orson K. 355,689,717, 793, 
826 
Miniature Waxy Cap 113 
Minores 313 
Miscellaneous Toxins 896 
Mitchel, D.H. 466 
Mitchell, Craig 414, 666 
MMH-see Monomethylhydrazine 
Monomethylhydrazine 799,893 
931 
Morchellaceae 784 
Morel 787 
Morels 31 *,44*, 55*, 783, 784, 785 
Moser, Meinhard 419 
Mountain Gastroid Agaricus 730 
Muk Ngo 675 
Muscarine 455,894 
M uscimol 894 
Mushroom(s) 1-959 
allergies to 892, 896 
carnivorous 29 
chemical characteristics of 20 
classification of 8 
collecting 11,26 
color 14 
color changes 15 
cookery 888 
definition of 4 
distinctive 48 
dyeing with 418,454,455,571, 712 
edibility of 23, 265 
evolution 57,724,739,841 
fear of 1 
growing 30 
hallucinogenic 29,31,265,282,354, 
358,359,368,370-374,409,410, 
894,895 
handling 27 
hunters 84,224,546-547 
hunting 11,25 
equipment 12 
field notes 13 
identification of 14 
macroscopic characteristics 14 
medicinal value 30 
microscopic characteristics 19 
names 8, 899 
nutritional value 30 
odor 15 
parts of a 5*, 14 
picking 26 
dangers of 27* 
poisoning 892 
preservation of 20, 890 
role in the environment 6-8 
seventy distinctive 48 
sexuality 5-6 
size 14 
succession of 8 
taste 15, 63 
texture 15 
toxins 892 
weeds 47 
when and where they grow 25 
932 
Mycelium 5, 18,43* 
Mycorrhiza 7 
Mycorrhizal Fungi 7,34 
Myxacium 418,429 
NO 
Narrow-Headed Black Morel 791 
Niche 7 
Nidulariales 778 
Neruda, Pablo 888 
Not So Tedious Tubaria 403 
Nutritional Value of Mushrooms 30 
Oak 37 
Oak Conk 582 
Oak-Loving Collybia 215 
Oak Root Fungus 196 
Octopus Stinkhorn 774 
Oddballs 711 
Old Man of the Woods 543 
Old Man's Beard 615 
Orange Peel Fungus 837 
Orange Sponge Polypore 571 
Oregon Black Truffle 854 
Oregon White Truffle 858 
Ornate-Stalked Bolete 522 
Ornate Stinkhorns 772 
Ox Tongue 552*,553 
Oyster Mushroom 29, 134 
p 
Paddy Straw Mushroom 258,262 
Panther Amanita 280 
Paraphyses 5 
Parasitic Fungi 6 
Parasol Mushroom 298 
Parasol Mushrooms 293 
Parchment Fungi 53*, 604 
Parks, Harold 842 
Pasture Mushrooms 43 
Paxillaceae 476 
Pear-Shaped Puffball 691 
Peele, Stephen 294 
Pellegrini, Angelo 889 
Peppery Bolete 517 
Peppery White Milk Cap 71 
Pezizaceae 817 
Pezizales 783 
Pfifferling 663 
Phallaceae 766 
Phallales 764 
Phallolysin 892 
Phallophobia 766 
Phallotoxins 893 
Phlegmacium 418 
Pickling Mushrooms 892 
GENERAL INDEX 
Piercy, Marge 31 
Pigs 29,842 
Pigs 29,842 
Pig's Ears 661, 797, 798 
Pine 35 
Pine Conk 582 
Pine Spike 485 
Pine Spikes 484 
Pink-Bottom 318 
Pinkish Coral Mushroom 654 
Pink-Tipped Coral Mushroom 656 
Pleated Marasmius 209 
Pluteaceae 253 
Pocket Rot 550 
Podaxales 724 
Poisoning, Mushroom-see Toxins 
Poison Oak & Ivy 27* 
Poison Pax 477 
Poison Pie 464 
Polyporaceae 549 
Polypores 52*, 549 
Poor Man's Candle 123 
Poor Man's Gumdrop 674 
Poor Man's Licorice 876 
Poor Man's Slippery Jack 504 
Poor People's Truffle 668 
Poplar 42 
Poplar Tricholoma 185 
Porcini 530 
Pores 488, 549 
Potato Chip Conditions 35 
Powdery Mildews 782 
Preserving Mushrooms 
for study 20 
for consumption 890 
Prince, The 337 
Psilocin 368,895 
Psilocybin 368,895 
Psilocybin Mushrooms 31, 95 
Psychedelic Mushrooms-see Hallu- 
cinogenic Mushrooms 
Puffballs 54*,677 
parts of 677* 
Pungent Slippery Jack 503 
Purple Fairy Club 637 
Purple-Spored Puffball 687 
Purple-Staining Milk Cap 75 
Pyrenomycetes 878 
Pyronemataceae 817,831,834,846 
QR 
Queen Bolete 531 
Questionable Stropharia 377 
Quinine Conk 579 
Quinine Fungus 579 
GENERAL INDEX 
Rabbit Ears 833 
Ramsbottom, John 61 I, 773 
Ramsey, Robert 688 
Rattlesnakes 28* 
Raverat, Gwen 766 
Rea, Paul 777 
Red-Belted Conk 578 
Red-Brown Butt Rott 571 
Red-Capped Butter Bolete 526 
Red Chanterelle 664 
Red Coral Mushroom 655 
Red Gravel 757 
Red Morel 31*,791 
Red-Pored Bolete 528 
Red-Stemmed Bitter Bolete 524 
Red uced Agarics 724 
Redwood 36 
Redwood Rooter 218 
Reindeer 29 
Rhodophyllaceae 238 
Ring(s)-see Annulus 
Riparian Woodland 39 
Ristich, Sam 672 
Rood y, Bill 77 I 
Rosy Conk 580 
Rosy Gomphidius 483 
Rosy Larch Bolete 506 
Rosy Russula 99 
Rots 549,550 
Rough-Stemmed Boletes 536 
Rufous Candy Cap 82 
Russia 3 
Russulaceae 63 
Russulales 63 
Russulas 83 
Rusts 57 
Rusty Gilled Polypore 590 
S 
Saint Ciro 484 
Salting Mushrooms 892 
Saltshaker Earthstar 704 
Sand Amanita 273 
Sand-Loving Mushrooms 46 
Sandy, The 185 
Sanguinolenti 313 
Saprophytic Fungi 6, 7 
Sap Rot 550 
Sarcoscyphaceae 817,834 
Sarcosomataceae 817, 826 
Satan's Bolete 527 
Saylor, Herb 652, 742, 744, 854, 856, 
864 
Scaly Chanterelle 661 
933 
Scaly Pholiota 389 
Scarlet Cup Fungus 836 
Scarlet Waxy Cap 114 
Scates, Catherine (Kit) 645, 651 
Schizophyllaceae 590 
Sclerodermatales 678,699, 707 
Sclerotiniaceae 877 
Scotch Bonnet 202 
Sculptured Puffball 684 
Sellers, Bob 708 
Sericeocybe 418,448 
Sex 5,6 
Shaggy Mane 9, 56*, 343*, 345 
Shaggy Parasol 297 
Shaggy-Stalked Parasol 309 
Sheep Polypore 557 
Sheep's Head 564 
Shelley, P.B. 2,342 
Shiitake 31*,141 
Shingled Hedgehog 619 
Shoehorn Oyster Mushroom 136 
Shoe String Root Rot 196 
Short-Stemmed Russula 87 
Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack 501 
Shrimp Russula 102 
Siberian Slippery Jack 498 
Sickener, The 97 
Sierran Puffball 684 
Silver-Leaf Disease 606,607 
Singer, Rolf 207 
Slippery Jack 500 
Slippery Jacks 491 
Slippery Jill 499 
Sloane, Hugo 822,823 
Slugs 29 
Smith, Alexander 7,64, 118, 138,224, 
235,261,345,360,361,384,385,419, 
434,435,455,466,473,489,499,585, 
657,691,696,740,753,754,766,769, 
772,804,864,874 
Smith, Helen 740, 753 
Smooth Parasol 299 
Smooth-Spored Truffles 852 
Smuts 57 
Snit ow , Alan I 
Snowbank False Morel 800 
Snowbank Mushrooms 46 
Snow Mushroom 800 
Snow-Puff Mushroom 220 
Soapy Tricholoma 184 
Soma 894 
Sordid Waxy Cap 122 
Spawn-see Mycelium 
Specialized Habitats, Mushrooms 
with 47 
934 
Sphaeriales 878 
Sphaerocysts 63 
Sphere Thrower 781 
Split-Gill 590 
Splitters 10 
Sponge Mushrooms 785 
Spore Color 18 
Spore Prints 18 
Spores 4,5, 18, 19 
developing 6* 
numbers of 576-577, 680 
truffle 842* 
Spreading Brown Cup Fungus 82] 
Spring Agrocybe 469 
Spring Mushrooms 46 
Springtime Amanita 286 
Spruce 40 
Squirrels 29 
Staghorn Jelly Fungus 674 
Stalk 16 
ornamentation (boletes) 488-489 
position of 17* 
shape of 17* 
Stalked Latticed Stinkhorn 776 
Stalked Oddball 713 
Stalked Polypores 554 
Stalked Puffballs 54*, 715 
Stamets, Paul 368 
Starving Man's Licorice 828 
Starving Man's Slippery Jack 504 
Steinpilz 530 
Stem--seeStalk 
Stereaceae 604 
Stickney, Larry 117,672 
Stinker, The 179 
Stinkhorn 768 
Stinkhorns 54*, 764, 766, 772 
Stinkopus 775 
Stinky Squid 776 
Stone Fungus 563 
Strawberries and Cream 627 
String and Ray Rot 565 
Strophariaceae 367 
Stuntz, Daniel 373,419,434,455, 
458,560,645 
Stuntz's Blue Legs 372 
Suburban Psathyrella 363 
Suffixes, Latin and Greek 900, 901 
Sulfur Shelf 572 
Sulfur Tuft 382 
Sunny Side Up 474 
Swamp Beacon 870 
Sweat-Producing Clitocybe 163 
Sweetbread Mushroom 240 
GENERAL INDE 
T 
Tamarack Jack 497 
Tanoak 37 
Tawny Grisette 287 
Taxonomy 8 
Teeth Fungi 53*,611 
Telamonia 418,450,451 
Terfeziaceae 854-855 
Terminology 14 
Termites 30 
Terrestrial Pholiota 389 
Thelephoraceae 604 
Thick-Footed Morel 788 
Thick-Skinned Puffballs 707 
Thick-Walled Maze Polypore 587 
Thiers, Harry 285,489,536, 742, 745 
Thimble Morel 794 
Thimble Morels 793 
Thin-Walled Maze Polypore 588 
Ticks 27* 
Tidepool Conditions 35 
Tinder Polypore 581 
Toadstool, Definition of 25 
Toadstool Tester 24* 
Toothed Jelly Fungus 671 
Top Rot 550 
Totally Tedious Tubaria 402 
Toxins, Mushroom 892 
Trappe, James 748,758,843,860 
Tree Ears 675 
Tree Oyster--see Oyster Mushroom 
Trees 34-42 
Tree Trunk Morel 788 
T remellales 669 
Tricholomataceae 129 
True Truffles 854 
Truffle-Hounds 842,855 
Truffle Hunting 842-843 
Truffle-Like Peziza 822*,824 
Truffles 55*,739,841,854 
Truly Trivial and Totally Tedious 
Tubaria 403 
Truly Trivial Tubaria 403 
Trumpet of Death 668 
Trunk Rot 550 
Tuberaceae 854, 855 
Tuberales 841 
Tubes 488, 549 
Tuckahoe 564, 604 
Tulostomatales 678, 715 
Tumbling Puffball 697 
Tumbling Puffballs 696 
Tunbridge Ware 878 
Turkey Tail 594 
GENERAL INDEX 
UV 
Umbrella False Morel 804 
Van de Bogart, Fred 346 
Varnished Conk 577 
Veil(s) 16 
different types (Agaricus) 312 
different types (Amanita) 263-264 
Veiled Polypore 585 
Veiled Stinkhorn 771 
Veined Brown Cup Fungus 796 
Velvet Foot 220 
Velvet Pax 478 
Velvet Stem 220 
Velvety Black Earth Tongue 867 
Violet Cortinarius 446 
Violet Cup Fungus 824 
Violet Hedgehog 622 
Viscid Black Earth Tongue 866 
Vole, California Red-Backed 841 
V olva 18 
different types (Amanita) 263-264 
V olvariaceae 253 
Vulcan Pixie Cup 840 
W 
Walnut 800 
Wasson, R. Gordon 29,894 
Wasson, Valentina 320 
Waxy Caps 103 
Weber, Nancy S. 740, 753, 816 
Western Giant Puffball 684 
Western Grisette 290 
Wet Rot 611 
Wheat Ergot 895 
White Chanterelle 662 
White King Bolete 529 
935 
White Matsutake 49*, 191 
White Morel 788*, 789 
White Rot 550 
White Truffle 854 
Willow 39,42 
Wine-Colored Agaricus 326 
Wine-Red Stropharia 378 
Winter, Bob 143 
Winter Chanterelle 665 
Winter Mushroom 220 
Witch's Butter 673 
Witch's Hat 116 
Woman on Motorcycle 299 
Wood Blewit 154 
Wood Ear 675 
Woodland Agaricus 334 
Wood Truffles 848 
Woolly Chanterelle 661 
Worms-see Maggots 
Wright, Greg 69, 161,241,346,350, 
404,475,528 
Wrinkled Thimble Morel 793 
XYZ 
Xanthodermati 313 
YAM's 224 
Yeasts 782 
Yellow Coral Mushroom 652 
Yellow Morel 787 
Yellow-Staining Agaricus 329 
Yellow-Staining Milk Cap 74 
Yellow-Veiled Stinkhorn 771 
Yet Another Mycena 224-225, 234 
Yung Ngo 675 
Zeller's Bolete 518 
Zygomycetes 844 
Geopora aren;cola (see description on p. 847) is half cup fungus, half truffle. When young it looks 
like a hole in the gr ound because all but the mouth is immersed in the soil. As it matures, however, the 
hole broadens, and in old age the margin ofthe cup often splits into lobes as shown on left. 
f- 
'i 
!to, 
.. 
" 
-.'t 
." 
", 
.., 
.. 
. '. 
f' 
'\ 
.., 
, .' 
. , 
. 
..' 
. ; 
, 
-;OJ ;:t ,'A,..... 
.... 
".I ., 
A S:>.',. 
:). ..... 
, ; 
, ..." i ,1' " 
". . "It 
4' , 
  :. 
 A.... .. 
'\ .. 
-4' 
, i'IfII' 
.' 
>, '", 
936 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Note: This index includes only genera and species so that it can also serve as a check- 
list. See "General Index" for common names, topics, persons, etc. 
Bold face numbers indicate detailed treatment of the subject; if treatment covers 
several consecutive pages, only the first is given. 
*-Indicates a photograph or illustration without accompanying text other than 
the caption. 
To avoid the confusion that results from using two sets of numbers, color plates are 
not included in the index; they are listed on the pages where subjects are described. 
A 
Abortiporus 
biennis 566 
Abstoma 680 
reticulatum 681,690 
townei 681,690 
Agaricus 58*,310,896 
abruptibulbus 335 
albolutescens 335 
albosanguineus 325 
altipes 317 
amethystina 341 
amicosus 316, 326 
argenteus 319 
arorae 311*,325 
arvens 12*,312*,332 
augustus 311 * ,337 
"barrow sir' 331 
benesi 316,325 
bernardii 322 
bisporus 319 
bitorquis 312* ,321 
blandianus 320 
brunnescens 320 
californicus 312*,327, 
895 
campestris 312*,318, 
889* 
chionodermus 315, 
317,335 
chlamydopus 322 
comtulus 315,340 
cretacellus 315 
crocodilinus 315,317, 
334 
cupreobrunneus 319 
diminutivus 340 
dulcidulus 341 
edulis 322 
fissuratus 333 
fuscofibrillosus 325 
fuscovelatus 324 
haemorrhoidarius 325 
halophilus 322 
hondens 326,895 
hortensis 320 
lanipes 316 
Agaricus (cont.) 
lilaceps 323 
"luteovelatus" 324 
macrosporus 334 
maritimus 322 
meleagris 329 
micromegathus 340 
nivescens 334 
osecanus 333 
pattersonae 316,324 
perobscurus 339 
perrarus 338 
pinyonensis 331 
placomyces 314,329, 
895 
pocillator 314,329 
porphyrocephalus 319 
praeclaresquamosus 
312*,329,895 
purpurellus 341 
rhoadsii 317 
rodmani 322 
rubronanus 325 
rutilescens 317,319 
semotus 315,339*,340 
sequoiae 317,332 
silvaticus 325 
silvicola 312* ,334 
smith;; 315,338 
solidipes 318 
spissicaulis 326 
spp. (unidentified) 3 17, 
318,325 
subfloccosus 320 
subrufescens 336 
subrutilescens 326 
summensis 315,339 
sylvicola 335 
urinescens 334 
vaporarius 317 
villaticus 334 
vinaceo-umbrinus 326 
vinaceovirens 322 
xanthodermus 329,895 
Agrocybe 467 
acericola 470 
aegerita 467,470 
amara 469 
Agrocybe (cont.) 
arvalis 469 
cylindracea 470 
dura 470 
erebia 467, 470 
firma 468 
paludosa 467 
pediades 43*,468 
praecox 469 
retigera 468 
semiorbicularis 469 
sororia 468, 469 
tuberosa 469 
A/batrel/us 554 
avellaneus 557, 558 
caeruleoporus 555,559 
couens 556,558 
cristatus 556, 560 
dispansus 556 
el/isii 559 
j7ettii 558 
hirtus 560 
ovinus 557 
peckianus 558 
pescaprae 558*,560 
similis 558 
sylvestris 560 
A/bo/eptonia 249 
adnatifolia 253 
ochracea 253 
sericella 252 
A/euria 833 
aurantia 837 
rhenana 836 
rutilans 837 
A/nico/a 399 
escharoides 400 
melinoides 400 
scolecina 400 
A/pova 756 
alexsmithii 757,758 
cinnamomeus 758 
diplophloeus 757 
luteus 758 
nauseosus 757, 758 
olivaceoniger 757, 758 
olivaceotinctus 757*, 
758 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Alpova (cont.) 
superdubius 758 
Irappei 757, 758 
Amanita 262, 263 
abrupla 275 
alba 266, 288 
aspera 278 
alkinsoniana 275 
baccala 273 
bisporigera 273,892 
boudieri 274 
breckon;; 281 
brunnescens 267,279 
caesarea 284 
calyplrala 265,284, 
679*,890* 
calyp Iralo ides 269,286 
calYPlroderma 285 
ceci/iae 289 
chlorinosma 275 
cinereoconia 269,276 
cinereopannosa 275 
cilrina 267,279 
cokeri 268,275 
conslricla 289 
cOlhurnala 268,280 
crocea 287, 288 
daucipes 275 
farinosa 267,276 
flavoconia 278 
flavorubens 278 
flavorubescens 269, 278 
frosliana 279 
fulva 287 
gemmala 281,894 
hemibapha 284 
hesleri 269 
inaurala 268, 289 
junqui/lea 281 
longipes 275 
magniverrucala 274 
mappa 279 
muscaria 15, 29, 264*, 
265,282,894,895 
mutabilis 273 
ocreala 12*,266*,271, 
286*,892,893 
onusla 269,276 
pachycolea 290 
pantherina 264*,280, 
894 
parcivolvala 267,284 
peckiana 267 
phalloides 264*,269, 
892,893 
polypvramis 275 
porphyria 279 
praegraveolens 275 
ravenelii 275 
rhopa lop us 275 
roseitincla 269 
Amanita (cont.) 
rubescens 264* , 266*, 
276,884* 
russuloides 281 
salmonea 269 
si/vicola 273,274* 
smilhiana 275 
solilaria 275 
spissa 269,280 
spp. (unidentified) 268, 
275,277 
sprela 266 
slrangulala 289 
slrobi/iformis 275 
Ihiers;; 275 
umbonala 284 
umbrinolutea 290 
vaginala 288,289* 
velosa 266* , 286 
verna 273,892 
virosa 267,273,892 
volvala 266 
wells;; 267 
AmanilOpsis 263 
(also see Amanila) 
vaginala 288 
Amylocyslis 
lapponica 600 
A ne//a ria 
separala 355 
Anthopeziza 
floccosa 836 
Anlhracobia 
macrocyslis 838 
melaloma 834,838 
Anthurus 
archeri 775 
aseroeformis 775 
borealis 778 
Arachnion 
album 679 
Araneosa 
columellala 679 
Arcangelie//a 736 
camphorala 737, 739 
crassa 738 
laclarioides 739 
lenax 739 
variegala 737, 739 
Armillaria 189 
albolanaripes 194 
bulbosa 197 
caligala 192 
decorosa 189 
dryina 136 
fusca 190, 194 
luteovirens 194 
mellea 196 
olida 193 
937 
Armillaria (cont.) 
pilkinensis 194 
ponderosa 49*,191 
slraminea 190,194 
labescens 197 
viscidipes 190 
zelleri 189 
Armillarie//a 189 
bulbosa 190,197 
mellea 34*,196,896 
labescens 150,190,197 
Ascobolus 838 
carbonarius 835,838 
Ascocoryne 
sarcoides 875,877 
Ascolreme//a 
faginacea 875,877 
lurbinala 877 
Aseroe 
rubra 772,775 
ASlerophora 200 
lycoperdoides 201 
parasilica 20 I 
ASlraeus 699 
hygromelricus 700, 705 
pleridis 706 
Auranliopore//us 572 
Aurantioporus 
croceus 597 
Auricularia 669 
auricula 675, 958* 
delicala 675 
mesenterica 675 
polylricha 675 
Aurisca/pium 629 
vulgare 629 
Auslroboletus 508 
belula 508 
gracilis 534 
subflavidus 508 
B 
Baeospora 
myosura 202,212 
myriadophylla 202 
Ba/samia 852 
magnala 853 
Bankera 616 
carnosa 618 
fuligineo-alba 618 
violescens 618 
Barssia 852 
oregonensis 853 
sp. (unidentified) 854 
Battarrea 715 
digueli 716,718 
laciniala 718 
pha llo ides 717 
sleven;; 718 
938 
Bisporel/a 
citrina 877 
Bjerkandera 592 
adusta 596 
fumosa 596 
Bolbitius 473 
aleuriatus 475 
caJ/isteus 475 
coprophilus 474,475 
lacteus 474,475 
reticulalUs 475 
sordidus 474 
vitel/inus 474 
Boletel/us 508 
ananas 508,509 
betula 508 
chrysenteroides 508 
russeJ/ii 508 
Boletinel/us 
meruJioides 490 
Boletinus 491 
(also see Suil/us & 
Fuscoboletinus) 
cavipes 495 
Boletopsis 554 
griseus 557 
leucomelas 557 
subsquamosa 556 
Boletus 511,894 
(also see SuiJ/us, 
Leccinum, TylopiJus, 
etc.) 
abieticola 514, 525 
aereus 50*,512*,531 
affinis 514,516 
albidus 525 
amygdalinus 527 
appendiculalUs 512* , 
525 
auriflammeus 516,522 
auriporus 516, 522 
badius 516,519 
barrowsii 512* ,529 
betula 508 
bicolor 521 
caespitosus 522 
colopus 523 
campestris 521 
chromapes 534 
chrysenteron 519 
citriniporus 515,523 
coccyginus 513,521 
coniferarum 514,523 
curtisii 516 
dryophiJus 520 
eastwoodiae 528 
eduJis 489*,512*,530, 
546,547,890* 
erythropus 526,895 
fagicola 516 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Boletus (cont.) 
fibri/losus 523,529* 
flam mans 515,529 
flaviporus 522 
fragrans 514 
fraternus 521 
frostii 528 
griseus 516,522 
haematinus 513,528, 
895 
hemichrysus 512 
hypocarycinus 527 
inedulis 515 
longicurvipes 516 
luridus 515,528 
.. marshii" 524 
mendocinensis 513,520 
miniato-pal/escens 521 
mirabiJis 521 
moltii 530 
olivaceobrunneus 523 
ornatipes 522 
oro vi/Ius 513,527 
pal/idus 515 
parasiticus 512 
piedmontensis 515 
pinicola 530 
pinophilus 530 
piperatoides 517 
piperalUs 517 
porosporus 520 
projectel/us 516, 522 
pseudoseparans 530 
pseudosulphureus 515 
pulcherrimus 528, 895 
pulverulentus 514,515 
radicans 525 
regius 512*, 526 
retipes 522 
rubel/us 515, 521 
rubinel/us 516 
rubripes 524 
rubroflammeus 515,529 
rubropunclUs 516 
satanas 527,895,896 
sensibi/is 521 
separans 530 
smithii 513,520 
spadiceus 518 
speciosus 515,526 
sphaerocephalus 512 
spp. (unidentified) 514, 
523,528 
subglabripes 516 
subtomentosus 488*, 
517 
subvelUlipes 515,527, 
895 
truncatus 514,520 
variipes 516,531 
Boletus (cont.) 
vermiculosus 516 
viridiflavus 516,522 
zel/eri 518 
Bondarzewia 554 
berkeleyi 556,565 
montana 548* , 565 
Bovista 696 
californica 698 
colorata 696,698 
dakotense 697,698 
leucoderma 698 
longispora 697,698 
minor 696,698 
nigrescens 697,698 
pi/a 697 
plumbea 697 
pusiJ/a 697, 698 
Bovislel/a 690 
radicata 691 , 694 
Brauniel/ula 732 
albipes 733 
nancyae 732 
Bulgaria 875 
inquinans 876 
melastoma 830 
mexicana 828 
rufa 827 
Byssoneetria 
aggregata 828 
c 
Calbovista 680 
subscuJpta 682,685 
Callistosporium 202 
graminicolor 211 
IUleo-oJivaceum 211 
Caloeera 
cornea 635,670,675 
viscosa 674 
Caloeybe 173 
carnea 176 
gambosa 183 
onychina 150,176 
Caloporus 
dichrous 552 
Caloseypha 
fulgens 837 
Calostoma 715 
cinnabarina 718 
IUlescens 716,719 
microsporum 716,719 
raveneJii 716,719 
Calvalia 677* ,680 
booniana 684 
bovista 686 
cae/ata 686 
candida 682,686 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Calvatia (cont.) 
craniiformis 682,688 
cretacea 681, 688 
cyathiformis 687 
diguetii 688 
elata 682,686 
excipuliformis 682,686 
fragilis 681,687 
fumosa 688 
gigantea 678*,680, 682 
hesperia 681,689 
lepidophora 681 , 689 
/loydii 682,686 
lycoperdoides 687 
maxima 683 
owyheensis 681 
pachyderma 681,689 
pa/lida 682, 686 
paradoxa 681 
rubroj7ava 682,688 
rubrotincta 682,687 
saccata 686 
sculpta 684 
subcretacea 688,689* 
tatrensis 682,686 
umbrina 688 
utriformis 686 
Camarophyllus 103 
angelesianus 112 
angustifolius 109 
borealis 109 
cinereus 112 
colemannianus 108,112 
cremicolor 109 
graveolens 108 
niveus 105, 109 
pallidus 112 
paupertinus 112 
pratensis 110 
rainierensis 112 
recurvatus 112 
russocoriaceus 109 
subviolaceus III 
virgineus 105, 109 
Cantharellula 149 
umbonata 151 , 165 
Cantharellus 658 
appalachiensis 660 
aurantiacus 480 
cibarius 659* ,662 
cine reus 666 
cinnabarinus 664 
clavatus 661 
confluens 660,664 
j7occosus 662 
formosus 664 
ignicolor 660,665 
infundibuliformis 665 
lateritius 660,664 
lutescens 665 
Cantharel/us (cont.) 
minor 660, 665 
odoratus 660, 664 
purpurascens 660 
subalbidus 662 
tubaeformis 665 
xanthopus 660,665 
Carbomyces 844 
Catathelasma 189 
imperialis 195 
macrospora 195 
singeri 195 
ventricosa 190, 195 
Caulorhiza 202 
hygrophoroides 219 
umbonata 218 
Cerrena 
unicolor 587,589,592, 
597 
Chaetoporus 
euporus 602 
Chamaeota 253 
Chamonixia 748 
ambigua 751 
brevicolumna 748,751 
caespitosa 748,751 
caudata 748,751 
Cheilymenia 
coprinaria 838 
crucipila 839 
stercorea 838 
theleboides 838 
Cheimonophyllum 
candidissimus 132 
Chlamydopus 715 
meyenianus 721 
Chlorociboria 877 
aeruginascens 878 
aeruginosa 878 
Chlorophyllum 293 
molybdites 295,895, 
896 
Chlorosplenium 878 
Choiromyces 855 
alveolatus 858, 859* 
cookei 858 
Chondrogaster 748 
Chondrostereum 
purpureum 605 
Choriactis 
geaster 827 
Christ iansenia 
mycetophila 216 
Chroogomphus 20*, 
484 
j7avipes 485 
leptocystis 485,487 
939 
Chroogomphus (cont.) 
ochraceus 485,486 
pseudovinicolor 486 
rutilus 485, 486 
tomentosus 487 
vinicolor 20*,484*,485 
Ciboria 877 
amentacea 877 
C lathrus 772 
archeri 774 
bicolumnatus 773 
cance/latus 773 
cibarius 774 
columnatus 773 
crispatus 773 
crispus 773 
preussii 774 
ruber 773 
Claudopus 238 
byssisedus 238 
depluens 238 
graveolens 238 
nidulans 141 
parasiticus 239 
C lavaria 630, 634 
(also see Clavulina, 
C lavulinopsis, 
Ramaria, etc.) 
amethystina 641 
cineroides 640 
fumosa 638 
juncea 637 
kunzei 643 
mucida 636 
ornatipes 640 
phycophila 636 
pulchra 638 
purpurea 637 
rosea 635,639 
rubicundula 638 
vermicularis 631 * , 637 
zollingeri 635,638 
Clavariadelphus 632 
borealis 632,634 
fistulosus 637 
ligula 633 
lovejoyae 632,634 
mucronatus 632,633 
pisti/laris 632 
sachalinens 633 
subfastigiatus 633 
truncatus 634 
Claviceps 880 
purpurea 880,895 
Clavicorona 640 
avellanea 642 
pyxidata 642 
taxophila 635,636 
940 
C lavulina 640 
amethystina 640,641 
cinerea 641 
cristata 641 
ornatipes 640 
rugosa 641,642,643* 
zollingeri 638 
Clavulinopsis 634 
appalachiensis 638 
aurantio-cinnabarina 
635,639 
corniculata 639 
dichotoma 640 
fusiformis 635,638, 
639* 
gracillima 638 
helvola 638 
holmskjoldii 640 
laet icolor 638 
luteoalba 638 
miniata 638 
subaustralis 639 
subtilis 640 
umbrinella 635,640 
Climacodon 
septentrionale 612, 
613* 
Clitocybe 148 
aeruginosa 151, 162 
alba 160 
albirhiza 161 
americana 150,157 
atrialba 165 
atroviridis 151, 162 
augeana 163 
aurantiaca 480 
avellaneialba 152,161 
brunneocephala 154 
candicans 161 
candida 151,159 
cerussata 159,161 
clavi pes 160,896 
coniferophila 152,161 
crassa 151,160 
cyathiformis 164 
dealbata 163,894 
deceptiva 162 
densifolia 155 
dilatata 159 
ectypoides 157 
epichysium 151, 166 
fasciculata 155 
flaccida 157 
fragrans 162 
geotropa 158 
gibba 157 
gigantea 158 
gilva 157 
glaucocana 149, 152 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Clitocybe (coot.) 
graveolens 149,152 
harperi 152,160 
i1/udens 148 
infundibuliformis 157 
in versa 156 
irina 149, 155 
leopardina 161 
Iignatilis 136 
martiorum 149 
maxima 157 
morbifera 163 
morganii 480 
multiceps 174 
nebu/aris 159 
nuda 9,10,11,153 
obsoleta 163 
odora 161 
olesonii 154 
oramophi/a 163 
polygonarum 152,156 
praemagna 155 
rivulosa 163 
robusta 150, 160 
saeva 149, 154 
sc/erotoidea 164 
septentriona/is 151, 159 
sinopica 157 
socia/is 176 
squamu/osa 150, 157 
suaveolens 162 
subalpina 156 
subconnexa 155 
sudorifica 163 
tarda 152 
variabilis 151, 161 
Clitocybula 149 
abundans 150,204,215 
atrialba 151,165 
familia 150,204,215, 
898* 
Clitopilus 239 
orcel/us 241 
passeckerianus 240 
prunulus 240 
Collybia 201 
abundans 215 
acervata 215 
albipilata 212 
alkalivirens 204 
atrata 166 
badiia/ba 216 
bresadolae 215 
butyracea 216 
cirrhata 212 
conf/uens 213 
conigena 212 
cookei 212 
distorta 216 
Collybia (coot.) 
distorta 216 
dryophila 215 
erythropus 215 
extuberans 205,217 
familia 215 
fuscopurpurea 214 
fusipes 204 
iocephala 202 
luxurians 205, 209 
maculata 217 
marasmioides 205 215 
oregonensis 218 
peronata 205,213 
platyphylla 146 
po/yphylla 205,213 
racemosa 212* ,213 
radicata 220 
spongiosa 205 
spp. (unidentified) 205, 
213 
strictipes 209 
subsulcatipes 203,218 
subsulphurea 216 
trullisata 211 
tuberosa 212 
umbonata 219 
ve/utipes 220 
Coltricia 566 
cinnamomea 568 
montagnei 567,568 
perennis 567,568 
Coniophora 
puteana 605,611 
Conocybe 470,895 
coprophila 471,472 
crispa 471,473 
cyanopus 471,472 
filaris 471,892 
intrusa 471 
lac tea 472 
smithii 471,472 
sp. (unidentified) 471 
stercoraria 471,472 
tenera 472 
Cookeina 836 
Coolia 
odorata 198 
Copelandia 358 
Coprinus 342 
alnivorus 344, 346 
alopecia 348 
american us 344 
arenatus 351 
asterophora 344 
asteroph oro ides 344 
atramentarius 9,347, 
896 
bulbi/osus 352 
"chevico/a" 351 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Coprinus (cont.) 
cinereus 351 
colosseus 346 
comatus 9,56*,343*, 
345 
disseminatus 352 
domesticus 349 
ephemeroides 352 
ephemerus 344, 352 
fimetarius 344, 351 
impatiens 344, 353 
insignis 348 
lagopides 351 
lagopus 350 
macrocephalus 351 
macrorhizus 351 
micaceus 348 
miser 344, 352 
narcoticus 351 
niveus 343,351 
palmeranus 346 
picaceus 346 
plicat i/is 352 
pseudoradiatus 351 
quadrifidus 344 
radians 344, 349 
radiatus 351 
semilanatus 351 
silvaticus 349 
spadiceosporus 346 
spp. (unidentified) 342, 
350,351 
sterquilinus 343,346 
sulphureus 344 
tectisporus 351 
umbrinus 346 
variegatus 344 
xerophilus 344 
Coprobia 
granulata 838 
Cordyceps 878,879 
canadensis 881 
capitata 880 
c/avulata 880,882 
entomorrhiza 880,881 
gracilis 880, 881 
melolanthae 880, 882 
mi/itaris 882,883* 
myrmecophi/a 881 
ophioglossoides 880 
881 ' 
raveneili 880, 882 
sphecocephala 880, 881 
unilateralis 880, 882 
washingtonensis 880 
882 ' 
Corio/el/us 603 
alaskanus 603 
carbonarius 602, 603 
Corio/el/us (cont.) 
heteromorphus 603 
sepium 603 
seria/is 603 
suaveolens 598 
Corio/us 
(also see Trametes) 
versicolor 594 
Corticium 604 
Cortinarius 417 
acutus 427,452 
adustus 423,450 
aggregatus 422,439 
albidus 423 
alboviolaceus 447 
amethystinus 447 
amoenelens 441 
angulosus 426 
anomalus 425,448 
argentatus 425,448 
armeniacus 428, 451 
armi//atus 448 
atkinsonianus 440 
aurantiobasis 454 
aureifo/ius 425,454 
aureofulvus 440 
balteato-cumatilis 434 
balteatus 433 
biformis 428,451 
bigelowii 443 
bivelus 451 
bolaris 425,446 
boulderensis 423,449 
brunneus 423,428,450, 
451 
bui//iardi 450 
bulbosus 451 
cacaocolor "428,451 
caerulescens 439 
caesiifo/ius 447 
caesiocyaneus 422,439 
caesiostramineus 438 
californicus 426,454 
cal/isteus 427,454 
calochrous 422,441 
calyptratus 421,444 
calyptrodermus 421 
444 ' 
camphoratus 425,447 
caninus 425,448 
castaneicolor 420,422, 
431 
cedretorum 439 
cinnabarinus 426,455 
cinnamomeo-luteus 453 
cinnamomeus 453 
citrinifo/ius 421,436 
citrinipedes 441 
c/andestinus 445 
941 
Cortinarius (cont.) 
claricolor 442 
cliduchus 442 
col/initus 431 
corrugatus 420 
corrugis 423 
cotoneus 445 
crassus 423,434 
croceofo/ius 427 454 
croco/itus 419*,423,432 
crysta//inus 428,429 
cyanites 424 
cyanopus 441 
cy/indripes 430 
damascenus 428, 451 
decipiens 427,453 
delibutus 420,431 
dibaphus 438 
di/utus 428, 451 
distans 428,451 
duracinus 451 
elatior 421,432 
elegant io ides 441 
elegantior 441 
evernius 450 
fasciatus 452 
flavifolius 426 
flavovirens 441 
fragrans 425,447 
fulgens 441 
fulmineus 441 
gentilis 444,896 
glaucopus 437 
greoluridus 420,431 
griseoviolaceus 425,431 
haematoche/is 426 449 
he/iotropicus 430' 
hemitrichus 428 
hercynicus 446 
herpeticus 441 
humboldtensis 453 
immixtus 436 
impennis 423,450 
incisus 427,452 
in/ractus 435 
iodes 420,430 
iodioides 430 
laniger 451 
largus 434 
latus 442 
lucorum 424,450 
lustratus 428 
luteoarmi//atus 422 
436 ' 
magnivelatus 442 
malachius 425,448 
marylandensis 455 
metarius 441 
michiganensis 422,439 
942 
Cortinarius (cont.) 
miniatopus 426,450 
montanus 421,440 
mucifluus 431 
mucosus 429 
multiformis 442 
mutabilis 437 
nigrocuspidatus 427, 
452 
obtusus 452 
occidentalis 437 
odorifer 422, 436 
olivaceopictus 453 
olympianus 439 
orellanus 427,444, 896 
orichalceus 421,441 
osmophorus 436 
paleaceus 427,452 
pallidifolius 421,432 
per com is 436 
phoeniceus 454 
pholideus 424,428, 
446 
pinetorum 428,451 
plumiger 424,428,450 
ponderosus 432 
prasinus 421,441 
privignus 428,451 
psammocephalus 427, 
452 
pseudoarqualUs 438 
pseudobolaris 427 
pseudosalor 420,430 
pulchellus 423,453 
puniceus 455 
purpurascens 437 
pyriodorus 447 
rain ierensis 426,444 
raphanoides 453 
regalis 443 
renidens 426 
rubicundulus 427 
rubripes 449 
rufo-o/ivaceus 421,441 
sa lor 430 
sanguineus 454 
saturninus 450 
scan dens 452 
scaurus 440 
semisanguineus 426, 
454 
sodagnitus 438 
sp. (unidentified) 423, 
441 
speciosissimus 427,444 
sphaerosporus 431 
splendidus 430 
squamulosus 445 
stemmatus 427,452 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Cortinarius (cont.) 
sterilis 420 
still at it ius 430 
subargentatus 425,448 
subcuspidatus 452 
subflexipes 423,453 
subfoetidus 434 
subpulchrifolius 425, 
448 
subpurpurascens 437 
subpurpureophyllus 
422 
subpurpureus 424,450 
subtestaceus 426,449 
superb us 422 
thiersii 453 
torvus 423,450 
traganus 447 
triformis 428,451 
triumphans 432 
trivialis 431 
turmalis 423,442 
uliginosus 426 
uraceus 427,428 
urbicus 424,450 
vanduzerensis 432, 
433* 
variicolor 422,442 
varius 422, 442 
velatus. 420, 443 
velicopia 422,439 
verrucisporus 420,443 
vibratilis 429 
violaceus 446 
virentophyllus 421,441 
volvatus 422,444 
washingtonensis 427, 
453 
wiebeae 443 
zakii 454 
Coryne 
sarcoides 877 
Cotylidia 604 
aurantiaca 608 
dec%rans 608 
diaphana 608 
Craterel/us 658 
caeruleofuscus 666 
calyculus 659,668 
cantharellus 664 
cinereus 665 
cornucopioides 666, 
898* 
fallax 668 
foetidus 659,666 
odoralUs 664 
sinuosus 659,666 
Cre%phus 
cirrhatus 612 
Crepidotus 405 
applanatus 405 406 
calolepis 406 
cinnabarinus 405 
crocophyllus 405,406 
fulvotomentosus 406 
fusisporus 406 
herbarum 405 
maculans 406 
mollis 406 
variabilis 405* ,406 
versutus 406 
C rinipellis 202 
campanella 210 
piceae 210 
stipitaria 210 
zonata 210 
Crucibu/um 778 
laeve 779 
levis 779 
parvulum 779 
vulgare 779 
Cryptoporus 584 
volvatus 585 
Cudonia 872,893 
circinans 872* , 873 
grisea 873 
lutea 873,874 
monticola 873 
Cyathipodia 805 
Cyathus 778 
helenae 780 
olla 779,780 
pygmaeus 779,780 
stercoreus 780 
striatus 779,780 
Cyptotrama 
chrysopeplum 131 
Cystoderma 198 
ambrosii 199 
amianthinum 200 
carcharias 199 
cinnabarinum 199,200 
fallax 199 
granosum 199 
granulosum 199, 200 
gruberianunl 199,200 
D 
Dacrymyces 
deliquescens 670,674 
palmatus 670,674 
Daeda/ea 586 
berkeleyi 587, 588 
confragosa 589 
juniperina 587, 588 
mollis 596 
quercina 587 
unicolor 589 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Daeda/eopsis 586 
ambigua 587,589 
coragosa 586*,588 
Da/dinia 878,885 
concemrica 887 
grandis 887 
vernicosa 887 
Dasyscyphus 877 
Datrvnia 592 
mol/is 595 
De/astria 855 
Denrinum 616 
a/bidum 619 
a/bomagnum 619 
repandum 618 
umbi/icatum 617,619 
Dermocybe 418 
(also see Cortinarius) 
cinnamomea 453 
sanguinea 455 
Destuntzia 748 
fusca 750 
rubra 750 
say/orii 750 
so/stitia/is 750 
subborea/is 750 
Dictyocepha/os 711 
attenuatus 713 
Dictyophora 766 
dup/icata 768, 771 
indusiata 767*,770 
mu/tic%r 768, 771 
rubrovo/vata 771 
Discina 797 
anci/is 799 
apicu/atu/a 799 
/eucoxantha 799 
macrospora 799 
o/ympiana 799 
per/ala 798 
Disciotis 784, 796 
venosa 796 
Disciseda 696 
ater 698 
brandegeei 698 
candida 698 
/uteo/a 698 
pedicel/ata 698 
subterranea 698 
Dissoderma 
paradoxum 198 
E 
Eccilia 245,246,249 
Echinodonrium 612 
tinctorium 613 
E/aphomyces 862 
granu/atus 864 
muricatus 863 
E/aphomyces (coot.) 
subviscidus 865 
variegatus 864 
verrucosum 864 
E/asmomyces 736 
camphorata 739 
odoratus 737,738 
pi/osus 738 
roseipes 738 
russu/oides 737, 738 
Elfvingia 577 
E/ve/a 805 
Endogone 844 
/actiflua 844 
Endoptychum 727 
agaricoides 731 
arizonicum 732 
depressum 730 
Enr%ma 238,242, 
895,896 
(also see 
Leptonia. Nolanea) 
abortivum 242 
c/ypeatum 244 
ferruginans 245 
grayanum 244 
/ividum 243,244 
madidum 243 
nidorosum 244 
nitidum 242,250 
pernitrosum 245 
prunu/oides 243, 244 
rhodopo/ium 243 
sinuatum 244 
speculum 243,244 
strictius 246 
trachysporum 242, 250 
vernum 248 
vio/aceum 249 
Exidia 
alba 671,673 
g/andu/osa 672 
nuc/eata 670,673 
recisa 671,674 
F 
F avo/us 
a/veo/aris 563 
Fayodia 151 
anthracob,ia 166 
Fischeru/a 
subcau/is 845 
Fistulina 553 
hepatica 552*,553 
pallida 554 
F/ammu/a 407 
F/ammu/ina 202 
ve/utipes 220 
F/occu/aria 189, 194 
943 
Fomes 574 
(also see Fomitopsis. 
Ganoderma. Phellinus) 
annosus 579 
fomentarius 575,581 
juniperinus 583 
officina/is 580 
pinico/a 579 
subroseus 580 
Fomitopsis 574 
cajanderi 580 
el/isianus 579 
fraxinophi/us 579 
officina/is 579 
pinico/a 578 
rosea 580 
Fu/vifomes 
juniperinus 583 
Funalia 
hispida 568 
trogii 598 
Fuscobo/etinus 505 
aeruginascens 507 
g/andu/osus ...s06 
grisel/us 506, 507 
ochraceoroseus 506 
pa/uster 506, 507 
serotinus 506,507 
sinuspau/ianus 506 
spectabi/is 506, 507 
weaverae 506 
G 
Ga/era 399 
Ga/erina 399 
autumna/is 401,892 
cedretorum 402 
corneipes 369 
heterocyst is 402 
hypnorum 402 
marginata 400,401, 
892 
mutabi/is 395 
pa/udosa 400,401 
semi/anceata 402 
tibicystis 402 
triscopa 402 
venenata 400.401,892 
Ga/eropsis 733 
angusticeps 735 
cucul/ata 735 
po/ytrichoides 735 
Galiella 
rufa 827 
Ganoderma 574 
adspersum 577 
annu/aris 577 
app/anatum 576 
brownii 577 
944 
Ganoderma (cont.) 
curtisii 574,578 
europaeum 577 
/ucidum 577 
oregonense 575,578 
tsugae 575,578 
Gastroboletus 544 
amy/oideus 544,545 
scabrosus 544 
suba/pinus 545 
sui/loides 544, 545 
turbinatus 544 
xerocomoides 545 
Gastrocybe 733 
/ateritia 474,733,735 
Gastrosporium 
simp/ex 696 
Gautieria 746 
candida 747 
gawierioides 746,747 
graveo/ens 747 
montico/a 747 
morchel/iformis 746, 
747 
parksiana 746,747 
pterosperma 746,747 
Geaster 699 
Geastrum 699 
arenarium 705 
bryantii 702 
campestre 70 I, 705 
coronatum 702 
de/icatus 705 
drummondii 700, 705 
fimbriatum 70 I, 704 
floriforme 700,705 
fornicatum 699*, 701 
indicum 703 
/imbatum 700, 702, 
703* 
mammosum 700,705 
minimum 700,702 
nanum 700,702 
pectinatum 702 
p/uriosteum 70 I, 704 
quadrifidum 700, 702 
recol/igens 705 
rufescens 700, 702 
saccatum 703 
schmide/ii 702 
sessile 704 
smithii 702 
striatum 700, 702 
trip/ex 703 
umbilicatum 705 
xerophi/um 702 
Genabea 849 
cerebriformis 851 
fragi/is 849, 852 
spinospora 852 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Genea 849 
arena ria 851 
cerebriformis 852 
compacta 849,850 
gardneri 850 
harknessii 850 
hispidu/a 851 
intermedia 851 
kraspedeslOma 849, 
851 
Geoglossum 866 
affine 867 
a/veo/atum 867 
difforme 867 
fal/ax 867 
g/abrum 867 
g/winosum 866 
intermedium 867 
nigritum 866,867 
simile 867 
Geopora 841, 846 
arenico/a 847,935* 
arenosa 846, 847 
aurantia 846,847 
clausa 846,847 
cooperi 846 
harknessii 847 
/ongii 847 
magnata 847 
pel/ita 846,847 
Geopyxis 
(also see Tarzella) 
carbonaria 835,840 
vu/cana/is 840 
Gerronema 221 
Globifomes 
graveo/ens 567 
Gloeocantharellus 
purpurascens 660 
Gloeophyllum 586 
saepiarium 588*,590 
striatum 590 
trabeum 586,590 
Gloeoporus 
adustus 596 
dichrous 552 
Glomus 844 
Gomphidius 481 
g/winosus 482 
/argus 482 
macu/atus 482 
nigricans 482 
oregonensis 482 
roseus 483 
smithii 482,483 
subroseus 483 
viscidus 486 
Gomphogaster 
/eucosarx 733 
Gomphus 658 
bonari 661, 662 
clavatus 661 
floccosus 661,895 
kauffmanii 660,662 
pseudoclavatus 661 
Grifola 554 
frondosa 564 
su/phurea 573 
umbel/ata 556,564* , 
565 
Guepiniopsis 
a/pinus 674 
chrysocomus 674 
Gymnomyces 742 
cinnamomeus 744 
ferruginascens 743,744 
roseomacu/atus 742, 
744 
socia/is 743 
Gymnopilus 407,895 
aeruginosus 409 
bel/u/us 407,408 
flavidel/us 407,408 
fu/vosquamu/osus 407, 
410 
harmoge 409 
junonius 411 
/iquiritiae 407, 408 
/uteocarneus 407,408 
/weofo/ius 409 
parvisquamu/osus 407, 
410 
penetrans 407, 408 
pu/chrifo/ius 410 
punaifo/ius 407,409 
sapineus 408 
sp. (unidentified) 408 
spectabilis 410 
subspectabi/is 411 
terrestris 407,408 
va/idipes 411 
ventricosus 411 
Gyrodon 
/ividus 490 
meru/ioides 490 
Gyromitra 796,799, 
893 
ambigua 803 
brunnea 800,803 
ca/ifornica 804 
caro/iniana 800, 802 
escu/enta 801,893 
fastigiata 801,803 
gigas 800 
in/u/a 802,893 
koifii 801 
me/a/eucoides 799 
montana 801 
sphaerospora 800, 04 
underwoodii 803 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Gyrophragmium 727 
californicum 727, 728 
texensis 730 
Gyroporus 510 
castaneus 510 
cyanescens 510 
purpurinus 510 
subalbe//us 510 
H 
H aematostereum 
sanguinolemum 606 
Hapalopilus 
nidulans 568 
Hebeloma 463,895, 
896 
albidulum 465 
crustuliniforme 464, 
466. 
fastibile 466 
hiemale 465 
insigne 465 
mesophaeum 465 
sacchariolens 464,465 
sarcophyl/um 463,465 
sinapizans 465 
strophosum 463,466 
syriense 463 
Helvella 796,805,893 
(also see Gyromitra) 
acetabulum 807 
albel/a 807,811.,812 
albipes 813 
atra 813 
californica 804 
compressa 811 
connivens 812 
corium 805,810 
costifera 806, 808 
crassitunicata 809 
crispa 816 
cupuliformis g06, 810 
elastica 813 
ephippium 807,814 
fusca 814 
griseoalba 806,808 
in/ula 803 
lactea 816 
lacunosa 815 
leucomelaena 808 
leucopus 812 
macropus 810 
maculata 814 
mitra 815 
monachel/a 813 
pal/idula 810 
palustris 815 
pezizoides 807,814 
philonotis 815 
phlebophora 806,816 
Helvella (cont.) 
queletii 809 
solitaria 809 
stevensii 807,812 
subglabra 807, 814 
sulcata 806,815 
villosa 805, 806, 810 
Hericium 611,613 
abietis 614 
americanum 614 
coral/oides 614 
erinaceus 615 
laciniatum 615 
ramosum ()15 
weirii 614 
Heterobasidion 574 
annosum 575,579 
Heteroporus 554 
biennis 566 
Hirneola 
auricula-judae 675 
Hirschioporus 
ab ietin us 593 
pargamenus 593 
Hohenbuehelia 132 
angustatus 137 
atrocaerulea 133,137 
geogenia 137 
mastrucatus 133,137 
petaloides 136 
Humaria 
hemispherica 839 
Hydnangium 744 
carneum 745 
roseum 745 
soederstroem;; 745 
Hydnellum 672 
auramiacum 626 
caeruleum 625 
complectipes 626 
concrescens 628 
conigenum 626 
cruemum 624 
cumulatum 628 
cyanopodium 623,625 
diabolum 627 
earlianum 626 
ferrugipes 625,626 
geogenium 623 
mirabile 624 
nigel/um 623,629 
peck;; 627 
pineticola 624,627 
piperatum 624 
regium 623, 625 
sc/eropodium 623 
scrobiculatum 627 
spongiosipes 624 
suaveolens 624 
subsuccosum 628 
zonatum 624,628 
945 
Hydnobolites 855 
californicus 857 
cerebriformis 857 
Hydnocystis 
californica 847 
H ydnopolyporus 
palmatus 555,605 
Hydnotrya 848 
cerebriformis 848,849 
cubispora 848,849 
e//ipsospora 825 
michaelis 849 
tulasnei 848,849 
variiformis 848 
yukonensis 849 
H ydnotryopsis 
compactus 845 
setche//ii 845 
Hydnum 611,616 
(also see Deminum) 
calvatum 621 
crassum 621 
cristatum 617 
cyanel/um 617,622 
fennicum 620 
fuligineo- violaceum 
617,622 
fumosum 618 
fuscoindicum 621.,622 
imbricatum 619 
laevigatum 618,621 
martioflavum 621 
repandum 618 
rimosum 618,620 
scabrosum 620 
stereosarcinon 618 
subincarnatum 617, 
618,620 
Hygrocybe 103 
acuta 107,112 
acutoconica 115 
albine/la 105, 109 
atro-olivacea 112 
auramiolutescens 116 
auramiosplendens 115 
caerulescens 112 
caespitosa 105 
calyptraeformis 117 
cantharel/us 106,113 
ceracea 115 
chlorophana 106,115 
citrin opa l/ida 115 
coccinea 114 
conica 116 
cuspidata 106, 116 
flavescens 115 
flavifolia 115 
fornicata 109 
laeta 107, 119 
laetissima 106, 115 
langei 116 
march;; 114 
946 
Hygrocybe (cont.) 
marginata 112 
miniata 113 
minutula 114 
moseri 113 
nigrescens 117 
nitida 106, 115 
nitrata 112 
o/ivaceoniger 117 
ovina 112 
parvula 106,115 
persistens 116 
psittacina 118 
punicea 114 
pura 104 
purpureofo/ia 112 
reai 105, 114 
ruber 105 
singeri 117 
splendidissima 115 
squamulosa 113 
subaustra/is 105, 109 
subminiata 106, I I3 
subminutula 114 
turunda 105, I I3 
unguinosa 106, 119 
virescens 118 
Hygrophorops 476 
aurantiaca 479 
o/ida 476,480 
Hygrophorus 103 
(also see Camaro- 
phyl/us, Hygrocybe) 
acutoconicus 116 
agathosmus 128 
albicastaneus 108,125 
amarus 108,124 
bakerensis 126 
borealis 109 
brunneus 125 
calophyl/us 129 
calyptraeformis 118 
camarophyl/us 107, 129 
capreolarius 108, 124 
chrysaspis 121 
chrysodon 119 
coccineus 114 
conicus 117 
cossus 121 
discoideus 125 
eburneus 119 
erubescens 108,124 
flavescens 115 
flavodiscus 121 
fu/igineus 107, 127 
fuscoalbus 107, 127 
gliocyc/us 120 
glutinosus 121 
goetzii 108, 125 
hypothejus 126 
inocybiformis 107, 128 
kauffmanii 108 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Hygrophorus (cont.) 
langei 116 
laurae 107, 125 
/imacinus 127 
marginatus 113 
marianae 107 
marzuolus 129 
megasporus 127 
miniatus I I3 
monticola 126 
morrisii 128 
nemoreus 108, 111 
occidenta/is 127, 128 
odoratus 128 
o/ivaceoalbus 127 
pacijicus 108, 126 
paludosus 107 
penarius 123 
perfumus 123 
persoonii 128 
piceae 105,120 
ponderatus 104,123 
pratensis 110 
psittacinus 119 
pudorinus 124 
puniceus 114 
purpurascens 124 
pusi//us 110 
pustulatus 128 
pyrophi/us 126 
recurvatus 112 
roseibrunneus 125 
russula 123 
saxatilis 108,125 
sordidus 122 
speciosus 126 
subalpinus 109* , 121 
subpungens 125 
subsalmonius 107 
subviolaceus 112 
tennesseensis 125 
tephroleucus 128 
variicolor 107, 126 
vernalis 125 
vinicolor 126 
whiteii 121 
Hymenochaete 
rubiginosa 606 
tabacina 606 
Hymenogaster 748 
albel/us 749 
albus 748, 749 
brunnescens 749 
diabolus 749 
gi/keyae 749 
luteus 749 
mcmurphyi 749 
parksii 748, 749, 750* 
pyriformis 751 
ruber 750 
sub/ilacinus 749 
Hymenogaster (cont.) 
subochraceus 749 
utriculatus 748, 749 
Hypholoma 36 1,38 I 
(also see Naematoloma) 
capnoides 383 
dispersum 384 
fasciculare 383 
incertum 363 
Hypomyces 878,882 
cervini genus 883,884 
chrysospermum 883 
hyalinus 883,884 
lactifluorum 884 
luteovirens 883,884 
transJormans 883,884 
Hypsizygus 
tessulatus 133 
Hysterangium 762 
aureum 763 
c/athroides 763 
coriaceum 763 
crassirhachis 763 
crassum 763 
darkeri 763 
jischeri 764 
fuscum 763, 764 
occidentale 763 
separabi/e 763 
setche//ii 763 
sp. (unidentijied) 763 
stoloniferum 763 
UK 
Ileodictyon 
cibarium 774 
Inocybe 455,894 
agardhii 462 
albodisca 456,459 
bongardii 459 
caesariata 457, 462 
calamistrata 462 
cookei 457, 459 
corydalina 456,459 
fastigiata 456, 457 
flocculosa 457,462 
fuscodisca 456 
geophyl/a 460 
godeyi 459 
hirte/la 459 
hystrix 457,462 
jurana 458 
lacera 457, 462 
laetior 456,458 
lanatodisca 456,459 
lanuginosa 462 
leucoblema 456 
leucomelaena 457 
/i/acina 461 
maculata 458 
mixti/is 457,458 
navives 457 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Inocybe (cont.) 
ob/ectabilis 456,458 
obscurioides 461 
o/ympiana 457 
picrosma 457 
pudica 460 
pyriodora 459 
serotina 459 
sindonia 459 
sororia 457 
sp. (unidentified) 457, 
462 
suaveo/ens 456, 459 
terrigena 457,462 
Inonotus 566 
andersonii 567 
arizonicus 569 
circinatus 570 
cuticu/aris 569 
dryddeus 567, 569, 570 
dryophi/us 569 
hispidus 569 
obliquus 567 
radiatus 569 
texanus 569 
tomentosus 569 
Irpex 
/acteus 598 
mol/is 60 I 
/schnoderma 573 
benzoinum 573 
resinosum 573 
Ithyphallus 766 
Jafnea 
semitosta 834, 840 
Kuehneromyces 
mutabi/is 395 
L 
Laccaria 171 
a/taica 172 
amethystea 173 
amethysteo-occidentalis 
173 
amethystina 172 
bic%r 172, 173 
/aceata 172 
ochropurpurea 172, 173 
ohiensis 172 
proxima 172 
striatu/a 172 
torti/is 172 
tru//isata 172,173 
Lacrymaria 366 
ve/utina 366 
Lactarius 63,64,895 
affinis 66 
al/ardii 67 
a/nico/a 71 
Lactarius (cont.) 
a/pinus 67,82 
aquif/uus 67 
argi//aceifolius 63* , 76 
aspideoides 65, 76 
atrobadius 80 
atroviridis 66, 70 
aurantiacus 79 
barrowsii 65, 69 
caespitosus 76 
californiensis 75 
camphoratus 81 
cascadensis 75 
chelidonium 65,69 
chrysorheus 65, 74 
cinereus 77 
circel/atus 67, 77 
cocosio/ens 67,79 
controversus 70 
corrugis 66, 78 
croceus 65,75 
deceptivus 66, 71 
de/iciosus 68 
fal/ax 77 
fragi/is 80 
fuliginel/us 78 
fumosus 78 
gerardii 78 
g/utigriseus 77 
g/yciosmus 66 
griseus 67 
he/vus 67 
hemicyaneus 69 
hepaticus 80, 82 
herpeticus 82 
hygrophoroides 67, 78 
hysginus 80 
indigo 69 
insu/sus 72 
kauffmanil 67,77 
lignyotus 65, 78 
/ucu/entus 79 
/uteo/us 66, 78 
macu/atipes 75 
macu/atus 75 
manzanitae 67, 80 
mucidus 77 
necator 70 
neuhoffii 71 
occidentalis 67 
ocu/atus 67, 82 
olivaceoumbrinus 70 
o/ympianus 66, 72 
pal/escens 65, 75 
pa//idiolivaceus 66 
paradoxus 65,69 
payettensis 66, 72 
peckii 67 
piperatus 71 
psammico/a 66, 72, 73 
947 
Lactarius (cont.) 
pseudodeceptivus 71 
pseudodeliciosus 68 
pseudomucidus 77 
pubescens 41*, 73 
representaneus 75 
resimus 65, 74 
riparius 80 
rubri/acteus 68 
rufu/us 82 
rufus 79 
sa/moneus 65,68 
sanguif/uus 69 
scrobicu/atus 73 
sordidus 70 
speciosus 76 
subdu/cis 82 
subflammeus 79 
subpa/ustris 75 
subplinthoga/us 66 
subpurpureus 65,69 
subserif/uus 67,82 
substriatus 79 
sub vel/ere us 66, 71 
sub verna/is 66 
subvi//osus 66, 73 
subviscidus 80 
thejoga/us 67,82 
thiersii 82 
thyinos 68 
tomentoso-margina tus 
71 
to rm in os us 73 
trivia lis 77 
uvidus 75,897* 
vietus 76 
vinaceorufescens 74 
yo/emus 78,79* 
xanthoga/actus 75 
yazooensis 66, 72 
zonarius 72 
Laetiporus 572 
persicinus 573 
su/phureus 572,895, 
896 
Lamprospora 839 
Langermannia 
gigantea 683 
Laricifomes 
officinalis 580 
Laternea 
co/umnata 773 
triscapa 773 
Laxitextum 
bic%r 607 
Leccinum 536 
aeneum 540 
a/askanum 541 
a/bel/um 537, 542 
arbutico/a 539 
948 
Leccinum (cont.) 
arctostaphylos 540 
armeniacum 538,540 
atrostipitatum 538,541 
aurantiacum 537,539 
541 
"aurantioscaber" 538, 
539 
brunneum 538,540 
californicum 537,542 
chroma pes 534 
cinnamomeum 538 
clavatum 538 
cons tans 538,540 
cretaceum 542 
croci podium 539 
discolor 537,539,541 
fallax 539, 541 
fibrillosum 538,540 
griseonigrum 538,541 
griseum 538,542 
holopus 537,542 
idahoensis 540 
incarnatum 538 
insigne 540 
largentii 540 
manzanitae 539 
montanum 538,541 
ponderosum 538, 540 
potteri 538 
roseofracta 542 
rotundifoliae 542 
rufescentoides 537 
rugosiceps 539 
scab rum 541 
snellii 538,541 
subalpinum 539, 541 
testaceoscabrum 538, 
541 
vulpinum 538 
Lemaria 645 
bysseda 644,646,649 
pinicola 646, 649 
Leminel/us 141 
cochleatus 142 
crinitis 133 
flabelliformis 144 
montanus 144 
omphalodes 142 
ursin us 144 
vuJpinus 144 
Lentinus 141 
detonsus 141 
edodes 31*,141 
kauffmanii 142 
lepideus 142 
ponderosus 43*, 142*, 
143 
sulcatus 142 
tigrinus 141 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Lenzites 586 
(also see Gloeophyllum) 
betulina 589 
saepiaria 590 
Leo tia 872 
albiceps 873 
atrovirens 873,875 
chlorocephala 875 
lubrica 874 
viscosa 874 
Lepiota 293 
acutesquamosa 294, 
303 
americana 301 
asperula 294,303 
atrodisca 304 
badhamii 301 
barssii 303 
birnbaumii 302 
brebissonii 302 
breviramus 302 
brunnescens 305 
bucknallii 295 
castanea 307,892 
castaneidca 307 
cepaestipes 301 
clypeolaria 309 
clypeolarioides 310 
cortinarius 309 
cristata 306 
decorata 307 
eriophora 303 
excoriata 303 
felina 295,309 
flammeatincta 304 
flavescens 302 
fragilissimus 302 
glatfelteri 306 
helveola 309, 892 
hispida 303 
humei 294 
josserandii 308,892 
leucothites 300 
lilacinogranulosa 294 
longistriatus 302 
lutea 302 
luteophylla' 295,302 
molybdites 297 
morgani 297 
naucina 299,896 
naucinoides 300 
procera 298 
pulcher rima 291 
rachodes 297, 896 
rhacodes 298 
roseatincta 305 
roseifolia 295, 305 
roseilivida 295,306,307 
rubrotincta 305 
sanguiflua 295 
Lepiota (cont.) 
scabrivelata 303 
seminuda 306* , 307 
sequoia rum 307 
sistrata 307 
spp. (unidentified) 294, 
305,307 
subincarnata 309 
tinctoria 295, 30 I 
"tomentodisca" 307 
ventriosospora 310 
Lepista 148 
(also see Clitocybe) 
inversa 157 
irina 155 
nuda 153*, 154 
saeva 154 
sp. (unidentified) 154 
tarda 152 
Leptog/ossum 132 
Leptonia. 248 
asprella 252 
carnea 250 
convexa 250 
corvina 251 
cupressa 252 
cyanea 249,250 
cyaneonita 250 
decolorans 251 
diversa 251 
exalbida 249, 252 
fuligineo-marginata 
249,252 
gracilipes 252 
incana 249 
jubata 246 
nigra 249, 252 
nigroviolacea 250 
occidentalis 249,250 
parva 251 
porphyrophaea 249 
rectangula 251 
rosea 249 
sericella 253 
serrulata 249,252 
undulatella 249,252 
vinaceobrunnea 252 
violaceonigra 250 
zanthophylla 249, 251 
Leptopodia 805 
Leucoagaricus 293 
(also see upiota) 
naucinus 300 
procerus 298 
rachodes 298 
Leucocoprinus 293, 
302 
(also see upiota) 
birnbaumii 302 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Leucocoprinus (cont.) 
brebissonii 302 
breviramus 302 
cepaestipes 302 
flavescens 302 
fragilissimus 302 
/i/acinogranulosus 294 
longistriatus 302 
lute us 302 
Leucogaster 759 
carolinianus 760 
odoratus 760 
rubescens 760 
Leucopaxillus 166 
albissimus 166*,167 
amarus 168,918* 
candidus 159 
gentianeus 168 
giganteus 159 
laterarius 168 
paradoxus 168 
septentrionalis 159 
tricolor 167 
Leucophleps 759 
magnata 760 
spinospora 760 
Leucosc ypha 
rutilans 837 
Limacella 262,291 
glioderma 291 
glischra 291, 292 
guttata 291 
i/Iinita 292 
kauJ.rmanli 291,292 
lenticularis 291 
roseicremea 291, 292 
so/idipes 291 , 292 
Longia 
texensis 730 
Longula 727 
texensis 729 
Lycoperdon 677*,690 
americanum 691, 694 
candidum 695 
coloratum 698 
curtisii 695,696 
echinatum 694 
foetidum 692 
gemmatum 694 
hiemale 696 
marginatum 694 
molle 694 
muscorum 694 
nettyana 691,695 
nigrescens 693 
peckii 691 , 694 
pedicel/atum 692 
perl alum 693 
pulcherrimum 694 
Lycoperdon (cont.) 
pusillum 698 
pyriforme 691 
rimulatum 694 
subincarnatum 690 
umbrinum 691,694 
Lyophyllum 173 
atratum 166,174 
carneum 176 
connatum 175 
decastes 174,898* 
infumatum 176 
loricatum 175 
montanum 46* , 175 
palustre 174 
rancidum 174 
semitale 174, 176 
sp. (unidentified) 175 
Lysurus 772 
borealis 778 
cruciatus 777 
gardneri 778 
mokusin 776 
periphragmoides 776 
M 
Macowanites 736 
alpinus 738 
american us 737 
chlorinosmus 737, 738 
iodiolens 737, 738 
luteolus 737,738 
magnus 737,738 
roseipes 738 
subo/ivaceus 738 
subrosaceus 738 
Macrocystidia 
cucumis 131 
Macrolepiota 293 
(also see Lepiota) 
procera 298 
rachodes 298 
Macropodia 805 
Macroscyphus 805 
Macrotyphula 634 
fistulosa 635,637 
juncea 636 
Marasmiellus 202 
albuscorticis 206 
candidus 206 
nigripes 203,206 
Marasmius 201 
albogreus 204,209 
al/iaceus 208 
androsaceus 208 
bel/ipes 210 
borealis 210 
candidus 206 
capi/laris 208 
cohaerens 204 
949 
Marasmius (cont.) 
copelandi 207 
delectans 203,206 
epiphyl/us 206 
foetidus 203 . 
fulvoferrugineus 210 
fuscopurpureus 214 
haematocephalus 210 
iocephalus 202 
magnisporus 206 
nigrodiscus 205,209 
o/idus 208 
oreades 7* , 208 
pal/idocephalus 208 
p/icatulus 209 
prasiosmus 208 
quercophyl/us 206 
rotula 203,206 
scorodonius 202,208 
siccus 204,210 
sp.(unidentified) 206 
stricti pes 205,209 
thujinus 208 
umbilicatus 203 
urens 213 
Martellia 742 
boozeri 743 
brunnescens 743 
cali/ornica 743 
cremea 742, 743 
el/ipsospora 743 
fal/ax 743 
foetens 743 
parksii 743 
Melanogaster 756 
ambiguus 759 
euryspermus 758 
intermedius 759 
macrocarpus 759 
parksli 758, 759 
variegatus 757* ,759 
Melanoleuca 169 
alboflavida 169 
brevipes 170 
cognata 170 
evenosa 171,897* 
graminicola 169,170 
lewisii 169 
melaleuca 169 
polioleuca 170 
subalpina 171 
vulgaris 170 
Melanophyllum 
echinatum 317 
Melanolus 
textilis 405 
Melastiza 
chateri 834, 839 
M eripilus 
giganteus 555,565 
950 
M eru/ius 
incarnatus 605,611 
treme//osus 605,610*,611 
Microcollybia 202,212 
Microglossum 868 
atropurpureum 867, 
869 
fumosum 867 
olivaceum 867, 869,870 
rufum 871 
viride 870 
M icromphale 202 
arbutico/a 202,208 
foetidum 203 
penetrans 208 
sequoiae 204, 208 
Microporellus 
dea/batus 563 
obovatus 563 
Microstoma 
j7occosa 835,836 
protacta 835, 836 
Mitrophora 
semilibera 792 
Mitrula 868 
abietis 870 
borealis 870 
e/egans 869,870 
gracilis 870 
irregu/aris 871 
/unu/atospora 870 
pa/udosa 870 
Mol/isia 877 
Montagnea 727 
arenarius 727 
Morchella 784, 785 
angusticeps 791 
conica 791 
crassipes 787, 788, 792* 
deliciosa 788*, 789 
e/ata 31 *, 786*.790 
959* 
escu/enta 787 
hybrida 792 
semilibera 791 
sp. (unidentified) 787, 
789 
Morganella 690 
subincarnata 690 
Mucilopilus 
conicus 533 
Mucronoporus 
tomentosus 570 
Multiclavula 634 
mucida 636 
vernalis 636 
Mutinus 766 
bovinus 771 
caninus 771 
curtisii 771 
e/egans 768, 771 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Mycena 224 
abramsii 235 
acicu/a 228 
adonis 228 
a/bidu/a 227 
a/calina 234 
amabilissima 226, 228 
amicta 226, 231 
atroa/boides 226, 233, 
235 
aurantiomarginata 
225,228 
capil/aripes 229 
capil/aris 227 
citrinomarginata 225, 
229 
clavicu/aris 237 
clavu/aris 227, 229* 
cortico/a 225,227 
delicate//a 227 
e/egans 229 
e/egantu/a 226,230 
epipterygia 237 
epipterygioides 237 
fibula 221 
fi/opes 235 
ga/ericu/ata 235 
ga/opus 232 
greov"id 225,237 
haema top us 231 
ignobi/is 227 
inclinata 235 
iodio/ens 234 
juncico/a 227 
/aevigata 234 
/atifolia 235 
/eaiana 225, 236 
/eptocepha/a 226, 234 
li/acifolia 236,237* 
/uteopa//ens 226, 228 
macu/ata 235,236* 
madronico/a 225,227 
metata 234 
montico/a 228 
murina 234 
occidentalis 226,234 
olivaceobrunnea 229 
oregonensis 228 
osmundico/a 227 
overho/tsii 226, 234 
parabolica 234 
pauci/ame//ata 227 
pe/ianthina 226, 231 
pseudotenax 235 
pura 230 
purpureofusca 229 
rorida 237 
rose//a 226, 229 
rubromarginata 230 
rugu/osiceps 235 
rutilantiformis 231 
sanguino/enta 232 
scabripes 233 
Mycena (cont.) 
sanguino/enta 232 
scabripes 233 
spp. (unidentified) 204, 
209,226 
stannea 235 
strobilinoides 228 
sty/obates 227 
subcaeruka 226,231 
subcana 233 
subsanguino/enta 225, 
232 
tenax 237 
tenerrima 227 
viscosa 237 
vitilis 236 
vu/gar 225,237 
Mycenastrum 680 
corium 689 
M ycolevis 
siccig/eba 741 
Mycorraphium 
adustum 612 
Myriosclerotinia 877 
Myriostoma 699 
co/iforme 704 
Myrmecocystis 
cerebriformis 852 
Myxompha/ia 149 
maura 165 
N 
Naematoloma 381 
aurantiaca 382 
capnoides 383 
dispersum 383,384 
e/ongatum 384 
ericaeum 384 
fascicu/are 382,896 
myosotis 384 
olivaceotinctum 384 
po/ytrichi 384 
radicosum 383 
squalide//um 384 
sub/ateritium 381,382 
subviride 383 
udum 384 
Nannfeldtiella 
aggregata 828 
Naucoria 399 
semiorbicu/aris 469 
vinic%r 404 
Neobulgaria 
pura 875,877 
Neocudoniella 
a/biceps 873 
Neogyromitra 
gigas 80 1 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Neo/ecta 868 
irregular is 871 
vite/Jina 871 
N eosecotium 727 
macrosporum 732 
Neottiella 
ruti/ans 837 
Neournu/a 
pouchetii 827 
Nidu/a 778 
candida 780 
niveotomentosa 779, 
781 
Nidu/aria 778 
farcta 779 
pulvinata 779 
Nivatogastrium 733 
nubigenum 735 
wrightii 736 
N o/anea 245 
cuneata 248 
edulis 247 
fructufragrans 245, 
248 
hirtipes 246,247 
holoconiota 248 
icterina 245,248 
mammosa 248 
murraii 245 
papi//ata 248 
salmonea 245 
sericea 246 
staurospora 246,247, 
248 
stricta 246 
verna 247 
Nyctalis 200 
o 
Octavianina 744 
asterosperma 745 
macrospora 746 
papyracea 746 
rogers;; 746 
Omphalia 221 
Omphaliaster 151 
asterosporus 166 
borealis 166 
Omphalina 221 
chlorocyanea 162 
chrysophyJ/a 221 
epichysium 166 
ericetorum 223 
fibula 221 
grossula 162 
hudsoniana 223 
luteicolor 221,223 
postii 223 
pyxidata 223 
strombodes 221 
umbeJ/ifera 223 
wynniae 162,221 
Ompha/otus 146,894, 
896 
i//udens 148 
olearius ]47,148 
olivascens 147 
Onnia 
tomentosa 570 
Osmoporus 
odoratus 586,590 
Osteina 
obducta 555 
ossea 555 
Otidea 831 
abietina 832 
alutacea 832,833* 
auricula 832 
bufonia 832 
canthareJ/a 832,833 
concinna 832,833 
grandis 832 
leporina 832,833 
onotica 832 
rainierensis 832 
smithii 832 
Oudemansiella 202 
longipes 220 
platyphyJ/a 146 
radicata 218*,219 
Oxyporus 
nobilissimus 549,575 
populinus 575 
p 
Pachyella 818,822 
babingtonii 819,822 
c/ypeata 819,822 
Pachyph/oeus 855 
citrin us 856 
conglomeratus 857 
melanoxanthus 855, 
857 
virescens 857 
Panaeo/us 353,895 
acuminatus 354, 357, 
360 
cambodginensis 358 
campanulatus 356 
castaneifolius 360 
cyanescens 358,895 
fimicola 354, 357 
foenisecii 360 
papilionaceus 357 
phalaenarum 355 
retirugis 354, 357 
rickenii 357 
semiovatus 355,357* 
separatus 355,357* 
sepulchraJis 355 
951 
Panaeo/us (cont) 
solidipes 355 
sphinctrinus 357 
subbalteatus 358,895 
tropica/is 358 
Panellus 132 
longinquus 133 
mitis 132 
nidulans 141 
ringens 132 
serotinus 137 
stipticus 138 
Pan us 132 
conchatus 138 
crinitis 133 
dryinus 136 
operculatus 132 
rudis 139 
strigosus 140 
torulosus 138 
Paxil/us 476 
atrotomentosus 478 
involutus 41 * , 477, 896 
panuoides 476 
verna lis 478 
Paxina 805 
acetabulum 807 
leucomelas 809 
recurvum 799 
Penicillium 782 
Pen ioph ora 604 
gigantea 607 
Perenniporia 
subacida 603 
Peziza 818 
(also see PachyeJ/a. 
Plica ria. Geopyxis. 
Tarzetta) 
ammophiJa 819, 826 
badia 819,821 
badioconfusa 821,822 
brunneoatra 820 
cerea 821 
domiciliana 822 
echinospora 821 
ellipsospora 822*,825 
emi/eia 822 
fimeti 823 
gautierioides 825 
melaleucoides 799 
petersii 821 
praetervisa 824 
proteana 824 
pustulata 821 
repanda 821 
sp. (unidentified) 822*, 
824 
stuntzii 825 
952 
Peziza (cont.) 
succosa 819,821 
sy/veslris 820* ,821 
varia 822 
venosa 796 
vesicu/osa 823 
vio/acea 824 
Phaeobulgaria 
inquinans 876 
Phaeocollybia 413 
attenuala 414,415 
ca/ifornica 415 
chrislianae 416 
decepliva 414,415 
dissi/iens 415 
fa//ax 413,414 
fesliva 413,414 
gregaria 414,415 
jennyae 416 
kauffmanii 416 
/alerarius 414,415 
/i/acifo/ia 414,415 
o/ivacea 414 
oregonensis 416 
piceae 415 
pseudofesliva 413,414 
radicala 414,416 
rufipes 416 
scalesiae 414,415 
simi/is 414,415 
sipei 416 
spadicea 414,416 
Phaeolepiota 411 
aurea 412 
Phaeolus 566 
a/bo/uleus 571 
fibri//osus 567,572 
schweinilzii 570 
Phaeomarasmius 
confragosus 404 
erinacee//us 386 
Phallogaster 762 
saccalUS 762,764 
Phallus 766 
hadriani 769* , 770 
imperia/is 770 
impudicus 768 
iosmus 770 
ravene/ii 768, 770 
rubicundus 768,770 
Phellinus 574 
chrys%ma 583 
everharlii 575,582, 
583* 
ferreus 75, 582 
ferruginosus 575,582 
gl/VUS 582 
igniarius 581 
/aevigalus 575,581 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Phellinus (cont.) 
nigro/imilalus 583 
pini 582 
pomaceus 575,581 
rimosus 575,582 
robiniae 582 
robuslus 575,582,583 
laxodii 583 
lexanus 583 . 
IOru/osus 583 
Iremu/ae 581 
Phellodon 622 
alralus 629 
conj1uens 624,628 
me/a/eucus 623, 629 
niger 623,629 
lomenlosus 628 
Phellorina 715 
inquinans 723 
Slrobi/ina 723 
Phillipsia 836 
Phlebia 
merismoides 610 
radiala 610 
Phlegmacium 418 
Phlogiotis 
he/ve//oides 672 
Pho/iota 384 
abielis 391 
adiposa 391 
a/bive/ala 380,387 
a/bocrenu/ala 392 
a/nico/a 388 
aSlraga/ina 387 
aurea 413 
aurive//a 390 
aurivelloides 391 
brunnescens 393 
caperala 412 
carbonaria 385,394 
confragosa 404 
connala 391 
decorala 387,393 
deslruens 395 
e/ongalipes 384,387 
erinaceella 386 
ferruginea 393 
ferrugineo-/ulescens 
393 
fibri//osipes 388 
fi/amenlosa 391 
j1ammans 391 
j1avida 388 
fu/vosquamosa 381 
fu/vozonala 394 
graveo/ens 394 
hiema/is 391 
high/andensis 385,394 
/enla 387, 393 
/imonella 391 
Pho/iota (cont.) 
/ubrica 392 
malico/a 388 
mU/lifo/ia 386,388 
mwabi/is 395 
myosol 384,387 
po/ychroa 387 
praecox 469 
prolixa 388 
scamba 387, 394 
sp. (unidentified) 385 
spectabi/is 411 
spinu/ifera 388 
spumosa 394 
squarrosa 389 
squarroso-adiposa 391 
squarrosoides 385* , 
386,390 
subangu/aris 394 
subcaerurea 380,385 
sub/ubrica 393 
subochracea 388 
lerreslris 389 
ve/ag/winosa 387,393 
vermif/ua 470 
vema/is 387, 396 
Ph o/iotina 
fi/aris 472 
Phylloporus 476 
arenico/a 480 
rhodoxanthus 480 
Phyllotopsis 132 
nidu/ans 140 
Physalacria 
inj1ala 548 
Picoa 852 
carlhusiana 854 
Piersonia 
a/veo/ala 858 
bispora 858 
Piptoporus 584 
belulinus 584 
Piso/ithus 711 
arenarius 713 
arrhizus 713 
linclOrius 712 
Pithya 
cupressina 836 
vu/gar 834,836 
Plectania 826 
coccinea 836 
hiemalis 836 
melaena 827, 831 
me/aslOma 829 
milleri 830 
nannfe/dlii 830 
nigrella 830 
Pleurocybella 
porrigens 136 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Pleurole/lus 
porrigens 136 
Pleurolus 132 
(also see H ohen- 
buehelia) 
candidissimus 132 
columbinus 134 
cornucopiae 134 
corticatus 136 
dryinus 135* , 136 
elongatipes 133 
lignatilis 136 
ostreatus 133* , 134 
petaloides 137 
porrigens 135 
sajor-cajou 134 
sapidus 134 
ulmarius 133 
P/icaria 818 
carbona ria 820 
endocarpoides 820 
leiocarpa 820 
trachycarpa 820 
P/icaluropsis 
crispa 591 
Pluteolus 
aleuriatus 475 
ca//isteus 475 
Pluleus 253,254 
admirabilis 254,257 
atricapil/us 256 
atromarginatus 254, 
256 
aurantiorugosus 254, 
257 
californicus 258 
cervinus 255 
chrysophaeus 258 
coccineus 257 
cyanopus 254,258,895 
flavofuligineus 258 
granularis 258 
leoninus 254,257 
longistriatus 257 
lutescens 257 
magnus 256 
nanus 257 
pe//itus 254, 256 
petasatus 255 
salicin us 254,258,895 
seticeps 258 
Pod axis 715,725 
argentinus 726 
longii 726 
micros porus 726 
pistil/aris 724, 725 
Podoslroma 879 
alutaceum 879 
Polyoze/lus 658 
multiplex 668 
Polypi/us 
frondosus 565 
Polyporus 554 
(also see Albatrel/us. 
Meripilus. Osteina. 
Ischnoderma. etc.) 
arcularius 563 
badius 42* , 562 
betulinus 585 
biennis 566 
brumalis 555,563 
decurrens 561 
elegans 562 
fagicola 562 
frondosus 565 
hirtus 560,561* 
lentus 562 
mcmurphyi 561 
melanopus 563 
mori 555,563 
mylillae 564 
picipes 562 
radicatus 556, 564 
squamosus 556,561 
sulphureus 573 
tuberaster 563 
umbel/atus 565 
varius 563 
versicolor 594 
Polysaccum 
pisocarpium 713 
Polysliclus 
tomentosus 570 
versicolor 594 
Poria 602 
cocos 604 
corticola 603 
incrassata 603 
sequoiae 603 
spissa 602 
vail/antii 603 
xantha 603 
Porodisculus 
pendulus 552 
Poronidulus 
conchifer 552 
Porphyre/lus 
pseudoscaber 534 
Pouzare/la 238,239 
ProlOgautieria 
lutea 741 
substriata 741 
Psal/iola 310 
Psalhyra 361 
Psalhyre/la 361 
ammophila 361 
atrofolia 365 
953 
Psalhyre/la (coot.) 
atrofolia 365 
bipel/is 362 
candol/eana 363 
canoceps 366 
carbonicola 366 
circel/atipes 364 
conissans 362, 364 
conopi/ea 365 
elwhaensis 365 
epimyces 361 
fuscofolia 364 
gracilis 365 
hydrophila 364 
hymenocephala 363 
incerta 363 
kauffmanii 362 
lacrymabunda 366 
longipes 364 
longistriata 362 
maculata 366 
multipedata 361,364 
sp. (unidentified) 362, 
366 
spadicea 362,364 
stercoraria 362 
sublateritia 362, 364 
subnuda 365 
uliginicola 362,363* 
velutina 366 
Pseudobalsamia 
alba 853 
magnata 853 
nigrens 853 
Pseudocolus 772 
fusiformis 772, 776, 
777* 
javanicus 776 
schel/enbergiae 776 
Pseudocoprinus 
disseminatus 353 
impatiens 353 
Pseudocra lere /Ius 
pseudoc/avatus 661 
sinuosus 666 
Pseudofislulina 
radicata 554 
Pseudohydnum 
gelatinosum 671 
Pseudopilhye/la 
miniscula 836 
Pseudopleclania 
melaena 831 
nigrel/a 830 
Psi/ocybe 367,368,895 
angustispora 370 
atrobrunnea 369 
baeocyst 372,895 
954 
Psilocybe (cont.) 
caerulescens 369,374, 
895 
caerulipes 369,373 
californica 369 
castanella 369 
coprophila 370 
corneipes 369 
cubensti 373,895 
cyanescens 371,895 
merdaria 369, 370 
mexicana 373 
montana 369 
pelliculosa 369,371 
semilanceata 370,895 
silvatica 371 
squamosa 381 
stricti pes 372 
stuntzii 372 
tampanensis 374 
umbonatescens 376 
Pteru/a 631 
Ptychoverpa 
bohemica 794 
Pu/cherricium 
caeruleum 605 
Pu/verobo/erus 509 
auriporus 509 
hemichrysus 509 
ravenelii 509 
Pu/vinu/a 
archeri 838 
carbonaria 838 
Punctu/aria 
strigoso-zonata 610 
Pustu/aria 840 
Pycnoporellus 572 
Pycnoporus 592 
cinnabarinus 597 
sanguineus 597 
Pyrofomes 
juniperinus 583 
Pyronema 
omphalodes 835,838 
QR 
Que/etia 715 
mirabilis 722 
Radiigera 760 
atrogleba 761 
fuscogleba 761,762 
taylorii 761,762 
Radu/um 
orbiculare 610 
Ramaria 645,890. 
abietina 650 
acris 646, 649 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Ramaria (cont.) 
acrisiccescens 648, 
651 
amyloidea 646 
apiculata 646, 649 
araiospora 655 
aurantiisiccescens 
647,652 
aurea 648,652 
botrytis 656 
botrytoides 648,656 
brunnea 654 
cacao 646 
cartilaginea 648,655 
caulifloriformis 648 
cedretorum 651 
celerivirescens 646 
claviramulata 647 
conjunctipes 647 
cyaneigranosa 647, 
654,655 
cystidiophora 647,653 
fennica 650 
fiaccida 649 
fiava 652,653 
fiavigelatinosa 648, 
655 
fiavobrunnescens 
647,652 
formosa 654,896 
fumigata 651 
fumosiavellanea 651 
gelaliniaurantia 648, 
655 
gelatinosa 655 
gracilis 649 
grandis 647 
invalii 649 
largentii 647,654 
leplOformosa 654 
longispora 654 
maculatipes 647,654 
magnipes 648, 652 
murril/ii 649 
myceliosa 649 
obtusissima 647 
ochraceovirens 650 
pusil/a 649 
rasilispora 652 
rubella 649 
rubiginosa 653 
rubribrunnescens 
647,654 
rubricarnata 654 
rubrievanescens 648, 
656 
rubripermanens 656 
sandaracina 647,648, 
655 
sanguinea 653 
Ramaria (cont.) 
secunda 656 
strasseri 648,656 
stricta 631*,648 
stuntzii 647,655 
subbotrytis 647,655 
suecica 649 
synaplOpoda 647,653 
testaceofiava 647,654 
velocimutans 646 
vinosimaculans 648, 
653 
Ramariopsis 640 
californica 643 
kunzei 643 
pulchella 641 
Resupinatus 
applicatus 132 
Rhizina 
infima 797 
undulata 797 
Rhizopogon 753 
amyloideus 756 
atroviolaceus 754 
cokeri 754, 755 
colossus 756 
couchii 754 
diplophloeus 758 
ellenae 755 
evadens 754 
idahoensis 756 
maculatus 754, 755 
occidentalis 754 
ochraceorubens 740*, 
755 
parksii 754, 756 
pinyonensti 754,755 
roseolus 754 
rubescens 754 
smithii 754 
subaustralis 754 
subcaerulescens 754, 
756 
subsalmonius 754 
succosus 754 
truncatus 755 
vinicolor 754 
Rhodocollybia 202 
butyracea 216 
maculata 217 
Rhodocybe 240 
aureicystidiata 241 
caelata 240,241 
mundula 240,241 
nitellina 240,241 
nuciolens 241 
roseiavellanea 241 
Rhodopaxillus 
nudus 154 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Rhodophyllus 238 
(also see Ent%ma, 
Leptonia, No/anea) 
serice//us 253 
strictior 246 
Rhodotus 
pa/matus 130 
Rhopalogaster 
transversarium 724 
Rickenella 
fibula 221 
Ripartites 150 
trich%ma 150 
Rozites 411 
caperata 412 
Russula 63,83,896 
abietina 101 
adusta 85,91 
aeruginea 95 
a/achuana 96 
a/bel/a 96 
a/bida 96 
a/bidu/a 96 
a/bonigra 89 
a/utacea 102 
amoeno/ens 94 
anoma/a 96 
aquosa 99 
atrata 89 
atropurpurea 85 
bic%r 86 
brevi pes 87 
brunneo/a 87,94 
caeru/ea 10 I 
cascadensis 85,88 
cero/ens 94 
chamaeleontina 101 
c/aroj7ava 92 
compacta 85,91 
crassotunicata 86,97 
cremoric%r 97 
crenu/ata 97 
crustosa 86,95 
cyanoxantha 94,897* 
dec%rans 91 
delica 88 
densifolia 90 
dissimu/ans 85, 90 
emetica 97 
j1ava 92 
foetens 93 
foetentu/a 93 
fragilis 98 
fragrantissima 92 
gracilis 99 
graci//ima 99 
granu/ata 94 
grisea 87,95 
Russula (cont.) 
integra 101 
krombho/zii 85 
/aurocerasi 93 
/i/acea 10 1 
/utea 86, 92 
macu/ata 100 
macu/osa 95 
mairei 98 
mariae 96 
montana 86 
nigricans 85 90 
obscura 92' 
occidenta/is 85,92 
ochro/euca 85,92 
olivacea 87, 102 
pa/udosa 92 
parazurea 87,95 
pectinata 94 
pectinatoides 94 
pe/argonia 99 
p/acita 100 
po/ychroma 101 
pue//aris 101 
pu/veru/enta 94 
raou/tii 97 
romagnesiana 88 
rosacea 99 
sanguinea 100 
si/vico/a 98 
sordida 89 
sororia 93 
spp. (unidentified) 86, 
102, 103 
suba/bidu/a 96 
subfoetens 93 
subnigricans 90 
tenuiceps 102 
variata 86,94 
ve/enovskyi 100 
ventricosipes 93 
vesca 87, 94 
veternosa 102 
virescens 95 
xerampe/ina 83*,102 
S 
Sarcodon 616 
(also see Hydnum) 
imbricatum 620 
Sarcoscypha 834 
coccinea 836 
j1occosa 836 
occidenta/is 836 
Sarcosoma 826 
g/obosum 827, 829 
/atahens 827,828 
mexicana 828 
955 
Sarcosphaera 825 
coronaria 826 
crassa 825 
eximia 826 
Schizophyllum 590 
commune 590 
Schizostoma 715 
/aceratum 716,722 
Scleroderma 707, 896 
a/bidum 710 
arenico/a 710 
areo/atum 708 
aurantium 708 
bovista 708,710 
cepa 709 
citrinum 708 
j1avidum 710 
j10ridanum 710 
furfure//um 711 
fuscum 710 
geaster 710 
hypogaeum 710 
/aeve 710 
/ycoperdoides 708 
macrorhizon 708 
michiganense 710 
po/yrhizon 711 
po/yrhizum 711 
reae 710 
texense 711 
verrucosum 708 
vulgare 708 
Sclerogaster 744 
co/umnatus 744 
xerophi/um 744 
Sclerotinia 877 
Scutellinia 
erinaceus 839 
scutel/ata 839 
umbrarum 839 
Scutiger 
e//isii 560 
hirtus 560 
pescaprae 560 
Sebacina 
incrustans 609 
Secotium 724 
agaricoides 732 
Sedecula 707 
pu/vinata 707 
Sepedonium 
chrysospermum 884 
Sepultaria 846 
(also see Geopora) 
arenico/a 847 
Serpula 
himantioides 611 
/acrymans 610 
956 
Setchelliogaster 733 
lenuipes 733,735 
Simblum 
sphaerocepha/um 776 
lexense 776 
Simocybe 399 
centuncu/us 400 
Skeletocutis 
amorpha 552 
Sparassis 657 
crispa 657 
herbsl;; 657 
radicala 657 
spalhu/ala 657 
Spathularia 868 
c/avala 872 
j7avida 871 
spalhu/ala 872 
ve/ulipes 869, 872 
Spathulariopsis 
ve/ulipes 872 
Sphaerobolus 778 
sle//alUs 781 
Sphaerosoma 845 
Sphaerozone 845 
Spongipellis 
/eucospongia 60 I 
pachydon 598,601 
unic%r 60 I 
Spongiporus 
/eucospongia 60 I 
Spragueola 
irregu/aris 871 
Squamanita 197 
odorala 198 
paradoxum 198 
umbonala 198 
Staheliomyces 
cinClus 768 
Steccherinum 
aduslum 612 
seplentriona/e 612 
Stephensia 845 
Stereum 604 
burlianum 608 
complicalum 606 
diaphanum 608 
fascialum 606 
gausapalum 606 
hirsulum 605 
/obalum 606 
ochraceoj7avum 607 
oslrea 606 
rameale. 606 
sanguino/entum 605, 
606 
sericeum 607 
slrialum 607 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
Strobilomyces 543 
cousus 542*,543 
dryophi/us 543 
j7occopus 543 
slrobi/aceus 543 
Strobilurus 202 
a/bipi/alus 212 
conigenoides 202,211 
kemplonae 211 
/ignili/is 212 
occidenlalis 212 
Iru//isalus 211 
Stropharia 374 
aeruginosa 380 
a/bocyanea 380 
a/bonilens 376 
ambigua 377 
aurantiaca 382 
bi/ame//ala 377 
coroni//a 377 
cubensis 374 
de pi/ala 380 
hard;; 375,377 
hornemannii 379 
kauffman;; 380 
magnive/aris 378 
me/anosperma 375, 377 
merdaria 370 
riparia 375,378 
rugoso-annu/ala 378 
semig/obala 376 
siccipes 376 
squamosa 375,381,382 
slercoraria 376 
Ihrausla 382 
umbonalescens 375, 
376 
Suil/us 491 
acerbus 494,504 
acidus 493 
a/bidipes 493,501 
a/bive/alus 492 
americanus 494,499 
borealis 493,501 
brevipes 501 
brunnescens 493,501 
caeru/escens 496 
caslanel/us 493 
cavipes 494 
colhurnalus 500 
decipiens 494, 495 
e/egans 497 
j7avidus 498 
j7avogranu/alus 502 
fuscolomentosus 504 
g/andu/osipes 493,501 
gran u/a Ius 502 
grevi//ei 497 
he/enae 494,498 
Suil/us (cont.) 
hirlel/us 494 
imilalus 497 
kaibabensis 494,502 
/akei 495 
/uleus 500 
megaporinus 492,499 
monlico/us 502 
occidenta/is 494,502 
pa//idiceps 494,502 
piclus 494,495 
pinorigidus 500 
p/acidus 494,502 
ponderosus 492, 496 
proximus 497, 506 
pseudobrevipes 500 
punclalipes 494, 502 
punclipes 493 
pungens 503 
relicu/alus 505 
riparius 492, 499 
sa/monic%r 500 
sibiricus 498 
sphaerosporus 492 
subaureus 494 
sub/weus 493,500 
subo/ivaceus 499 
lomentosus 504 
umbonalus 498 
variegalus 505 
volcana/is 493,501 
wasalchicus 502 
T 
Tarzella 
(also see Geopyxis) 
bronca 835,840 
calinus 835,840 
cupu/ar 835,840 
rosea 835,840 
Tecte/la 
palel/aris 132 
Telamonia 418 
Terfezia 855 
arena ria 855 
Thaxterogaster 733 
pingue 734 
Thelephora 
/aciniala 609 
mU/liparlila 609 
pa/mala 609 
spicu/osa 609 
lerreSlris 608 
via lis 609 
Togaria 
aurea 413 
Trametes 592, 603 
(also see Cono/e//us) 
hirsula 595 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
957 
Trameles (cont.) 
mol/is 596 
occ;denlalis 550,595 
pubescens 595 
suaveo/ens 598 
ve/ul;na 595 
versicolor 594 
Tremel/a 
concrescens 670 
encephala 673 
fo/;acea 673 
frondosa 673,674 
fuciform;s 669,671 
lutescens 674 
mesenler;ca 673 
rel;culala 644, 670 
Tremel/odendron 
cand;dum 644,670 
pa//idum 640,644,670 
schwe;n;lz;; 644 
Tremel/odendropsis 
640 
lUberosa 643 
Tremel/odon 
gelal;nosum 671 
Trichaplum 592 
ab;el;nus 593 
bi/orm;s 592, 593 
Trichoglossum 866 
far/ow;; 868 
h;rsutum 867 
velul;pes 868 
Tricholoma 176,189, 
896 
acerbum 178,185 
acre 178,182 
aggregalUm l74 
albobrunneum 185 
album 183 
argyraceum 182 
atrov;olaceum 178, 181 
aurant;o-o/ivaceum 188 
aurant;um 187 
cal;gatum 192 
che;lolamn;um 180 
cingu/alUm 177 
columbetta 183 
equestre 180 
flavobrunneum 185 
j1avov;rens 179 
locale 189 
fu/vum 185 
gambosum 183 
georg;; 183 
imbr;catum 186,188* 
;namoenum 179 
leucophyJ/um 177, 180 
magn;velare 191 
manzan;fae 185 
Tricholoma (cont.) 
matsutake 192 
myomyces 182 
n;ve;pes 181 
nudum 154 
or;rubens 182 
panaeolum 155 
pard;num 183,896 
personatum 154 
pessundatum 185,896 
platyphyllum 177 , 179 
ponderosum 191 
popu/inum 185 
portentosum 180 
resp/endens 183 
robustum 189 
saponaceum 184 
sca/pturatum 182 
sejunctum 180 
sord;dum 152 
sp. (un;dentified) 179, 
182 
squarrulosum 178, 182 
subacutum 181 
sulphurescens 183 
su/phureum 179 
terreum 182 
titans 178 
us tale 179,185 
usta/o;des 185 
vaccinum 186 
venenata 183 
v;rgatum 181 
zeller; 188 
Tricho 10m opsis 144 
decora 145,146 
edodes 141 
fal/ax 146 . 
j1ammu/a 146 
j1av;ss;ma 146 
platyphylla 146 
rutilan 145 
su/fureo;des 145, 146 
Trichophaea 
abundans 838, 840 
boud;er; 834, 840 
bullata 840 
Trogia 
cr;spa 132,591 
Truncocolume/la 752 
citr;na 752 
rubra 748, 753 
Truncospora 
dem;doff;; 575, 583 
Tubaria 399 
confragosa 403 
furfuracea 402 
pel/ucida 403 
Tubaria (cont.) 
tenu;s 403 
Tuber 841,854 
aest;vum 855 
bessey; 859 
californ;cum 860 
cana/iculatum 856,859 
cand;dum 861*,862 
citr;num 860 
dryophilum 860 
gardner; 859 
g;bbosum 858 
harkness;; 859,862 
;rrad;ans 860 
/ev;ss;mum 860 
/insda/e; 859 
magnatum 854 
melanosporum 842* , 
854 
mont;co/a 860 
mur;num 856, 859 
rufum 861 
separans 859 
shear;; 860 
sphaerosporum 861 
texens;s 856,859 
Tulostoma 677*,715 
berteroanum 720 
bruma/e 719 
campestre 720 
cretaceum 716,720 
excentr;cum 720 
fibril/osum 720 
;nvolucratum 720 
lysocepha/um 721 
macrocepha/um 720 
mer;stostoma 720 
opacum 720 
s;mulans 720 
striatum 720 
Tylopilus 532 
alboater 532 
amm;rat;; 533,535 
amylosporus 520,532 
atrofuscus 534 
bad;ceps 533 
bal/ou;; 533, 534 
chromapes 533 
con;cus 533 
ex;m;us 532 
felleus 533,535 
ferrug;neus 533 
fumos;pes 534 
gracilis 533, 534 
humi/us 535 
;ndecisus 535 
intermedius 533 
minor 533 
nebulosus 534 
958 
Tylopilus (cont.) 
olivaceobrunneus 534 
pacificus 534 
peralbidus 533 
plumbeoviolaceus 533, 
534 
porphyrosporus 534 
pseudoscaber 534, 535. 
rhoadsiae 533 
rubrobrunneus 533,535 
snell;; 532 
sordidus 534 
subunicolor 535 
tabacinus 533,535 
Typhula 634,636 
juncea 636 
Tyromyces 591 
albellus 599 
amarus 601 
balsameus 599 
basilaris 598, 599 
caesius 599 
chioneus 599 
floriformis 598,599 
fragilis 600 
galactinus 599 
guttulatus 599 
immitis 599 
lacteus 599 
leucospongia 600 
mollis 598, 600 
perdelicatus 599 
spraguei 599 
spumeus 599 
stipticus 599 
tephroleucus 599 
transmutans 600 
unicolor 598,601 
GENUS AND SPECIES INDEX 
uv 
Underwoodia 
columnaris 797 
Ungulina 
marginata 579 
Urnula 826 
craterium 829 
geaster 827 
hiemalis 829 
pouchet;; 827 
Vaginala 
plumbea 288 
Vascellum 690 
curtis;; 691,695,696 
depressum 696 
lloydianum 696 
pratense 695 
Veluticeps 
berkeleyi 607 
Verpa 784,193,893 
bohemica 793 
conica 794 
Vibressea 
truncorum 869,870, 
873 
V olvaria 258 
Volvariella 253,258 
bombycina 261 
hypopithys 260 
parvula 260 
pusilla 259, 260 
smithii 261 
speciosa 259 
surrecta 259,262 
taylori 259,261 
villosavolva 259, 261 
volvacea 258,259,262 
WXYZ 
Weraroa 733 
cucullata 734 
Whelzelinia 877 
W olfina 
aurantiopsis 834 
Wynnea 
americana 831 
sparassoides 817 
Wynnella 
silvicola 832 
Xerocomus 5]] 
(also see Boletus) 
chrysenteron 520 
subtomentosus 518 
Xeromphalina 221 
campanella 222 
cauticina/is 222 
fulvipes 221,222 
kauffmanii 223 
orick iana 223 
picta 222 
tenuipes 221 
Xerulina 
chrysopepla 131 
Xylaria 878,885 
cornu-damae 886 
hypoxylon 885 
longipes 886 
polymorpha 886 
Xylobolus 604 
Xylosphaera 
hypoxylon 886 
polymorpha 886 
Zelleromyces 742 
cinnabarinus 742 
gardneri 742 
sp. (unidentified) 742 
A species of Auricularia (probably A. auricula) growing on a log. Brown color and rubbery- 
gelatinous texture are distinctive (see p. 675 for details). 
, ... ... 
....i ""d ... 
'... #, I 
If> 
.. 
, 
.t 
..-  ...., 
., ..  
 
r 
A:. 
...... 
 
 
. ..... 
... 
.... 
 
lit 
." '.'!: ". 
. 
" 
. 
.... 
.& 
" 
959 
. 
" 
, ).... 
': 
,  . '.. 
.' 
J 
, f. 
. , 
..:"" 
o 
r 
, 
.. .' 
.t l 
\ 
; 
: 
o 
I 1. 
'- 
1. '<:# 
f) 
- 
, 
The author with some giant black morels (Morche/la elala group, p. 790). (Joel Leivick) 
" 
.... 
"  " 
- ..... : 
... 
 
"''''', 
: '" . 
..:..... 
1. A "toadstool," Lactarius atroviridis (see comments under 
L. olivaceoumbrinus, p. 70). 
'f 
 " 
.\ "':i. 
 to . 
.I: \ _ - '. \ 
..()' 
'- 
 
2. Lactarius deliciosus, p. 68; edible but not necessarily delicious. 
... 
" 
, 
" 
, .... 
"' V '" 
'4 
...:.. 
.... . 
- 
'\ 
.A. 
-, 
';\ 
 
 
- - - 
... 
-- 
,.. 
, 
') 
:'Ilf 
\ 
- 
 - 
......-  
. ...-- 
"7 
.: . 
.... 
 
'., \- 
" 
"'" 
, 
 
----==-- 
 
. _--==-=- 
- 
-- 
 
 
fL 
.. 
. . 
'\ . 
\ 
.... :_........I 
I'r '1  rv  rOPil" .- 
j \, 
: ' , .. 
" t r 
 
3. Close-up of the "bleeding" latex 
of Lactarius rubrilacteus, p. 68. 
.... I '(' 
.\\ .,,)  
-  -- 
\', '. . 
1- ;;- 1  
4: 
--- 
 
"'    ."' II' 
-  .:......-=--. i¥ii; ... 
, \ \  < c 
,1\'  ,.<" .: '" . 
" I  ,\, '' " 
  V  
...1 ,\,  ",,- 
 .'  
A 
4. Lactarius indigo (Indigo Milk Cap), p. 69. 
5. Lactarius alnicola (Golden Milk Cap), p. 71, has a 
very peppery taste. 
.,.. 
'. ., 
"' 
l 
III 
/I 
II! 
, 
" 
. 
... 
---- 
j- 
I ' \' 
\i\ 
 '\ 
;;:  - 
--...... 
  
!fa - - 
. 
. . .. ' .\ \ 
l' 
. 
-- 
.- 
  
.. . :t.- 
.. c_ 
 
.j . ..' 
:s 
6. Lactarius rubrilacteus (also known as L. sanguifluus or the Bleeding Milk 
Cap), p. 68. 
7. Lactarius torminosus (Bearded Milk Cap), p. 73; common under birch. 
, 
.. 
. ' 
.:. 
: i 
 
)'. 
" 
.....\ 
- - 
I 
f__ 
;,,\ .\ 
\ 
5- 
""- 
:' 
-............ 
.. 
i,' [fly! / 
, '! 
8. Lactarius corrugis, an edible eastern milk cap (see 
comments under L. volemus, p. 78). 
'" I. 
.A. 
J ,\' 
" 
\r 9. Lactarius fallax (Velvety Milk Cap), p. 77. 
';-y 
,..... '\'" - - :, ," 
. '"... .. "; 
  1"" -, ,, 
10. Lactarius fragi/is (Candy Cap), p. 80; smells like 
maple syrup when cooked or dried. 
" .' 
t " , . 
;;' " 
.., ..... 
I '\ 
.r I 
{ ....1 - \  
\ . \  
., 
.' . '\, 
, " - . 
,- . . -{ , , 
.. .. 
"!iI', .. 
r ... 
,-....' . - 
, . " 
;t- . -ot 
I' 
\ \ 
' 
\ II/( 
:', . \ / 
 " 
...-...... . 
 - - . 'S;.. .  -. 
 .. \:' 
., 
......... 
J 
'\ 
, 
 
-. 
. 
" 
., 
" 
 
,, 
11. Russula fragrantissima 
group, p. 92; can be fragrant 
or foul-smelling. 
12. Russula cyanoxantha, 
p. 94; like many Russulas, 
its color is extremely variable. 
13. Russula rosacea (Rosy 
Russula), p. 99. 
I I 
" _.4 
. 
, I 
. \ / 1 ,,\ 
;. I." 
\ If '.. 
"\. 
, . \ 
.. 
. . , 
. 
'.' 
. 
" 
I 
I 
 
, 
\ 
'-. ,- 
. '" 
,,\, 
 
--: , " 
'.' 
,4  
, 
. \1 ... 
 ',' 
., 
- 
, .' . t . 
... . 
- 
 . 
- ..< 
\ 
,. 
: ..... - 
 <'. 
.  J, 
. . .',' 
:''). .,\ 
.. 
I' . ".If 
"'I, 
I 1-.. .:: 
t.. 
, 
. . 
.... 
- . 
,"I 
.. . . 
. , 
(. 
.. 
,\ \ I 
\J 
,,-\\ \ ! t  ',,- \ 
"",  \ . .. 
 t \ \  
, \t ...... -. 
'\ -\'  
i  
\.  . 
'''; , J 
\ "..' 
, ,, ( 
., 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
,< 1\ " 
..... \ 
, 
 . ' .. 
'\ -,' 
\ 
. \,' 
, 
, 
... 
.."''' 
y .. 
\ ...' 
 ' 
, i 
, 
\ 
-( 
..... 
. 
t\ '''  
, \', "..,." 
\. '. '\. 
-...::::::  
\ 
 
, . 
, - 
\ J 
.. 
....... 
-...... 
... 
:., 
.. .' 
 
" 
--;.. 
 . 
(. 
\ 
" 
 
.. ... 
L ,.... 
, 
... 
-.: 
14. Russula xerampelina (Shrimp Russula), p. 102; as beautiful as it is delicious! 
-../' 
. .. 
15. Hygrophorus speciosus, p. 126; a beautiful larch- and pine-loving waxy cap. 
-.., 
v 
\ 
'" 
 
.#; ,...... 
---.. 
i 
.. 
" 
'\ 
, 
 
, . 
'" 
"" 
' 
..,. 
: r 
f...... 
16. Hygrophorus pudormus, p. 124, favors spruce. 
17. Close-up of the golden-flaked stalk of 
Hygrophorus chrysodon, p. 119. 
18. Hygrocybe psittacina (= Hygrophorus 
psittacinus), p. 118, is dark green or bright 
green when fresh but soon fades. 
) ) 
. I: 
,. "I. 
/J . I · 
JI' 
--, 
c::: 
o 
en 
Q. 
C) 
>- 
ro 
a: 
, 
I, , 
, .." . 
.' 
, . 
-." 
$:. 
19. Hygrocybe conica (= Hygrophorus conicus 
or Witch's Hat), p. 116, blackens when bruised 
or handled. 
., \.q 
\,. 
'f 
-., ' J 
- p .......  \ 
. 
._. . 
. ...... 
. 
'Ii 
. ::..' 
., 
- 
 
,II 
I 
. -.-" 
. .- 
' 
..... 
. - . 
""'  '.. 
, '-..' , 
.. ''..' 
\ 
..... 
'\-: 
I' . I.. 
,-; ..  
:\ -: 
 
-, 
20. Hygrocybe coccinea (= Hygrophorus coccineus), p. 114. 
'- 
--.. 
". 
---;r- 
I( 
" 
.. . 
,. 
,., 
'-..- 
"'- 
........ 
........ 
 
".---.. 
 
_\ ' 
. 
"'. 
21. Hygrocybe punicea (= Hygrophorus puniceus), p. 114. 
'-.., 
.....'- 
).. 
.. 
\ 
'-. 
. 
... 
" 
i 
)---. 
 
- ';.,. 
- '\, 
./ 
 
... 
I\- 
.. .. . 
..... 
110 
22 Hygrocybe (=Hygrophorus) flavescens (Golden Waxy Cap), p. 115. 
. ......- 
 
\ 
\ 
\ 
. I 
.. 
24. Omphalina 
luteicolor (see 
comments under 
0. ericetorum, p. 
223) grows in 
groups on rotting 
conifers 
" 
) ..... 
( 
.,- 
. 
23. Hygrocybe (= Hygrophorus) calyptraeformis 
(Salmon Waxy Cap), p. 117; pointed pink or 
salmon-colored cap is distinctive. 
 
... 
i 
V 
"'":r... 
\, il f, 1 t) .. :L '."L\i-' 
 I ':T.¥, J. - l'-" f 1!' 
.. ,..  I - ..";I.JoJ-",." · -;. ,  ,...(" 
 . ' . '':t.,'  'i.'tJ/ 
t' - (A1': ", f1::'.;,?t.";...'    : 
t: .', 'Jr )/ +!- I "" :tr" I '  :J. -', 
,....&. 'r" .." ,... 't. F 
ii-'  .l r' - it. . '..' ..  '! 1" 
....il ; .' 'ii 
, "r. 
..\ 1 
. .," 
: 
",'f... 
.I( 
. 
--1" 
)  . ,,-';., 
oJ . r .;.(/.. ,\", 
t -4 " : .; - \I &': .." 
'. '<h.:--->'" '< 1. '.l ej'-:: 
"  t',\Jf.'" . ,,' ". 
M .'?: 
.411.. - 
. 
,., J"; .. 
!" . 
,', 
I 
. '1 
25. Aspens and cottonwoods (p. 42) supply Pleurotus 
and Flammulina in the fall and winter, morels in the 
spring, Leccinum in the summer. 
J 
( 
\ 
( 
,e -- 
.. 
 
26. Flammulina velutipes 
(Velvet Foot), p. 220. 
27. Pleurotus ostreatus 
(Oyster Mushroom), p. 134, 
growing on bush lupine by 
the ocean. 
,( 
....,,-- . 
t. . 
i.  - 
,\W 
..i 
\\ 
'. 
r 
'\ 
CD 
Q. 
ro 
I 
c 
(\j 
o 
. 
II 
I 
Ii 
I 
!,' 
"' 
---- 
;1 
:'1 
28 Pleurotus ostreatus (Oyster Mushroom), p. 134. 
I 
III 
L 
.. 
,\ 
- 
-- 
. I 
= 
 
 
-  
..d 
"" 
, - 
"- 
. , 
'\' 
, 
 
29. Laccaria laccata (Lackluster Laccaria), p. 172. 
-- 
f' 
\ 
 
.. . ' 
 
.... .' 
; 
 
...... 
( 
. 
" 
, 
\ 
'.  
.. 'I 
' I 
, 
........ 
, 
'- 
. ... ......... 
.....t 
-'-. .\ 
--: 
,  \ - . 
7': 
._. ,  " 
* ." .....- -,...0:: \.. 
.-' - ........ . 
-..... 
 " 
, \ 
. H _e. 
- 
 4 
\ 
f 
., \ 
....,. 
.j . 
(  -.... '...:;'...... 
J.. . 
4 
 
... 
-  
. \ 
, 
, 
 
 
" 
 
"- 
. \.... 
...... ._ A · 
'\ 
. J 
 
J. 
--- 
": 
.1 
..:::: _ .,.... A _ 
 " -. ,:.- ,,  
""' ::1'1.... -  ---,,;  
1i....;:;.':.-- ..., '\ 1- 1 
,J;., r;-...   
 
" -- 
30. Laccaria amethystina group (Amethyst Laccaria), p. 172. 
\ 
. 
. . - "  
 
. 
!. 
" 
. L 
'"'> 
\ ._ ,  \1: ",:--.' _ 
. .'"' ......, , 
. ,.... .' .II.' . 
. 
 
31. Leucopaxillus amarus (Bitter 
Brown Leucopaxillus), p. 168. 
 
, 
II r 
,, 
.... 
"' 
... -- 
':";:r J 
II 
" 
\ 
'" 4 ," . /I 
, I  
( 
. ,"i 
'"' 
32. Clitocybe (= Lepista) nuda (Blewit), p. 153. Some forms have only a slight 
lilac tinge; others are perfectly purple. 
33. Tricholoma flavovirens (Man on Horseback), p. 179. 
;;;;.. 
..-' 
'" , 
.... 
.. '"'; ',.. J=-- 
-, 
-\ . \\ 
 -\ 
:""'t 
 , 
J i . .. ,.'." 
I 
", ., 
" ..,.. .. 
t I 
" 
, . 
 \ 
 
. 
- 
-: 
:-- 
." . 
. :'" 
 
 
. .f. 
\. 
\ 
,... -' " 
A_.. 
\ \\\/f It \il 
, 
I' 
\ . '\a. \. 
., 
" \ 
. . 
 
j. 
, 
,J  
0' ...., . 
.;... ", .4 
\- 
34. Clitocybe gibba, p. 151 
"' 
,, J/ 
,. 
.. 
;fA 
". 
\ 
 
\ 
 J I 
l 
35. Tricholoma pessundatum group, p. 185. 
, 
'-1 
...... 
36. Marasmiellus candidus, 
p.206. 
, 
.. 
-.  
"'" 
, 
" 
" 
." 
.... 
"'" -- 
 I"" 
' 
. 
37. Arm;llar;aponderosa {= Tr;choloma magn;velareor White Matsutake), p. 191. 
38. Marasmius oreades (Fairy Ring Mushroom), p. 208, a common suburban 
lawn mushroom. 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
, 
" 
. , 
'" 
, 
, 
, 
" 
\ 
 I 
.- 
,-. 
I' .:. . 
-:--.. 
 
::. 
.' , 
I f 
. . 
fit 
.'\  
40. Omphalotus oltvascens 
(Western Jack-O-Lantern 
Mushroom), p. 147. 
39. Close-up of a cluster of 
Armillariella (= Armillaria) mellea 
group (Honey Mushroom), p. 196. 
"" 
\, 
l 
41. Omphalotus olivascens (Western Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom) p. 147. 
\ 
-......, 
........... 
- 
IV;'f 
. . 
 .  . 
-, .' .. 
"' 
,.4{ 
j 
 
'l' 
F 
i I 
;;..- 
'. 
"'" . 
- 
, 
1 I 
 
} 
" 
f' 
/ 
" 
42 Armillarie/la (=Armillaria) me/lea group (Honey Mushroom), p. 196. 
1 
...... 
... 
"" 
I1f 
-", 
43. Armillaria 
albolanaripes, p. 194. 
" 
'.) " 
, '\ 
44. Xeromphalina campanella, 
p. 222; these specimens are 
somewhat browner than normal. 
45. Marasmius plicatulus, p. 209; 
one of our most beautiful 
mushrooms. 
46. Mycena haematopus (Bleeding Mycena), p. 231. 
_...:::::- 
,... 
=,' 
 
 , ' 
\'"  
I . 
, 
 
...;::- 
 . 
\ 
; 
v , . -i' 
1- f \ 
. 
., 
, """-- 
., 4=- 
I 
'- 
X 
';.--: 
\ - 
, ' ...), r 
 \ 
\' .,' \ t ' 
J 
<' 
--f 
r. 
O!. 
.... 
." 
:"\:"- >1" 
,., 
, 
'''" 
. . 
-? 
7.' . 
. 
.' ' ' :\. 
'I .' \" 
, - , 
, . 
,- 
 
.' 
.' ,," 
47. Marasmius oreades (Fairy Ring Mushroom), p. 208. 
, 
"- "- 
II' , 
......- - 
.... 
I" ... " 
" \ .0\ 
1 ,\ IT" .. ('1 
\ "  
---- 
\ 
"/I. \ 
'\ 
'( 
48. Mycena murina group (Yet Another Mycena), p. 234, often 
fruits by the hundreds under pines. 
'" 
.\ 
-., 
,.. 
- 
,f} 
" 
." 
"'{. 
 
'- 
<. 
\ 
49. Collybia acervata, p. 215, grows in bundles under conifers. 
, 
50. Amanita phalloides (Death Cap), p. 269; don't expect this deadly species 
to be as green and pristine as these perfect specimens! 
b 
- -s- 
,- 
" ,,( 
" 
t 
 1 I 
 ::- 
<  
/ " 
I . 
\ t' 
\ \ i: .\ 
 ., 
1  .,., 
- . - \ 
" l \ "'" .. I. ; 
"- \ I 
i .. 
)i ');. 
, j. 
. . 
"- .\ 
..\ .... 
"\1." 
 I II 
 :'JI 
- 
I"I' 
. 
, 
, 
-.... 
,.. 
51. Entoloma madidum, p.243. 
52. Leptonia carnea, 
p. 250, is dark blue 
and often iridescent. 
\ 
 
':. 
0 0 <" 
 
- \ 
\ 
\ 
t 
\ . 
, :.... 
, . ....- 
.. . 
- , .,: 
t.. 
54. Amanita baccata (Sand 
Amanita), p. 273. 
53. Amanita virosa (Destroying Angel) 
(see comments under A. ocreata, 
p. 271). 
55. Amanita magniverrucata, p. 274, has exaggerated warts on the cap 
 
o .. \,-'- 
.f ./ T" i I 
I 
i 
1\, 
..., · J 
r , 
\ \ I:II 
.". , 1:1 1 1 
\ I 
" II 
 
',. 
- , 
-- 
. ..... - " 
...:, *---. 
. \.- '.:'  · "' 
. 
. . 
." I - 
I.. 
....;;;. 
 
- , 
 , 
\ 
- 
.. 
,  ..'. . 
\ . 
- -"V 
. . - .' 't 
, . 
;": #"!;:, . 
56. Amanita aspera (also called A. francheti), p. 278; cap color ranges from 
bright yellow to dark brown. 
 
.....:.. 
" 
...." 
" 
i£....... 
 
57. Banana slugs (see p. 29) 
prefer mushrooms to almost 
anything but other banana 
slugs. In this stage they are 
commonly called "Poor 
Man's Peaches." 
... 
'''.1 
'.""'- 
CD 
0.. 
ro 
:r: 
c::: 
ro 
o 
.. 
.:.... 
58. The yellow-capped variety of Amanita 
muscaria (Fly Agaric), p. 282. 
,I 
.;...' 
........ . 
,""", 
--.... \ 
., - 
.. .. 
. . 
.... 
.,.  
. . -- . 
.. . 
.' 
,. 
, 
............ A 
\. 
Co 
:l :: 
 4 ..  
,. c., 
, '.;:-.....'-. . ;.. .. .  
 ". '... -- .... : ,. 
......  
 .. ..'1..... 
I 
I 
,  
.... 
 
-/ 
, 
.- 
.' , 
_...; 
. .-.' 
 .... ., , 
.. .. 
.,: ,\ 
. 
. .' 
. " " 
- ,. 
.. ., 
. \ 
.-. 
  
 
. 
. ... 
59. Amanita muscaria (Fly Agaric), p, 282; the red-capped variety. 
\ 
" 
'- 
, 
\ 
. , 
, 
._1* 
... 
- --- 
, 
.. \ 
, .'.\ 
. " 
. .  '- 
. .. 
, , 
60. Amanita caesarea group (Caesar's Amanita), 
p. 284, has bright yellow to yellow-orange gills. 
61. Amanita calyptrata (=A. calptroderma or Coccoli, Coccora), p. 284. 
-'. I!{- 
:. 
. ."'- 
- L. .. . .., 
.?:. -. -.., - r''-:::.... _ 
.. -L -.. ..-\: 
. ,  - . - .. t ..\ . 
- ""'t- - -\  
-  . '. :.  
.- 
" 
f.:/> « 
J - 
4 
"'. 
,..- .... 
1 _  "" I 
........ 
.,. 
. .i' 
.It !"-: 
'"-- 
-... 
..... 
;6\ 
. ..f' 
:.:.:.'. 
T' iJ' 
. . 
..". ..., 
/'I 
Ti{'\. 
..' 
,.....!"'\..: -t 
.- '. '. 
.:. ":F;;,..j:,:..... 
. . : . , '. ,q- 
. 't;:.\ 
' :::. "l:._  
l 
 . 
/:;r. .  . 
::. \ "!. -..c ii . "' . 
- .- ... .:..; -" 
. .t>-:-. 
-,. .. 
J,_: 
63. Amamta calyptrata, 
p. 284; the winter-spring 
form with a pale yellow to 
whitish cap. 
..- ..., 
-, . 
-- 
. '.i':- 
. "". -.. 
..\i'" -. '""'-" 
" 
" . 
.... 
.'\ 
" /¥. .. 
, . 
. 11. 
. .,. 
. -1' .: - 
. '. 
. :- ";. \i 
.. 
.. 
." 
: :.-4- 
..- .1 
62. Amanita calyptrata, 
p. 284; the dark-capped 
(fall) form. 
... 
., 
.\ 
- ../ 
.....",. -. 
':"'4 . 
.'... of, 't- 
. I 'f' .... 
'- 
64. Amanita velosa (Springtime Amanita), p. 286, often grows 
at the edges of meadows when spring wildflowers are in bloom. 
,-. 
 
'--. 
"'\Ij- 
\ '.:d'- 
. y. . 
.... ," 
\ 
. "'- 
...t 
"'t 
..... 
. 
.' I " 
\ 
 . 
'. 
","\ - 
\ . ).  \ 
'f . 
\ \. . 
-r 'It 
. J 
.-\ 
,v. 
'--..... . 
 
.!\ ,,", 
". 
.... 
 '-- 
.-' 
 
'" 
 
.-l 
 
\ - 
 I 't-\'! 
d . i' 
. 
... 
,:-  
. 
- 
"'.' 
, 
. 
 
\ 
.,\, 
. " 
u"j." .Y' 
y ',.. ., 
.,. 
.........w 
":I,'" 
 
-, 
' 
'- - 
,-. -' ,- ... ..,,- 
.:;:';<-1 ; r__ 
..,t;w-  ':.r"¥'., 
-.. '\- .'" -..,... 
'..c<>; ,'0"( 
'-1f"::.': 
3:... 
\ ./ 
. -:.t 
5- 
--2: 
,\ 
r . 
"..: \..1 . . 
, 
\'/ 
1\ 
, . 
 - 
-. 
T f .\: 
;. J. 
r  -,'. : ,:<' . '., ! 
:\;.): - ''\ . 
-  ....- 
. \\. 
- 1-" - 
T. 
- 
 - 
-......... 
, '. '. 
11.. 
65. Amanita pachycolea 
(Western Grisette), 
p.290;young 
specimens with dark 
brown caps. 
;. 
t 
 
 
66. Amanita pachycolea (Western Grisette), 
p. 290; mature specimen with a paler cap. 
67. Close-up of the glutinous veil in 
Limacella illinita, p. 292. 
68. Volvariella speciosa, p. 259, is 
abundant in gardens and cultivated fields. 
- 
... 
;.>- 
. .". . 
J<o. ,. 
;: " 
, :- 
,, . 
\ 
" 
 \ .' 
\. 
\" .,.. 
\; 
....-..... 
.'t;':" 
, . 
" 
'--f 
- 
,.' 
69 Lepiota rachodes (Shaggy Parasol), p. 297. 
70. Lepiota /utea (= Leucocoprinus /uteus), 
p. 302, grows in lawns, gardens, flower pots, 
J 
I 
} 
, 
,I 
'" 
. " 
. 
I 
II, 
I 
.$ 
 
> 
\' ",,", 
\ 
.. 
" 
,  
.,. 
" 
 
....... 
 
....<... 
, 
,. 
71. Agaricus campestris (Meadow Mushroom or Field Mushroom), p. 318. 
72. Agaricus califomicus, p. 327, a mildly poisonous mushroom often 
mistaken for the meadow mushroom 
, 
 
\ 
,,:.. 
 
 
.. 
' 
 . 
)0 
} 
\ 
«. 
,.r' 
 . -  [I 
" -'r' 
-... .;\ 
..... 
(/ I   
.. mll\ \"" 
 -" 
 ., ,.- 
..l:' 
',- 
.. ;. ,..II! #' ,.. 
. 
>.  
::, 
1. :: J .,' 
I' 
:'.  
'" 
-..... 
"" 
". 
.. 
 
., 
73. Agaricus cupreobrunneus (Brown Field Mushroom), p. 319. 
', 
\ 
.; I,- 
.. 
.... . 
, "',. 
, ..,\ 
 
 
...L' 
"I, 
't 'i" 
-.. 
., 
"'. 
. ;. 'I&:.. 
;. 
. 
, I 
74. Agaricus fuscofibrillosus, p. 325, is 
one of several species that "bleed" 
(stain red) when cut 
 
 
75. Agaricus subrutilescens (Wine-Colored Agaricus), 
p. 326; can be slender (as shown here) or robust. 
\ 
, 
 
'" 
..... 
, 
I 
It 
I 
I 
I 
! j 
I' 
:1 
- II 
 I 
Ii 
. . I 
I I 
I I 
.... 
....... 
',..-\ ' 
 
,.. 'iT - 
'A W 
vl ., 
,."t ,t 
.. 
... 
. 
plj. 
: ' r i 
- . 
':h 
... 'I, 
I' 
, ,,1\11 
""'-.. 
\ 
\ 
. 
. '. 
 ", !' 
, 
'l. 
I 
-( 
/' /, 
<. 
I .... 
.I \ 
\ '\' 
\  ) 
 
-."'" 
r 1 
.r \ 
... 
...-.... 
76. Agaricus praeclaresquamosus (=A. meleagris), p. 329; poisonous to many 
people. 
77. Agaricus augustus (The Prince), p. 337; it is also shown on the front cover. 
.- 
-\ 
. lilt -_-",,- -:.-14:::;::" -. . 
. ......:-......- ......:- -... 
......-... . ( 
.., ·  ,,-. .. .,J 
":,1  .: ..;;.... 
..... = '.. 
.. ... 
-I 
" "-.. '\ . 
......... ".. 
\- 
, 
. . 
.I(-" -- -_... 
. ').; ';....... ... 
', '-:;"': .. 
"t.-'" - 
 "'-',  
. ..... 
"' 
-:. 
.. 
.... ......... i- 
y 
..J. 
-'- 
.... 
-- 
.. 
.. 
. 
.....--..... 
 ... 
" ..... 
....; 
. 
,. 
'. ,.......::.-:....:.r 
".,J ..,q.;-, ":...-... r.:::-.,.  . 
...:....,. '-....$ 
· .. ...... l ":"'- :I.'....... 
14 ,." '" '" 
"...: :: c. .,.... ......." 
....... .. : .... 
-... 't  .';., :... ' . 1Ii 
. .,. ... .....  - 
'- .' .. 
... 
. 
... 
..... 
io 
..; 
. . 
. .. 
...... 
,- 
::4:f.: - .;:.J . 
. ".J. -:. .e. 
. ': 
_ _:.y.:  .f". . 
.... 
<:- 
- J. 
'. ,.1: -, 
.".  -: . 
.1 
c:-...... 
..... 
" 
 t -... 
r  
4 
1" 
,. 
1 
... 
lit 
'-" 
. 
. <. " 
'1 "'': 
78. Agaricus osecanus group (Giant Horse Mushroom), p. 333, differs 
microsopically from the better known A. arvensis. 
79. A Greedy Person (see p. 27) laden with giant horse mushrooms 
(Agaricus osecanus group, p. 333). Turn to next page to see what happens 
to Greedy People. 
'-: ... '--1."- 
, 
' 
bf' (  I ' 1 
'.  -..:..: 
,  
\ . 
.[' 
\'"\.1 
 \;t\G ' 
' 
. KEEr.I1 :  l 
? r I,- 
T;?ES Y 
C 
.' 
--,- 
\. 
"(". 
 ----- --- 
1 
., ;....:. 
qz 
r - , 
 ' ::: "' "., 
-  I - " 
.- --- "- 
, ----=:;--" - .....  
, 
 " ' - \ \'  
.  - - 
 ,.'. 
,. 
- I 
... 
.. 
. ""- \. 
.< 
..- \ 
. 
.  
 
.., 
80. Crack in the soil caused by 
Agaricus bitorquis (= A. 
rodmani), p. 321, a delicious 
edible mushroom that often 
grows underground. This picture 
is dedicated to those purists 
who insist that mushrooms must 
be photographed exactly as 
they occur in nature. 
81. What happens to Greedy People (see p. 27 
and Color Plate 79). 
,<r- 
_,... oL. 
.. 
" 
., 
'\ 
.. 
Ie 
1(E,lJ 
00 i I 
ES I 
\ 
[' 
 "*-. 
Ail-> 
"""- 
)\ 
" 
\ 4 
. V 
- C?) J'  
. 
 ' 
 
, 
.., 
-. 
- , 
.... 
., 
., 
 
-J 
4t- 
, 
 
!!JOIooooo---. 
 "1 
(\" 
, l 
84. A long-stemmed 
form of Endoptychum 
depressum, p. 730; it looks 
like an Agaricus but lacks 
gills. 
85. Coprinus comatus 
(Shaggy Mane), p. 345. 
 
. "  
..ir . <# 
,.. .. .. 
- - . r" 
..  .;I 
'.  .t 
-...... 
'J:_ 
.; 
\. 
. . 
"f': " 
1<; 
\ 
" 
J!I! . . 
'\ 
, 
.. "-,j" 
. , 
.....-  
----- 
" ",.c. 
..: . ff: 
......., 
l :. 
.-. 
f '. . 
? 
-" .' '1., (, 
 .' 
82. Agaricus subrufescens 
(Almond Mushroom), 
p. 336; smells and tastes 
like almond extract. 
, 
83. Panaeolus solidipes 
(= P. phalaenarum), 
p.355. 
,  
"- .J  
.. 
. ;  """ 
., ... 
 
.. -..I "\. 
\ . 
, - 
. ," 
...110 "\ 
t, 't \ , 
"" ,., 
\ , 
t 
... 
.- .' 
. 
. '. 
....... 
.-" 
. 
'/ 
- \. 
---..... 
\ 
-' 
,I' - 
: I 
-1.1:. 
\   
;  
I' j s\ 
. 
" 
r. 
..,,; 
1 
 
-') - 
" 
- 
86. Coprinus lagopus group, 
p.350. 
i.. 
87. Coprinus plicatilis, p. 352; the 
cap is oval when younger. 
 
'I' 
. --- 
- 
fI. :. 
, 
.».:. . 
; 
.. 
 
\ 
\1 
.... I  
'f\. 
....', , 
" 
 
, , '.  
.,\ 
! I 
,\ 
;. A 
,.. 
. \ 
., I' 
,. 
.. ...... 
f" 
" 
,\ 
88. Psilocybe cyanescens, p. 371, stains blue when bruised. 
t 
, 
 
. . 
.. 
\  , 
'. 
. , 
 
 ,.- 
.., 
. , 
\ 
. . , 
, 
. . 
89. Stropharia ambigua (Questionable Stropharia), p. 377. 
...J. -.  
. ... 
.... -:- ';.,,", 
)10 , 
\ 
-; .,. ., 
.  l {, : 
. I 
   
. 
..l. 
,',i 
._, '. I 
I ' . 
 ". 
 
".. 
.. 
91. Stropharia aeruginosa 
(Blue-Green Stropharia), 
p.380. 
, 
, 
\ 
90. Stropharia kauffmanii, 
p.380. 
. . 
'. . 
"' - 
:- 
....' --/. 
...' 
. 
\ .... 
. 
\ 
. 
..':..\: 
. 
f', 
. 
 
 
, 
ijl 
I 
{...;..... . 
I 
I 
I' 
'I 
I 
.... 
,\'\'  
- _ I 
- '  : 
I/! 
I 
I 
II 
 
  
- - 
- 
'\ 
......---- --- 
./ 
" 
--  
92. Naematoloma fasciculare (Sulfur Tuft), p. 382. 
93. Naematoloma aurantiaca, p. 382. 
\ 
-- 
'---- 
'- 
1\ 
- 
.......... 
--- 
_? f 
 ..-')- 
.. 
, 
-- 
t 
;;:0... 
. ., 
'- 
" 
.... 
.. 
· r 
 
 
.. 
".  .. ,. 
'" .. .;.. 
. 't: .. ... " 
- 
,'" 
 .. 
... - 
-   
:w _ . 
.. ;..-: ) 
 
",,':i. 
If 
'.... 
...... 
" 
 
95. Pho/iota aurivella group (Golden 
Pholiota), p. 390; the caps are very 
slimy when wet. 
._.;... .." 
..- 
-. 
\ . 
.# 
J; 
! 
.. 
" .. 
1 
-. 
 
'14 
"'&::lOj$ _ 
...;.... l::;;' . 
.... ... __...4.... .1... .1t 
f .:._"...... 
...... ..1 
;:' -.. 
'i:. 
'tL, :. 
_..... ... "'"" 
...-: 
:. or. 
'..... 
\ ,. 
>f_}\,'- 
...- 
.. 
', . 
... 
. :t. l' 
,- .2 
94. Naucoria vinicolor, 
p. 404, a rare mushroom. 
I _ ","" ..... .. 
'.,"j/t;);.=4> 
...-  1.r 
"'-'.'",  
.. ...:.... ".;:.:}  1; J 
...I/r;;.,... .:.- ;-rlJ 4 
'10...'-  it.t! ... 
v ....   
$ 
-.. -.. - .. 
..., ." 
 . .:.-;;;: 
" 
,.. . -. 
\... -:':'=-Ij . 
-.,. ' / 
.::  ....  I./.; . 
.. 4 oJ" 
...." . -.... 
. 
....z: *  
.,. .. .-... ,4 
.. ":-- ) 
/ 
96. Pholiota squarrosa (Scaly Pholiota), p. 389. 
- 
. ' . '" 
 
( 
\ 
,I 
I 
 ...... 
" \ 
\ - - 
\\Iif (f 
\ ' 
l' 
L 
! "\ '- 
, 
.... . .-.. . 
'. 
. l' I 
- 
) 
..; .. 
-- 
.. 
97. Pho/iota squarrosa (Scaly Pholiota). p. 389. 
... . 
I 
.. 
. 
''1' -, " 
.' 
 I 
 
I 
'f#J'. ";:a:...}.::::,,:'- - 
 . 
::.:....;:......  .i.:. :... 
..J;.:_-... ::' ;.: 
{{t:i:{:$i . 
 
...:. ." -' 
_.i-:., _.. /-:: 
.::.. 
. -. 
"- 
-.;.- 
.', ",,"';::-- 
- i".a 
-. .)::t1.:. ._ 
.  ;:-:.-:; . 
..:.::" ,-,,: 
.--.:.:.:.-.- 
-, -;.:: :: 
. -s. 
:... 
'.,"-::.. 
...:.... 
: ::- 
'{;;;f{." '.' 
. - 
 
 
. 
 
. . 
"';". 
..;::. - 
.. .. .. 
:1:.: 
;::"- -. 
..; . 
'. . 
". . 
,..- . 
;:.. 
.}; ; 
of' . 
. , 
....-'1. 
.......... 
.'- 
.. . .":". ...., 
... .. 
'" 
, . 
'.; .  
98. Pho/iota squarrosoides (see comments under P. squarrosa, 
p. 389); youngsters are much scalier than these mature specimens 
... 
""- 
-*"v 
:. i!( 
 
#.. 
....:. \ 
L - 
.. -"l;' 
- . , 
99. Gymnopilus spectabilis group, p. 410. The bark has been 
stripped away to show the base of the cluster; it is not 
normal for the caps to be so misshapen. 
100. Phaeocollybia californica, p. 415, grows in troops or loose bundles. 
.. 
II. ..... 
. 
.. 
., 
 
- . 
, 
, 
 
.. 
9"" 
"""" . 
- .i' . 
: ). 
. . 
.. ,); 
.e..,.. 
J 
... 
,.;:. 
.\. 
 
 
", 
._ >.. '4} .. , ,i 
\. 
I 
.\ .- 
1 
1:.. 
 
," 
" 
JJL --t.' 
. - -, ,. 
 .\\ 
_. 
"7 
:... " 
'.' 
/ 
...; 
,".A:. .- 
.... 
.A 
.  
'" 
t f':;' .' 
/', 
......... 
-- ,; ':.- 
\ 
\ " t 
.  .' J2,J . 
[' -,{. i \ ":'" 
, Yi. 'I '.' . 
'- . , j' '- 
, ,. '  \ " ..' " ......." '. 
, . ./'-;-.' 
j,.,. '. f  '. ''/: 
- -t., .. - , 
". 
.  \. .J,{t   
, ,p - 
:.. i--- ...:flC- . 
...., - . 
"""'/ 
';'\1' 
\ "'. 
:_>. 
\ . .. 
'-'. 
',:,..\. 
\\-,- 
-f". 
 
,ro.. 
-: .. .. t' 
\ .... ' '. h,. 
I '>....+, -'" ..... \, 
'\._. .  I 
; 
II 
J 
'" -'. 
I 
" . 
......, 
., 
;./ 
. '.}f" 
. ::".- , '\}f'- 
\;  ',:.. ..:' ,:', ....: .1... 
, \.. \ 
:, '/I 
- '1{L1 
  
)t' \.I " ,.- 
\::.. : . '1. _ '::.' 
..... . \. '. 
101. Rozites caperata 
(Gypsy Mushroom), 
p. 412; note wrinkled 
cap. 
 
J 
,/ 
, 
102. Agrocybe praecox group, p. 469. 
\. --'- 
, \ 
-, 
 
... 
\ 
," 
" 
/" 
, 
-" 
" 
J 
"" 
. \ 
... 
.:. 
y: , 
, 
- .... 
 9 
\\\1 
I 
, "" 
. I, 
 
103. Close-up of the collapsed 
cortina (cobwebby veil) of a 
Cortinarius (p. 417); the 
rusty-brown color is caused by a 
coating of spores. 
\ 
104. Cortinarius 
co/linitus group. 
p. 431; the cap is 
slimy when wet. 
}., 
"I 
.... 
105. A young Cortinarius cedretorum (p. 439), 
sliced in half to show the cobwebby veil or 
cortina. 
J 
 ," 
\... . 
1'(' ,-' , 
\. 
. 
 - 
< 
'- 
or : 
.,. '", 't: 
..'  ''" 
.. " ,F ( ' 
Jo. I. . ", . .. 
: . -": t:. . 
"r 
 'i 
. 4:' 
 .' 
'.: 
.' , 
, : "" 
106. Cortinarius traganus, p. 447, a common conifer-lover. 
, .e'f.....  .."":. ';;:,', -t::.r. .';" ...'" ': 'i 
f..f ",').,.:t . ':n-' .....:;;:7. '....., 
i; r, "" f ' '.- "'r;'  -" ':r': 1'( 
.1' .: .,.....:'9 :'IT. .,-- --r.J"' 
. " . . \'.,." ,...t.. t"'-i7  ...:3... oF' . ..... 
..... _,...,. ¥ .... .. ., r.,. .,' 
.< ;A . "':'--'1l ."" )IP¥;j...... -: . 
. ... - .  'T1_p,:-" .. 
...:! ":" - ....I;- ..\..__.-'Fi;!oii.::"It::.'TJ '., ...t:x_{If-. 
. _,-,:,> '!  . ,""'i- ..-..,. , -. . .p.7; 
. ';'" .....  .... ..  .; ?......-: f"'- 
,. .: '..... ;..;.'' 'r,i. 
, .... -... " . . --" ...;.':i:ii='-:-::-;;..-:'S _-M.T 
. . f'"_  :m "f,fTl; .. I'.c.". --S;" . 
. tT -hL1-,--_.---.. .'  - f!'- .. " .....,..... . 
 "'t''!i , '. - .. 1'Y-::,.... 
...  ..If ; s_ .:....1:- !ii:-r..;.. 
, '4f.  '!-.:...__ -"7'"  " ,....."" '.{""."" 
'...r ...." ,""!._ :1fi=-:'" .:'..,..... . ...;..';;'.,r; 
- .... :So.t.....:e.. ''''".r'-':. --;0..,...._... ,.",.......-. . 
.""",.....;.'" . . .. '"""".. #.;-:.-,- .....:l: -... 
"'_." '- .:;:.. ..'..: 'T_"' ; --:p' 
. -':....' .;p..... :;':::.JItF .'? ....... 
.:............ ...  ...:............--;;..-..:... 
'--' -. . '("'.,. -. ... . ......  . .:.."":X.: " ..,. . 
4 J. . .- , L  .. ....: ',. 
 '-. '"'-'''- -";":..-- 
:>:7...rf.' .;.t1-:!   
::..-. . '""'"""I. !!;C: "":<.. - - Z' 
---- _  ;::7::. .3-i .1!. 
:t',. .. __ .... --..-., ...... '" 
.£;;  . - ;i1 , l _ :' _  , ,';-  
. .,.   .......""'.;; -- ---'  .. 
'":'; .. .... :t'..:,........: . 
 ......':>....: ,'."':- "'-\0... 
o _;.... ...,- ..:.. .4\' .' -- 
.. . .  .....;..-' -..-. .,..,.. 
- .' - c.'. - -.:::  
.. 
-:::. 
.... 
II 
107. Little Brown Mushrooms 
("LBM's"), p. 32, on a wet stump. 
... - 
' 
. 
... '!!:' 
...... 
" . 
, 
-, -. 
\ 
...:. ,. 
t; 
."" '> . 
. \ 4..::--:" 
 \J'. 
'.A\.' 
......... 
,.... . ": 
.. "," 
. .:,.: 
,. 
' 
\", 
.... 
t, 
1. 
'q t 
- 4,;-; '-, 
... 
.. 
 
, 
F . 
... 
- 
.... 
)0.. 
-'.. 
_, i" ,;- 
..:  .. .. 
'" 
:-. 
---- . ..., 
. ) 
'. 
" - 
....... 
 
 
 
v. 
"" ."' 
. "'J. 
'w- :"! 
. . 
 
.... 
'. 
....-; . 
. . 
109. Cortinarius violaceus, p. 446, is deep purple to nearly black. 
, , . 
::.: :-.. .III 
 
"\' r 
S 
----=..:: 
.?- 
 
 
. 
 
'. .,:o'i/i; 
;.. .  
 _ v 
· h  
.,. ........ 
.... 
1-:" 
f.f..;,. . 
, .......; 
. .:::- 
- 
 . 
. \ 
" 
.- . 
" 
108. Cortinarius squamulosus, 
p. 445; note the bulbous base. 
--.:..:.. 
c; 
'1J" ... 
,j 
: 
..... 
.-it 
.  
')r, 
" 
... 
'. 
, 
"'- \ 
" 
.'- 
'\ 
\ 
.. 
 
.:""."\. 
,: 
\ 
III :. . 
..." : 
\.  
J 
, 
( 
III \ 
1\ 
 
I 
':1 
I 
- 
110. Close-up of the forked gills of Hygrophoropsis 
aurantiaca (False Chanterelle), p. 479. 
 I 
111. Phylloporus rhodoxanthus (Gilled Bolete), p. 480; the 
gills often stain blue or greenish when bruised. 
. 
 
..;. 
} .. 
I 
I I 
, 
. - 
- . 
\ 
. \ 
'" 
:11 
I 
--.. 
-- 
" ' " 
.... 
 
, -, 
 
" 1 
,\ 
, 
. \ 
 
I, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. 
III 
I 
A. 
-!:--  j' "'" 
\ J "- 
{ \ 
'- .:, 
,{ . 
.. 
'\ 
 
" 
112. Gomphidius subroseus (Rosy Gomphidius), p. 483, is 
associated with Douglas-fir. 
\" 
... 
", 
'.':) 
I' 
. 
( "I  
 
t.../ 
,. . 
'J 
. 
'i '; 
.(- 
r 
-( 
. ....,1 ,/ 
:\ c "t,- J/il\... . Y 
. __  -, '\ _. r :4  
\,"t; ..... \..... ...........  ,.:; 
\ ' .,.... "  .: ..... '- - ...  .",,\ . 
"',.\,' , . .. .. ,- -I:,.. .\; J ,/9',' >J::... ' 
'\., ' - ": .Y',\1 - _",f. . r .,4..; 
..... ,1'1\ ,..,I.' _",.':  \=...... . '1"...." 
, " r ,..\: -. ':.-' ... . ";: _'-' ," 
I ' 
f \ 
'A. I \ \ 
,\) \-\ 
"" ''\"'}\ 
'.' ,; 
, '.., 
113. Chroogomphus vinic%r (Pine Spike), p. 485; cap 
ranges from grayish to orangish to wine-colored or reddish- 
brown. 
. ',,",, :" 
\. 
- ',,\ 
." _ I,  
j 
" \' 
" 
\ ,." 
,r . 
i.1. 
:,;..-' 
-'. 
.'., ' 
'- 
114. Suil/us pungens (Pungent 
Slippery Jack), p. 503, grows undl 
pine, often with pine spikes. 
"". 
,. ""- , 
\ ... 
." 
.., -- 
\ 
.' 
'. 
. 
"'0; 
115. Suillus brevipes (Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack), p. 501. 
116. Suillus sibiricus (Siberian Slippery Jack), p. 498. 
.. 
- 
-- 
 
.. . 
," 
.. 
\ 
. . 
 ..- 
--- 
i- ... - .. 
. 
-4:-. " 
!i) . .. 
".r...l' 
, 
-.". 'X'. 
4: 
.,.¥':" 
'.} .' 
'. 
, 
..:. 
, ,' 
, 
..:), 
\ 
I...' .-\ 
 
- 
, 
.:...y 
\"" 
-:--, , ./ 
- " 
". 
,\ '......., .  "\ 
'" 
t \ 
:. . . 
..., 
 
 . 
" . 
" 
\" 
f' 
 
- 
.... 
 
'.. 
I 
, " 
I. j ., 
.l.x' 
',;/-,>,; (. 
..J'''''' ..,- 
\. , 
, 
117. Suillus ponderosus 
(see comments under 
S. caeru/escens, p. 496). 
.'- 
1 .1 . 
. " \ .' 
., -0:;.' 'J. ()..' 
.. " ,\ 
1'\\ ., \  .  .' 
.--" " 
.. 
"- 
..: \ 
" 
.' , 
. 
..... 
.'" 
J.,t 
r-.,; 
\ 
.....- 
, , 
\ t 
'i 
118. Suillus /uteus 
(Slippery Jack), 
p.500. 
.).0. .' ... 
\ 
"- 
. l 
..:--. 
........... 
,<. 
. .., 4g 
. , . 
- J.  j  
=:- 
/j:' . '. 
. ... - 
i . C\ 
.  . .1. 
"- .\ \. . 
. .; ""'r" 
,\ r .... 
I 'C?' .....' 
i l , '. .....---- 
t 
II ., -. 
(.' , - , 
\Ik,  .. ,  I.", 
.. \. I 
I .. " I  
,.. - 
 .\ I; \. ' 
I. . . r:.... 
119. Suil/us fuscotomentosus (Poor Man's 
Slippery Jack), p. 504. 
120. Close-up of the glandular-dotted stem 
of Suil/us fuscotomentosus, p. 504. 
I 
:ff 
. ),': 
'j 
f . 
" 
""" 
 
- 
1- :'./, ,\ 
 -....\ I 
,"",, . 
.. - ..""'..........1..",' 
. t: . 
.,... 
\ 
.... 
. . 
,i- 
. . 
4 'i 
\ 
. . 
!. 
. 
. 
': 
. '( 
/: . :. : 
-;;: 
I.,. . 
. ),"J/ 
_.' 
---- 
-III 
'. " 
1\-'  
,,:.. "\ 
-- " \ 
.'\ H)o . 
(\   
i.. \. 
'. 
.. 
. ........ 
.(  
,.. 
.: oj . :1" 
 .. 
" 
. .. 
121. Suillus subolivaceus (Slippery Jill), p. 499. 
....' 
\ '_ III 
 
" 
"'i 
"/ 
--.. 
, \ ,( 
(" 
'" 
,  
. ,... 
y \ 
--...; . 
t 
122. Suil/us cavipes, p. 494, is common under larch; note hollow stem. 
' 
 
-\ 
\t, 
'.i I 
t1-l 
 
 
1  
\ 
 
I.'m'.r., 
".JI:.il . " ... 
,-........-.-,  . 
\ '. .;.,.. 
'; ,-' . 
. '\ 
:;(1 
123. Fuscoboletinus 
ochraceoroseus 
(Rosy Larch 
Bolete), p. 506, 
ma y be hard to 
pronounce but is 
easy to see. 
3 
- "." 
" .,;.... 
.  .. "- 
. IJ,. - 
.. \ 
. . .',-.' 
:t 
 
;r::4" 
r}::' ..); 
\. 
-' 
'- ( - 
\\ ,> 
\'''\ 
-v- 
;" 
"'I 
i . 
 j' 
....:, \ f, 
,' \ 
'1' \ 
7  11\ :. \ 
'. ' \ '" ,.':, 
.-.:: 
-, - 
."f .../ 
."'" . 
- 
---- 
. \ 
"- 
..I 'f" 
. ..;.: 
.. %'. 
<t - 
........ .,,:'-:. 
 . 
'" 
-,:!.. - - ' - "'. - 
"i- " " c 
-, ., 
.......-- 
'- 
. . 
 II : r 
{ 
'.. ' 
- .. -'. ,J.f- 
.'  
-. 
 
'\. 
.... 
'"L'( 
? 
.  
. ., 
-:. ,'w-:- , 
. " 
.  
'\ . 
125. Boletellus 
russellii, p. 509, has 
a long jagged stalk. 
, "'.... 
124. Suillus lakei, p. 495. is common under Douglas-fir. 
126. Fuscoboletinus spectabilis (Bog Bolete) (see key to Fuscoboletinus on p. 506). 
,. 
, 
.. 
......\. 
,,\ ... 
'oj 
... 
.' 
f 
 
I 
'0, 
#... 
.... - / 
"'\ f. 
. 
.....-  ...... 
 fn 
.'..  
,. 
'" 
--  
- 
"- 
'.. 
'\. 
/ 
;-.. 
 
; 
 
, ... 
t I .... 
"""'t' 
.......... 
." " II 
- 
, , 
. J .:.. .... .  
"'.-:- 
.r=' ' 
i". 
.---' I \ t'" 
\ 1"\1 
, 
. '.' 
, \ ',,' t\ 
I .'" , 
I 1 ,"i 
,,'./ :j\ ,:1 j  ':'\\\ \ 
! ' 1 'I,  
I 
,. .:'..5. 
i ,... 
- , 
. 
wit, A .. 
. ..., 
. .J.. 
"' . 
:.:.. .. 
" : 
., 
.. 
7\  '. . 
. . 
 ) . ". \. 
'\ 1 
 . 
.--.-- 
-,.. 
...., ...... 
1$  
'\ 
. .... '" '.. 
.. 
127. Boletus mirabilis, p. 521; a mature 
specimen growing on a buried hemlock log. 
128. Boletus zelleri, p. 518. 
 "- 
\ .' 
.1.. 
.' \ 
 
. ) 
.- 
,'" . -- 
, ,"/ 
t 
f 
I.. "... 
, 
, , .), 
.\ 
129. Boletus mirabilis, p. 521; this specimen 
is younger and darker-capped than #127. 
r 
-.... ,;>... 
\ 
" 
" 
." 
- , 
-{, 
'0. 
-' . 
'to.: r. : 
) , 
".  
-- 
n' 
*"- , 
- ,-; .!!r 
 .. 
, ;\ 
.  I 
ijl 
!; 
./&. ""..... 
 
130. Boletus rubripes (Red-Stemmed Bitter Bolete), p. 524; 
young specimens 
::- 
': 
./ 10'. I' 
. 
.,. .6:" 
- " 
. 
... 
 
\k. 
J'- 
- 
\.1 
, 
. 
,... 
'. - /-. , 
:}. <'\.. 
v 
. ' 
. , \ 
t . 
I 
JJ 
 
131. Boletus flaviporus, p. 522. Pores are brilliant yellow-this 
photograph does not do them justice! 
132. Boletus dryophilus, 
p. 520, is often shorter and 
stouter than shown here. 
.. '- 
.\FI 
133. Boletus regius (Red-Capped Butter Bolete), 
p. 526; unusually small specimens. 
lit.. - 
.. 
\,\ 
/ \" 
 
, ,. 
, 
\' 
"'1' 
. .-:: 
. \<;-"':, 
.- 
, 
... .t .,.- 
... 'i:::. 
_....' ..- '..:':,o 
-:t": ..; 
" . \  
-.: \.....  
...._', 1  
'\ 
\ . 
.". \ 
... 
) 
 
'- ! 
' 
" 
" 
.t 
\, 
.. \ . 
- '"", 
... 
( 
.. 
..... 
- , 
  
\l 
 
l' . 
'I. 
>1. 
.; 
 
....... 
,\ 
\ 
'- . 
..v- 
. - 
_. 
\J \ ' .r;. < 
"'. 
"1' "'- 
"- 
j .,;- 
 
" '-. 
"r '" 
\ 
'" );"') 
\ 
134. Boletus appendiculatus (Butter Bolete), p. 525; pores 
normally stain blue when bruised. 
... " \ d 
I '. . 
!JI. 
 
'i.. 
..- 
\ 
'1 
135. Boletus erythropus, p. 526, 
is one of many boletes that stain 
blue when cut open. 
...- 
136. Boletus subvelutipes (see comments 
under B. erythropus, p. 526). 
..... .... ... 
'J"< 
. ':"1. 
? 
.1. 
 
........ 
. 
'.".. 
.. 
"t...".. 
....,.---- .. 
-==-" 
:::..", 
 
... 
. 
.1"f" \ 
y 
r 
\- 
. 
., . I 
. ,;):' I 
,U. 
" 
........ 4-' 
I' 
r. 
-  ", 
" 
,.,it'.. 
\.. 
.  
"\.. 
.\ 
.;;..... 
.,\..\ 
lor .  '';;' . " . 
" ,.' 
. - "\i a', 
. , \\ 
':.. 
--.... 
 
:"" 
\..., ., 
 ........J 
. "'-t' 
, 
; 
 
.' ". 
. ,\ 
J' 
 
\. 
j 
- 
( 
".  
....  .:» 
. -.... ..' 
.' 
" 
) 
\ . 'i 
\." 
-... 
, 
\.. 
., 
-,. 
137. Boletus satanas (Satan's Bolete), p. 527, a poisonous and bulbous oak-lover. 
I" \ ,..-.,' - - 'I 
'-':'\ .W!'';1!iiS.;'. , I' 
..=-- ..  '" 
; :"- - .- \ ,\ ." 
I " " 
1   
 ...o\,-.. 
;" ". 
I 
i 
, "...- 
.., - \ 
I. (- ,....: -.. '::", .A 
,.........  
'W!  -- - -. 
138. Boletus haematinus 
(see comments under 
B. pulcherrimus, 
p. 528). 
\ 
.' , 
, 
./ 
" 
. . 
i ' " 
... 
" 
.111) '. 
"1"'\ 1 
1 ,. 
, 
,... I 
.f.!: 
''t 
. 
 
- 
.\- 
" 
}- 
 
... 
1 ,."' .r 
. \( 
\-- 
139. Boletus frostii, p. 528; note the red 
cap and netted stalk. 
\ 
,\ 
""  
", \/ ) -' 
I .. 
, /',: . 
IV I' 
 
/ 
,'" "' 
\, .-. 
1 
',1 
\ 
I 
\ /I 
.... 
\ \ 
;:¥ 
:,. ",".  
<:;\1 
\ 
. 
\\ 
i 
Lt 
4 
. [\. 
\ 
"" 
'fu.-= 
,-'-': 
", . 
, 
.\' 
" 
140. Boletus aereus (Queen Bolete), p. 531. Cap is dark brown 
beneath a whitish bloom when young, cinnamon-brown or paler 
in age. 
......... ! J "W . '.  'i'" 
}11'" If. . ,.\.... ,,<£. , I ,.... 
  u. . -. ... .......\ 
',k  :. - -', -.,. t - , 
,).,..,  . 
J. _ 
'  
":- 
) 
\\ 
.... 
;,/ ;- 
\ I 
..I 
;;rll , 
 
, 
, 
, 
: . ....,,. 
.C 
....... 
141 Boletus barrowsii (White King Bolete), p. 529. 
,..... 
....." 
'1 
\ 
.> 
\ tr. 
" ' 
.. 
.  
\ 
, 
 
\. 
" , 
- .. .... 
-... 
\. 
, , . -;... '.,  .  
- 1\ ."'; 
."" Irf..,. 
. '-I-' ,," 
:. . 
\.  
 
. v -::." ;. 
\1 
 \ ' 
r 
. 
 
" ':'" ': '-'.. 
. . . .' 
,. .. .'... 4 I ;, '; "- 
',' ' - 
,. '.: - .  
. {, 
.;' J- 
I ,., 
 
,I 
.-.:.- 
/ 
II 
11 
I 
'\. 
" 
.." 
.. 
. 
\ 
 
... 
". 
" 
'" . 
..  
'" 
, 
, 
142. A basket of Boletus edulis (King Bolete), p. 530. 
"" 
\ 
'- 
143. Boletus edulis (King Bolete), p. 530. This red-capped variety is abundant in 
the Rocky Mountains in late summer when many of the wildflowers bloom. 
- 
.. 
, 
it:. 
\ ""- 
  
"' .. '",' 
... 
-., . " 
, " 
 
,"''It, 
\, 
.... 
, 
'0' \_, 
1\ - 
\ '\ -'- 
"\ .........'.  
J  
 
..... 
- ,\ 
.I ...:: 
I, 
i. 
, 
" 
- 
- 
.. 
,\ 
\ 
it , 
t!,I . j 
. 
 i 
" ..z. 
, 
- 
, "  
144. Boletus edulis (King Bolete), p. 530; the typical brown-capped fonn. 
" 
 
" 
".r:- 
}". 
, , 
\ . 
.' 
,. 
, 
'- .. ';"t' 
. ",... 
...' "'. >f 
..1 
I 
11 
: .1--i" j 
. .,::-: 
 "- .... 11'. 
. ...,') .' 
'.\ . :.f / 
\. '. \  '. 
...' ...-- 
'j . 
" -. 
. \' 
\ i < 
A' . i.J;., 
 - "'"} 
 
f. 
,J' ' 
... -\ .." 
. -' ;.....\ 
:...,.\ ,'; 
.' . 
... . \ 
.. \. 
" .. 
 "1 ' H.., 
't 
'- 
\ 
'- 
\ 
,. 
" 
. . 
: 
'. 
.... . 
145. Leccinum manzanitae 
(Manzanita Bolete), p. 539. 
. l- 
,.' 
 :\...... 
"  ...,.,. 
". ..- 
... 
1 
., 'i;' ". 
t- '1;, '}; 'f  
..   
.y :\\4' 
. . .' 
l 
'I' 
...... ):'1 
- ...; 'j 
y 
... 
-- ., .  
-r- - -. 
I 
I  .. .. 
!"'C .. :",. .., 
.. " 
o' ",-:l .- 
.,. { 
.. 
-t,.. 
,( 
I "" '. i.fif' 
 '"\ 'J..:." ,.}.4"{ 
.' '\" ...t:}'c. 
.. . ." 
, , . 
.. ... ,'& . t ." 
.' .l' _ 
''.!. 
.1.... - '1 l - 
......  '. ' ..../i.. -'?- 
. ..:., -:....:,. 
. . \,:. . . \. "'"" 
,.  '. \.\ ..<!'...\ 
.... 
t ..J. ! :......;';", 
'... '.', . ': 
. , , 
"\.' :...:,. 
.... ,. ". r . 
. '" f .  -(-.,. 
'-;'. 
. ." I';. 
'. 
.....-\ " 
'" \ 
146. Leccinum ponderosum (see comments 
under L. manzanitae, p. 539). 
1\ 
" 
'- 
. ;.  
'....i!. \ 
..tj.....' 
., 
....."'..:., 
..... ,-"".- 
'" 
. ,,,'UI 
. 
. '.,. .f.' 
 ):.> 
"----- 
--- 
147. Leccinum insigne (Aspen Bolete), p. 540. 
{ 
: 
149. Tylopilus 
gracilis (see 
comments under 
T. chromapes, 
p. 533) is a 
common eastern 
bolete. 
" 
......... 
148. Gyroporus castaneus, p. 510, 
has a strong, nutty flavor. 
f 
......... 
" 
 
.. 
, 
'\ 
." 
..............;::: 
I 
 
. \ 
, I 
. ... 
150. Tylopilus felleus (see comments under 
T. indecisus, p. 535), a bitter-tasting eastern bolete. 
" . . 
'- .:':. 
151. Polyporus tuberaster (Stone Fungus), 
p. 563, fruits from an underground "tuber." 
, 
,II  
:I 
..... 
,I 
....;.... . 
, 
. ..."'. 
:\;..,' -  
,'  , 
.," 
: ,\-:/;!: 
"." '?1? 
/,. ; 1": 
.. ,......"L T\ 
..  '. 
, .,. 
;. -. .:....  
";, - 1 
\-"'" 
. 
.- 
 - .......,.,,.. 
.... 
-"':-   -t_ 
i:.- 
:.. ...... .. 
- \ ." ..f? 
'-.. 
, 
 
.- 
it.' 
>" 
.-'" 
. " 
:'\:'.l' I 
'" . 1" } ' I 
-.: '. t \ 'J C,,;. 
.-'"11'\  , 
. . 
.... 
.::. . 
?",i _ ..,., . .. . .."',..,. 
r;', .-.::... _ r, . :-;: 
.. .. ..' 1 
. r.1-  \ '>, .:-. 
 
 
r 
" 
!" 
.., 
... 
'r ;,( : 
. -".. 't;,. 
.. 
g', ..; 
.", 
',/". . 
,. It 
 
tJ: - 
" 
1 . 
..  
.1. :' 
. '.-" 
_"41" 
".' 
. "t;..-.- 
'>S ..;, 
152. Fistulina hepatica (Beefsteak Fungus), p. 553, with banana slugs and 
chinquapin; this is a mature individual. 
..r.. 
'" 
153. Phaeolus schweinitzii, p. 570; young, colorful specimens. 
,,- -, - 
\., 
 ' ... 
,f : 
(- ""'" 
--. 
."'" 
......_ . r-'  I 
, 
'- 
\ 
. ,\ 
" , 
..\. \ 
--..f 
... 
'I '--- 
 
  
\ . '............ 
" 
 ,  
-.,I'._:' 
=-- 
..J 
I 
. ,t' '. · . 
r 
\ 
, 
, 
'-""" 
..... 
\ ' 
.... 
:fI'"'  
t'. ;' 
. 
, f 
., 
, " 
('. 
.  ,; 
.\... 
If'): . 
 
... 
" 
¥ 
 
l' 
'\ 
. 
,," 
," 
;. 
.... 
1 
/" ". '::..t, 
'\ 
r \ "',." 
.' , 
,'. \.'\ 
.- }", , 
'- 
 l - :,- 
154. Laetiporus sulphureus (Sulfur Shelf), p. 572. These 
juicy specimens are just emerging. 
'; 
" . 
r-- 
'\ 
. " 
 ,;,,,- 
 " 
, \ 
\ 
'", 
 
155. Laetiporus sulphureus, 
p. 572. A mature 30-lb. 
cluster. 
 
\ 
'-  
T .. 
' ..,/.... 
:i. 
,. , . t 
\ 
\. 
 "' 
159. Close-up of the 
spines of Hydnum 
imbricatum, p. 619. 
-.. 
'" 
156. Ganoderma tsugae (see comments under 
G. lucidum, p. 577) is one of several varnished 
polypores. 
"!'fA.- 
. 
. ... 
;-'J 
....., 
\ 
._. L. 
............. 
, . 
. 
",,' 
., 
1. !..... 
.\ 
 
 
" 
\\\." 
,c 
 
",. 
i 
. '..1 
. 
157. Hydnellum 
zonatum (see comments 
under H. scrobiculatum, 
p. 627) has a zoned cap 
with spines on the 
underside. 
,- 
'r. 
...... 
'L .' 
X 
 
158. Trametes (= Coriolus) versicolor 
(Turkey Tail), p. 594; zoned caps are 
lined underneath with tiny pores 
 
\ ' 
161. Dentinum (= Hydnum) 
repandum (Hedgehog 
Mushroom), p. 618. In coastal 
California it can often be found 
when the wild irises are in 
bloom. 
A 
I 
-- .. .:.... 
-;, .. .",. 
. 
\. 
-;.. 
., 
.. .'.. 
'--- . 
"-;: 
1 
160. Hydnellum peckii 
(Strawberries and Cream), 
p. 627, exudes red droplets in 
wet weather. 
I.." 
:: 
\ . 
! I 
162. Dentmum repandum (Hedgehog Mushroom), p. 618, has spines 
underneath the cap instead of gills or pores. 
 
 
,  \ ,li":".FI\ '\\\ 
,',,':;)\:i'l\ :;1'\!.\\\\1 ti 
. '11\, t I')\'" 1 ,I' \I\\I;, 
\\"\..'\ j ,I r, l' 
t' 1,:,1 _'" 
?-I\<"£ 
. \..\-\" n"-' 
 ' _.\\:  \\"" :,  .h\" 
, .i , , 1 \"  \\ , 
,'\\\;' -\\ ,,\,,.,I ,' 1\ '\ 
\ '\',,, (' \\I \ : h\\"  \' \\l  1,1\\ \ 
\t Ij', 't\i\ I \  \\  '\' l '   \'\'\'\Y: , \ , .t 
I \,  \\\ \\\ \ \\\\, \ I \' 
· \ \\'  t\, ,\ \  \" 
\ 'I \,' , . i\\1i\\f 
\ \ \ \ \\ 
I ,\, 
I; , 
, 'J 
, . 
 
/ 
, 
", . 
" 
J 
,. 
 
'1 
 .; 
. U. j I 
.. 
\ 
 . 
,\ I' f 
Ii 
o 
>. 
ro 
en 
.D 
CD 
I 
163. Hericium abietis, p. 614, can weigh 50 lbs. or more! 
\ 
"r-. \ 
:\ '4 . , 
1 '. 
 '"  . ilft 
'i 
, ,'- . :. ,ut 
. .&11 . . I. 
\- II 'ft 
f'l ':-' ./ 
 
 . "\ 
. ". 
 j , 'to. : ,. 
- .... 
- . .:! 
.- >.  "', 
 . 
\ .- 
.. 
164. Hericium ramosum, p. 615, is more delicate than the above species. 
f 
.. 
"" 
 \. 
, 
", 
,,' 
"  II '.  - 
. - :.-t  
\ 
.\ 
'), I1J "- 
. r- )'\' 
. t- . 
I \) 
 
. ,. 
;, 
 
.-....7-...-....' 
....,; ... ' f(... 
r "'... 
 
, 
,. 
_,If. III 
'.ff . 
\ \ 
. '.  
:... I ' 
>1':(- .  
..r-... {:. . 
'k1 .. 
..... .. 
-:... 
, 
'11.' . 
d>' 
" 9 
"1. -; 
.... 
.r..(- . 
':' 
" . 
.  "'';;;..k_ 
 ....,..,-..... 
..::-,.. 
":r ". . 
-," 
\ ' 
.>,. ""- 
 ,,-..,..: - 
.:. .;..:"ii,7;. .. 
j .,./;e:.ty;.' ., 
.' --r.'. .". ;,.,;,,,.. \...... 
 i""",1t,;.: !.. 
". .. t 
.... 
 :4  :." 
. -  
:t.},,: 
 : 
.   ;:t"'C( 
 "'1 ... 
I. I; tI\" 
w 
,.: \ 
.,.  .."' 
.\ , 
'\ 
I 
" 
. , . .. 1 
. \. 
165. Hydnum scabrosum group (Bitter Hedgehog), p. 620. 
.  
t 
, , 
, 
!C- 
".... 
\ 
I 
'..... 
..... \ 
, 
\' , 
. 
 
... . .... .. ... 
,  
166 Clavariadelphus truncatus, p. 634, is a conifer-loving club fungus . 
III 
I, -' " 
I  ", 
.... \\ 
II 
II.: . 
.. 
, ,.,-- , 
, 
 
 
L 
.. 
"i.. 
.\ 
.  : ), 
..--. 
'. J.... 
.'' 
>J. - 't... 
. 
168. Ramaria araiospora 
(Red Coral Mushroom), 
p.655. 
. 
'f.' 
 
, 
., " 
" ... 
'-., 
, 
:.. 
167. Clavaria purpurea 
(Purple Fairy Club), p. 637. 
,I 
169. Clavu/ina cinerea (Ashy 
Coral Mushroom), p. 641. 
. ) 
,.. 
, 
 
... ':  
: , 
., . 
.,.. 
. . 
,{ 
.....\.. 
J 
-( 
'" I 
J 
.... 
. 
. 
. . 
.. 
'(' 
" 
170. Tremella mesenterica 
(Witch's Butter), p. 673. 
«. 
 
,\ ': 
"" 
 ..... 
 ..\ 
{ , 
 ... 
,,, . 
.."':f. . 
. r .' -:-.. 
(oJ 
'", , t _ 
. . 
 
.--\. :. · , 
 
! . 
!J.."l" 
.,,, 
:. 
. 
li). ,: '. I 
 \ . 
-  
"( 
'. 
I' . 
, .. .. . ,. 
It  . 
.t 
 
. - " 
171. Clavariadelphus 
ligula, p. 633, often 
grows in troops 
under conifers. 
172. Sparassis crispa (= S. 
radicata or Cauliflower 
Mushroom), p. 657. 
.... 
,. 
 
, 
-' 
'. 
 
.,it 
-' 
::- 
......... ..... 
, -;: 
-'i"'.  1 
. .' 
- 
.,->::,,- '\ 
."..-  
-- 
I . 
. I 
 
ii' 
. '"\.. 7 
I . '1;" 
.( 
" i" 
 .. 
. 
.zIi9: --- 
* 
"- 
, 
. 
 
. ,," 
'I 
I 
I.' 
- --:< 
j, 
'\ 
- \ \... 
.\ 
 .... 
;. ., ,. 
...:......... 
-:::. 
,. ..,;. 
t 
.--4' 
-5;,: -. 
. 
. - .u ,... 
....- 
. 
 "'-::'  " '&-. r 
. \t: , I . _) . .:- 
JI ,.... 
 
'). 
, \ 
., 
. '-,  
, t) 
....... ,i:.' 
, 't', 
,-7"-. 
'\ 
 
<'" 
..J-'" 
 - 
,-' 
l., .. 
... 
\i- 
.  . ,"'--;'. 
....- 
-Y', . ..,,::;- 
 
.... ....--..... 
-- ..... 
..  :- 
- , 
-....... .....""':-. 
... ": 
\. 
. .:- 
:tAf.:;:-- .- . 
. ': . ..... 
 '.. 
,;-,  . - .. ,.. 
..".>" 
-.( 
 
........-..-. 
.. .....  
.. - 
')l t ". 
r, -.e. /\ ') ,... 
" - . :!'I 
. ,. 
. _\, l' :J 
-"t .. .( 
..: " J' 
i'  J': 
t 
f}-- 
.. 
.1 
,. 
n 
-.: ,, 
.\I 
J 
......  
". .- 
173 Tremella foliacea 
(Brown Witch's Butter), 
p.673. 
'q 
/" 
, ,', 
- '\\\'I  I 
, \ \\  \\ I 
't  ,\,\ - I 
,-,\\\\ ,I " 
,-' " "' ,  f' 
, \" ' \ \'. 
, ,\\\ . \ 
"\\\" 
\.\, 
, 
I · 
. 
'I 
' 
'" ';,' 
174. Gomphus floccosus group (Scaly Chanterelle), p. 661; the caps are not 
always as brightly colored as these. 
175. Cantharellus cibarius (Chanterelle), p. 662. This clean, slender-stemmed, 
yellow form is common in eastern North America. 
,....' . 
\ 
-.... 
- \ \\ 
\ 
\ 
'" 
..... 
, 
-......- 
...., \ . 
. c 
 >'=  
. I . .  
 
I 
. ...." 
-, 
\ 
 '.:: 
""\..... - 
- 
IX 
 }. 
176. Gomphus clavatus 
(Pig's Ears), p. 661. 
 I , 
\\  
\ 
177. The gills of this eastern 
chanterelle (Cantharellus 
cibarius, p. 662) are unusually 
thin, deep, and well-developed. 
" 
178. Cantharellus cibarius (Chanterelle), p. 662; the large orange form common 
on the west coast. 
, 
., 
'\ 
'" 
\ 
" 
 1\ 
 ,. 
- - s  
,, 
 
--- 
 
 
.I' 
..... 
:;; 
" 
- 
----- 
 
/- 
. . 
".. . 
,...... 
.... 
" 
 
" 
. '. " .-. 
-.'.(, v. 
(: to . '1c .- 
" 
,  
0\ \' 
,\ 
'\ 
...........\ "" .. 
. '.1 1 
- 
. -.. .: -i';_.. 
,:"*, 
"....... ... 
.-..... 
· -;; -,: "=:',_ ,--s. " 
:- '-. < ' 
0'" 
. .... 
'-.' 
:- l' 
i:J - ::-. 
... -. .. 
".... '.,j.. 
 
\ 
''o: '0',,\' 
; .......: '. ' ,>',., 
\\  - 
'",- 
179 Cantharellus subalbidus (White Chanterelle), p. 662, a common western species. 
i 
I" ..... 
--- 
I ' 
'I' 
- "( , 
, \ IU ft; 
"'(" \V.t i 
",,,  
, ,\ , 
\ 
 < 
I' 
I' 
, 
:( 
I 
I 
I I 
r 
. ' 
I . 
 
"',' "' 
'\' 
, '.. 
v  . 
. 
\. 
180, Cantharellus infundibuliformis 
group (Funnel Chanterelle, Winter 
Chanterelle), p. 665, a common 
northern species; also called 
C. tubaeformis, 
. 
," 
J l't  
\\ \\ I 
<I 
'J 
l' 
'#- 
......., 
" 
, . 
"' 
1 
.-.. 
 
-?'-.£: 
181. Cantharellus cinnabarinus 
(Red Chanterelle), p. 664, a 
common eastern species. 
 
'" 
- 
'- 
" 
.... 
"- 
-. 
.f 
- ." 
 
. - .-.. 
J,' 
\ 
, i 
.  
'', 
.' .:,-\. "" 
'$J. ' 
 
. ,'- . ';.,: 
.... 
t, .' 
-, ..;, 
')." 
'" 
<. 
'''' ............ 
'\ 4 ". 
-.'..... 
:-- 
" 
 
- 
,. 
. . .;.\ 
" ":"- 
"i- 
t.- 
 
y 
"'-- . 
" 
182. Craterellus cornucopioides (Horn of Plenty), p. 666, blends in well with its 
surroundings. The caps are black when moist, brown in dry weather. 
183. Polyozellus multiplex (Blue Chanterelle), p. 668, a deep blue or violet-tinged 
conifer -lover. 
\ 
, 
J 
),{ 
q,W 
,t, I 
F 
I 
.,- 
to./' 
"II\ HIt 11111111 11 III 
' . : " 
\ " . J,. 
\.'"t.,' - 
.. . 
.. 
.-. 
.. " 
.... 
.., 
-<. 
if '0)' 
 ,. 
.. 
"- r. 
-to 
"'- 
" 
.  
 
' 
... 
.... 
!" 
1"°, 
r '" _ 
. Ii'- 
, ;.' 
... ...' ...... 
'I '- 
. \ 
{ .' 
," 
... 
.' 
." 
'. ..  
 -.... 
';1. 
" 
,''', 
\ 
! ' 
 ",:,'. 
1- 
j 
. . t;"'.... 
 .. 
'I "  
,\ I; 
J' 
( .... 
. .. 
. \ "\ 
" {, ..  ... .. w 
'-(. '. 
. ' 
. 
!lit 
.. 
....' 
. r 
"\ 
. ! 
- 
'10 
 
184. In coastal California, giant puffballs (Calvatia gigantea 
group, p. 682) often grow on poppy-laced hillsides. 
185. Pisolithus tinctorius, p. 712; a 
young specimen sliced open to 
show the numerous spore capsules. 
- ,....:;  
,,'\.' . 
, i'!"" 
, ';/1 
.. 
';,Y .." J 
:' .  
.'\  
. 
, _.f 
. 
-.. .1. 
 
 
L .. 
..:; 1 
'-.. 
I , . 
". . . 
.. 
,i t ., 
, . 
- 
'*; :  
. 
-f'",,- 
,"'!. .;;.=;.- 
. .  
:.."--........ 
" 
 
- 
..... 
" 
. , 
);... 
. 
.:'": . ,,' - 
, 
. .. 
'. ,...... 
187. Battarrea 
phalloides, p. 717, 
usually grows in deserts 
or sandy soil. 
189. Pisolithus tinctorius (Dead 
Man's Foot), p. 712; common in 
poor soil, along roads, in patios 
and parking lots. 
 
...... 
....... 
-- 
..' 
 
.. 
186. Calvatia booniana 
(Western Giant Puffball), 
p. 684; these rather small 
specimens are much too 
old to eat 
-"IIII; 
188. Calostoma 
cinnabarina, 
p. 718, a colorful 
stalked puffball. 
. 
'.. 
c 
Q) 
"D 
0> 
o 
LL 
Q) 
ro 
..c 
. 
 
,. 
I 
ir .. 
."'- 
f 
iJ 
 
....,.,.1:. 
\. - 
I" J . 
_ . 11' ".... 
<.-  -$- -;,' 
  I 1'", 
;. . 
.:I 
_:. 
" ., '!!.l I 
- "":; - > . 
':: -i.. _ ' 
. ' ..-' " . r _ . . , _  .. . .  .  _ , ._ ? : " .._. _ . -, \i 
<\:>;-- "' ;". - 
. .... , ,.. ,. '\ ,  
:. .# ..".: ,. r 
., ";' f-..j 
'''lf'- 
 .ft ...... 
 
. 
y_J . -. 
.. -,."' .... 
,, 
- --<-....... +t 
. 
, 
'to 
.....  
,J, :i:!. 
' 
,  
....  
;iL. - 
, ,. 
\-" . 
 
&' to 
:-' 
\ 
..--- 
:.. ;:;!! ,:t!. 
."; b ... ;.t; ... -..- . 
" ... - -. 
. ..... .. ,....... 
L ...- ..4' 
... - ... -; .. ." . 
. : C!!  \..:- ..::....i 
 '!'  . '"'-"'''''... 
. ;,:; ;tt 
'!' .'" 
. '. 
 
. 
.;S; ,- 
.'-:' ";;1; 
" .. "'-..... 
, 
. . 
.- 
.- 
-1,:- 
.. 
-- 
 
 
..?- \ 
 
.. 
"__4 
II 
I 
I  
r 
II 
-, . 
 
 \., 
- -- 
190. Scleroderma citrinum (Common Earthball), p. 708. 
:1, 
I  ' 
I 
,,' 
... ..... 
,.- 
.. 
" . 
- 
. 
. -:\ 
. 11h 
f 
Phil Sharp 
... 
.' '41'  
t _'_' , 
\ . ,,\ " 
1.> '. ' 
\tf\'1__  
"' ,: '"  
"" ., ,.. . 
-.'It. '. , 
.... ),''''. 
. ... 
..! ';. W 
 .... . 
\ .  
... 
 
 i. 
 
C:;' 
::J 
nJ 
 
T1 
o 
co 
a. 
CD 
:J 
.I 
4i 
. . 
'" 
. 
'" 
....'" 
191. Dictyophora indusiata (Basket Stinkhorn), 
p. 770, is tropical, but a closely related species 
occurs in eastern North America. 
.. 
, 
192. Lysurus mokusin (Lantern Stinkhorn), p. 776. 
Like other stinkhorns, this species relies on flies for 
spore dispersal. 
. 
....... 
 
" 
<1 
--- 
. 4 
 
10 
\ . 
\\ ., 
193. Phallus impudicus 
(Stinkhorn), p. 768; 
mature specimen. 
195. Mutinus elegans 
(Dog Stinkhom) (see 
comments under 
M. caninus, p. 771). 
-.. 
194. A stinkhorn "egg" (Phallus impudicus, 
p. 768) sliced open to show the olive-colored 
spore mass. 
 
"- 
1 
.. J 
..\. ..... 
 -:> '. ;;;--... 
- ...; -= 
 
; . 
.- 
.. ., 
, 
.. 
"- 
\- 
,. 
,...} I 1\ 
 J. 
196. Mutmus elegans 
(see comments under 
M. caninus, p. 771); 
sometimes called 
"Devil's Dipstick." 
\ 
» 
,.. 
,"- 
1.1 
I' 
I, 
I', 
Ii 
I 
: 
 
;t 
 
 
I 
j- 
'\. 
 
..... . .',  
,!G- 
-- 
 
I _ 
 
197. Clathrus archeri (Octopus Stinkhorn), 
p. 774; a mature specimen. 
198. A Clathrus archeri (p. 
774) "egg" sliced open to 
show the mucilaginous 
spore mass. 
.. 
199. In Oregon, black morels (Morchella elata group, p. 790) are often found 
with calypso orchids. 
\ 
, 
.... 
" 
1 
0, 
:. 
j 
 
0..,.>", 
.: \. 
, 
.1 1. 
.. ", 
.:, '  
 -' \ .. 
 I' 
 .' . 
.... 
- ....t:'t 
.. .":,;: 
::..: 
'a;..... 
P, ;. 
v 
I" 
..,. . 
- __I 
, 
r- 
.. ' 
 
, 
.- 
" 
.,/ 
J. 
 " 
..'  \. : 
.. , 
, ..... 
-4 
," , 
:\1 
:J:-.-. 
.. ':'{ I ,'>( 
 
" 
. 
\ 
... 
 
- . )- 
 
'. :.: 
200. Neolecta irregularis 
(Irregular Earth Tongue), 
p.871. 
,  
... 
I( . 
201. The coastal California version of the white morel (Morchella 
deliciosa, p. 789); ridges are whitish when very young. 
"' 
I  
. 
I ' ',./j."\'" 
r , 
I ,. _., 
I  
.  '  
... ':-,. . I. 
II ,\ 
II' '' . ," - 
'i. ;:> , . 
' h -. " 1 
. 't " "', ". . 
r .. "-' 
. "?#' 
r .d · 
, 
''\. 
j -, 
, .1'.Ii 
" ""t.- 
I ' ' ..... :..  - 
Af. 
 ' 
\. 
. ( 
,..  -, . 
," e' 
...... 
..:;, 
 
,...... 
II 
,I 
I 
I 
! 
I( 
II 
I: 
I 
I 
1- 
.... - 
J 
 
// " '1' 
r ... i I .',1 
I :'.} '- , 
;! ...:" '1'-'"' 
", ". 'A ' ,b .:...... 
,..!.i1 - 
" 'I 
. " ., ,.,,, 
l\. ' .-!) 
. i" .'!' 'i( 4 
'{';'\ ',;' I, tt 
' . :1:A':".#_ ':7' 
'"  .... J. 
. -l .< . ,,\\ 
 . .?,..- 
'..- 11'  
.f "1\.,,-_.\ . ."\._ 
,"S v . .\,,, 
"', "'.' : 
., 
 
 ..-' 
" ""...' '""  -' .:::-= .  ..- 
\ '''''''    · fl' ¥ £. 
I. l' ''<CiI I . 4....'  ( I 
.' f1 "\"" '_. i" ):. I: . 
j "..--:, ,w\,,; , \ I.".. , ..' . 
- f S'lI, 1.1..1\\ " ,;  ....t..,-" ,," 
, - \'r'  i ' 'I.y...! , ',.. t :,.. tt - 
. "I 'tl ! II'"\ .., . I  . - 
.. J.'J..r,., ( ,'t, ri;:' I '\') " tf -'<..., I"!.. 
J II ..! .J. . 1 .......'/  IIJ rlf. 2 .... 
. ,:' f$. \ :, j,I\', '.' :,,; \ ... 
; , ' ''Iv... '.»!1 ,,\& t" ,"r1\', , . 
. ,tI-<.:\,, f  - {  _ . \ .. 
,..,.. , \,.,tt;.  , 1  ' ...... ... , 
. I ' t.- 1,,"'!J'1. - .. . 
-",,::. . ."t' ' .. \' , .- 
f -4f\\\' ': .,). 'i.-). ''')-  .'1,. . , 
'l ,,'   ,  L J.. .'1 r . 
1'. iL. -' " , . . I . ?' {""II -..    
,.,;. ?--....  " . '" .. ':'.' e.-........ -<I: 11& 
.,\""   ..... . "11 . -, 
. .t" '  J u, ;\'1J \ r . 
.. ; . \t.. \  
 ...  - ,..- 
.. 1 ....... ' . 
... ;.' , - ... 
t .'" . 
· . j J. 
 . J I " 
': 
. 
. 
. 
 _. .. 
,  
" . .... " 
, - . ---..." 
- - 
" -I 
1'1 .. 
... 
... 
..... 'J." >-.. 
---. 
-. 
- 
 
 
  \ - 
.- " 
>- ;. 
 (- \.- ;y- 
- - 
.. ..,. 
'__ r- 
_ A--4. 
\ -,." 
>-, 
-... 
. 
'" . 
, 
- .... 
"JII '!' 
"'= - 
;;."-   
.r 
" 
1 
.... " '" 
" 1If.. 
, 
...- 
",' 
, , 
.if 
'\ 
,..:. 
 
j .I 
I ' 
--- 
.... 
-- 
.c., 
, 
202. Black morels (Morchella elata group, p. 790) are easily overlooked because 
they look like fallen pine cones. 
203. Morchella esculenta (Morel), p. 787. 
;;. 
.. 
.. . 
 
 
t 
204. Helvella compressa 
(Compressed Elfin 
Saddle), p. 811; a pale 
specimen. 
 
205. Verpa bohemica 
(Early Morel), 
p.793. 
,;... 
" 
\ . 
:-. , 
-.. 
.:>i.. . 
..... L 
'}', , .., 
,.. 
... 
oil 
.;; 
, 
- 
. '- 
.. '., . 
i'.' , . . --c- 
;. 
" 
 \ 
,_ -{t 
. "_' ,-t. 
: '\. 
, \ '\ 
.11 . _..-.... 
p -' '-. 
I; ....;J , 
.' ri 
'. ,- 
" , 
." 
206. Gyromitra escu/enta 
(False Morel, Brain 
Mushroom), p. 801. 
" 
, ' J 
\ 
t,,' ,,:,,_ 
..:., 
-' 
..;.. 
..i' 
?'.tL. 
 
. of-'" '\ 
:..... -'\ : 
>. f. ..', ..  f 
207. Peziza domiciliana, p. 822, a common indoor cup fungus. 
 
I _ 
I' 
I ,- ,.''- 
"': . .- 
" 
 ;... 
,t 
- 
- 
'. 
'.,' 
Ii 
. '.If 
\..:.. 
.  ...... 
. "':.",--- -.>. , :' "....' 
If ''. \', ,."". 
, '  ' . 
" , 
-. 
208. Aleuria aurantia (Orange Peel Fungus), p. 837. 
209. Aleuria rhenana, p. 836. 
.'1 " 
. .... 
,II "\ 
.. lIP"\" . 'If 
. = . :",,;' - .  
\ \ 
, 1 · 
" 
210. Sarcoscypha coccinea (Scarlet Cup 
Fungus), p. 836. 
'or 
..... 
" 
"- 
, , i 
..,. 
 
-<;. 
l' 
..- - I( 
f' 
!'- 
, 
. \' 
t' . 
. " 
'i.\. 
 
."- 
.. i 
211. Caloscypha fulgens (Snowbank 
Orange Peel Fungus), p. 837, is usually 
greenish- or bluish-stained. 
....':. 
\ 
\ 
212. Truffles, anyone? These are Tuber separans, p. 859. 
J. 
. ....... 
213. Pachyphloeus citrin us 
(Berry Truffle), p. 856. 
214. Microglossum viride (Green Earth Tongue), p. 870; 
young specimens. 
....'" 
i. 
,:- 
, 
 
-- 
,-. 
\ 
J 
-.. 
 .. 
.-'1 
. ! 
  
'.. 
. .1. 
_ 4 · 
 
... 
"' I \ "' 
. 
.. -. --- 
. ...."Ii:. .. 
. \ 
, ... 
f 
"" 
. 
 
. -t- <. 
. r 
,."; 
 "'. 
" . 
215. Leotia lubrica 
(Jelly Babies), p. 874. 
.4- 
216. Hypomyces lactifluorum 
(Lobster Mushroom), p. 884. 
217. "Too many mushrooms." Overindulgence is a frequent 
cause of so-called "mushroom poisoning" (see p. 888). 
\. 
,.) 'j, 
.; .i" 
 
.. 
.J!>. 
