Clean
Lactarius deliciosus (Delicious Milk Cap) Color Plate 2
CAP 5-16 cm broad, broadly convex or with a depressed centerandan inrolled margin
when young, becoming depressed or shallowly funnel-shaped; surface viscid when moist
but soon dry, smooth, often zoned; color variable: dull orange to carrot-orange or orange-
brown, sometimes blotched with or entirely green; fading in age or dry weather to
brownish, gray, dull greenish-gray, or even yellowish; margin inrolled when young. Flesh
thick, brittle, orange to yellowish or greenish; taste mild or slightly bitter. LATEX very
scanty, bright carrot-orange (but in some forms slowly staining dark red when exposed),
eventually staining wounded or aged tissue greenish (within 5 hours). GILLS typically
bright to dull orange, but varying to yellowish or orange-buff, greenish where wounded;
adnate to decurrent, close. STALK 2-7 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base,
soon dry, sometimes scrobiculate; rigid, hollow inage, frequently maggot-riddled, colored
like cap or paler. SPORE_PRINT creamy yellowish-buff; spores 7-11 x 6-8 microns,
broadly elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers (pine, spruce, etc.),
commonandwidely distributed. It is abundant in our coastal pine forests in the late fall
and winter, generally after the major crop of look-alike L. rubrilacteus.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not necessarily delicious. Several varieties or forms occur and
some are apparently better than others. Special treatment is required to overcome the
grainy textureandlatent bitterness. Its abundanceanddistinctiveness, however, make
experimentation worthwhile. Some sources recommend slow cooking (e.g., baked in a
casserole), others insist it should be cooked rapidly in a frying pan with very little butter.
It is popular in Europe,andthe Russians are fanatical about it-especially salted.
COMMENTS This variable, cosmopolitan fungus strikes a discordant but colorful
note with its unlikely combination of pistachio-greenandcarrot-orange-even more so
when found in the company of the bright red Russula rosacea, as is so often the case in our
area. The carrot-colored latex separates it from L. rubrilacteus,andconfusion with other
mushrooms is unlikely. The latex is so scanty as to often be non-existent, but the brittle
fleshandgreenish stains on the cap, stalk, and! or gills will identify it. The fruiting bodies
persist for a long timeandare often completely hollowed out by maggots. Several varieties
of L. deliciosus have been described based on slight differences in color, staining reactions,
and microscopic characteristics; one variety tends to have an areolate (scaly-cracked) cap
in age. The Greeks were apparently fond of L. deliciosus, for it is depicted on a fresco from
Herculaneum (buried in 79 A.D.). Other species: L. thyinos, of northern bogs, has carrot-
orange latex but stains red, not green; in other respects it is quite similar. L. salmoneus is
a smallish but distinctive southeastern species with a whitish cap, bright orange gills,
flesh,andstalk (when fresh)andorange to salmon-orange latex. L. pseudodeliciosus is
buff or dingy colored with yellow-orange to rusty-orange latex. All ofthese are edible and
the latter two stain greenish in age or where wounded.
Lactarius rubrilacteus (Bleeding Milk Cap) Color Plates 3, 6
CAP 4-14 cm broad, broadly convex with a depressed centerandinrolled margin when
young, depressed or shallowly funnel-shaped in age; surface viscid when moist, smooth,
reddish-brown to orange, orange-brown, or tan, or often concentrically zoned with these
colors; dullerandgreenish-stained in age. Flesh thick, brittle, brownish to buff, reddish,
etc.; taste mild or slightly bitter. LATEX scanty, dark red (but occasionally orange-red
in old specimens), slowly staining wounded areas greenish. GILLS adnate to slightly
decurrent, close, reddish or dull purplish-red, or tan with a dark reddish sheen; greenish
where wounded. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, firm, rigid,
hollow, colored like cap or paler, sometimes scrobiculate. SPORE_PRINT pale yellowish
or buff; spores 7.5-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Scattered or in large troops under conifers throughout the West; associated
in our area with Douglas-firandabundant in the fallandearly winter. Where pines pre-
dominate it is largely supplanted by L. deliciosus,andwhere pineandDouglas-fir grow
together, the two milk caps often mingle. In Europe, L. sanguifluus (which may be the
same as L. rubrilacteus) is mycorrhizal with pine.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not pleasing to everyone because of its granular texture; usually
better, however, than L. deliciosus (see comments on edibility of that species).
COMMENTS The dark red latex is the telltale trait of this handsome fungus, which for
many years has been known to fungophiles as L. sanguifluus. In dry or very wet weather
the latex may be absent, but in these conditions the greenish stains are usually quite
pronounced. In fact, as with L. deliciosus, weathered fruiting bodies may be entirely
green,andmature specimens often have tiny, aborted green "buttons" at their bases. Be
sure not to confuse this species with the similarly colored L. vinaceorufescens and
L. chrysorheus-they often grow with L. rubrilacteus, but have a white latex that quickly
turns yellow. Other species: L. barrows;; has dark red latex, but its cap is much paler
(whitish to pinkish-brown)andit occurs mainly with ponderosa pine. Another similar
edible species, L. subpurpureus of eastern North America, has wine-red latexanda wine-
red to silvery cap,andfavors hemlock. See also L. paradoxus(under L. indigo).
Lactarius indigo (Indigo Milk Cap) Color Plate 4
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex or centrally depressed with an inrolled margin when young,
usually depressed in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, then dry; indigo-blue when
fresh but fading to grayish-or silvery-blue, sometimes with greenish stains; often zoned
concentrically. Flesh pallid to bluish, brittle, slowly staining greenish; taste mild to slightly
bitter-acrid. LATEX indigo-blue (bright dark blue), scanty, slowly staining wounded
tissue greenish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, indigo-blue becoming paler in
age. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, indigo-blue to silvery-or grayish-blue, equal or
narrowed at base, rigid, hollow in age, soon dry. SPORE_PRINT creamy-yellowish;
spores 7-9 x 5.5-7.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in summerandfall, mostly in oakandpine woods;
found throughout soutt-.ernandeastern North America, but most common along the Gulf
Coastandin Mexico. I have found it in Arizona under ponderosa pine. If it should turn up
in southern California it would certainly be a most welcome addition to our fungus flora.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery good-superior, at least, to the other greenish-staining
milk caps, such as L. deliciosus. In Mexico it is sometimes sold in farmer's markets.
COMMENTS The overall blue to blue-gray colorandbright blue latex make this one of
the safestandmost memorable of all agarics. No other milk cap has blue latex, let alone
a bluish fruiting body. Other species: L. paradoxus, common under pine in eastern North
America (especially the South), often has a bluish-tinged cap when young, but has reddish-
brown to purple-brown latexandgills. Another species, L. chel;don;um, has a yellowish
to dingy yellow-brown to bluish-gray capandyellowish to brown latex "the color of
grasshopper juice." It occurs commonly in the eastern United StatesandSouthwest. L.
hem;cyaneus is a medium-sized to large species which usually has bluish flesh in the cap
and orange to red-orange flesh in the base of the stalk. It may possibly occur in southern
California, according to Greg WrightandPaul Harding. All of the above species are
edible despite their tendency to stain green in age.
Lactarius olivaceoumbrinus (Toadskin Milk Cap)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane or shallowly
depressed; surface viscid when moist, typically a mixture of dark olive, sordid olive-
brown,andolive-buff, often spotted or zoned concentrically, but zones fading in age. Flesh
thick, dingy olive, brittle, taste very acrid. LATEX copious, white, becoming greenish-gray
(sometimes very slowly). GILLS adnate to decurrent, crowded, pallid becoming spotted or
colored greenish or olive-gray. STALK 4-8 cm long, 1-3 cm thick; solid, becoming hollow
in age; viscid when wet, then dry; rigid, colored more or less like cap; usually scrobiculate.
SPORE_PRINT pale buff; spores 7-10 x 6-9 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with
amyloid wartsandridges. Cap surface staining magenta in KOH or ammonia.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered or in small groups on ground under conifers in late
summerandfall, Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, occasional.
EDIBILITY Unknown. The sordid appearanceandacrid taste are major deterrents.
COMMENTS This speciesandits close relatives are among our most distinctive milk
caps-easily recognized by their overall dingy greenish to murky olive-brown color and
copious, acrid white latex. I know very few people who would call them beautiful, but
that's precisely what they are-beautiful-in a grotesque sort of way that only a thoroughly
jaded fancier of the fleshy fungi can appreciate. (For some reason, they remind me oftoads
-see Color Plate I.) Other species: L. sordidus is a similar species with a somewhat
browner ca pandsmaller spores; it also occurs in the Pacific Northwest as well as in eastern
North America. L. alroviridis (COLOR PLATE 1) has a mottled dark greenish cap and
stalkandgrows under hardwoods (especially oak) in eastern North America. Neither is
edible. The nameL. necalor(a European species) was previously applied to this group.
Lactarius controversus (Poplar Milk Cap)
CAP (5) 7-20 cm broad, broadly convex becoming depressed; surface viscid when moist,
then dry, white, or whitish with lavender to pinkish stains; margin at first inrolled. Flesh
thick, firm, brittle, white; taste slowly acrid(burning). LATEX white, unchanging. GILLS
adnate to slightly decurrent, crowded, narrow, pinkish to creamy-pink. STALK 2.5-7 cm
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, white, sometimes spotted; hollow in age;
rigid. SPORE_PRINT creamy to pale pinkish; spores 6-7.5 x 4.5-5 microns, elliptical, with
amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under aspen, poplar,andwillow; widely distributed.
It can be found in the aspen forests of the Sierra Nevada in the late summerandfall. I
have seen large fruitings in New Mexico in the late summer.
EDIBILITY To be avoided due to the acrid taste.
COMMENTS This handsome milk cap is one of several large, whitish species with white,
unchanging latexanda very peppery taste. The viscid cap when moistandpinkish-tinted
gills plus the association with aspen, poplar,andwillow distinguish it from the other
large white Lactarii (see L. piperatus), while the presence of a latex places it in Lactarius.
Lactarius piperatus (Peppery White Milk Cap)
CAP (4) 6-16 cm broad, broadly convexandusually depressed centrally, becoming broadly
vase-shaped in age; surface more or less smooth, dry, unzoned, white to creamy-white,
but often developing dingy buff or tan stains in age; unpolished; margin naked. Flesh thick,
crisp, brittle; odor mild, taste extremely acrid. LATEX white, copious, unchanging or
drying yellowish ( or in one variety staining wounded tissue dingy greenish). GILLS adnate
to decurrent, narrowandvery crowded, white to creamy, often forked. STALK 2-8 cm
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapered toward base, dry, white, smooth or with a whitish
bloom, not scrobiculate. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-7x 5-5.5 microns, elliptical
to nearly round with inconspicuous amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods,
common in the summer in eastern North America. I t has also been reported from the west
coast, but I have not seen it west of Minnesota.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. In RussiaandScandinavia it is eaten, along with other
acrid milk caps, after parboiling or pickling. However, it is rather difficult to digest and
may even be poisonous if not properly prepared.
COMMENTS The dull dry white ca p, very crowded narrow gills, extremely peppery taste,
and copious white "milk" form a distinctive set of characters. It has much the aspect of
Russula brevi pes, but of course that species lacks a latex. There are several similar,
medium-sized to large whitish, acrid milk caps with white latex, including: L. neuhoffii,
with larger sporesandonly moderately crowded gills that are sometimes pale pinkish-buff
at maturity; L. subvellereus, with minutely velvety capandstalk,andclose to well-spaced
gills; andL. tomentoso-marg;natusandL. deceptivus, witha whitish cap that becomes dull
tan or brownish in ageandhas conspicuous cottony tissue on the margin when young. All
of these are common in eastern North America under hardwoods; the latter also grows
with conifers. None have the slightly viscid capandpinkish gills of L. controversus. Other
species: L. pseudodecept;vus mimics L. deceptivus, but grows with northwestern conifers.
Lactarius alnicola
(Golden Milk Cap)
CAP 5-14 (20) cm broad, convex with a central depressionandconspicuously inrolled
margin when young, depressed or broadly funnel-shaped in age; surface viscid when
moist, usually zoned concentrically with various shades of ochreandpale yellow, but
sometimes nearly evenly colored; margin naked or slightly hairy but not bearded. Flesh
thick, brittle, crisp, whitish; taste very acrid. LATEX white, unchanging or very slowly
yellowing or staining wounded tissue yellowish. GILLS crowded, adnate to decurrent,
whitish when young becoming buff or ochraceous-toned in age; wounded areas stained
yellowish to yellow-brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or with narrowed
base, hard, usually hollow in age; pallid or tinged cap color, often (but not always)
scrobiculate (with darker yellow to ochraceous spots). SPORE_PRINT whitish to
yellowish; spores 7.5-10x 6-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under spruceandother conifers (despite the species
epithet, which implies alder) in the Rocky MountainsandPacific Northwest in the late
summerandfall,andalso abundant (a slightly different form-see comments) in our live
oak woodlands in the fallandwinter. Still another variant occurs in coastal sand dunes
with willowandbush lupine.
EDIBILITY Not edible. The excruciatingly peppery taste is a formidable deterrent.
COMMENTS The overall yellowish-ochre colorandzoned, non-bearded cap plus
the frequently scrobiculate stalk, acrid taste,andwhite latex typify a very confusing group
of milk caps which have traditionally passed under the European names of L. ;nsulsus and
L. zonar;us. There is still doubt, however, as to just what those species are. The common
member of this group in centralandsouthern California differs from typical L. alnicola in
its mycorrhizal mate (oak), somewhat smaller sizeandpaler cap (yellowish-buff),
frequently short, off-center stem,andlatently acrid taste. Its latex usually stains
surrounding tissue dingy yellow but does not turn yellow itself. Forms are encountered,
however, in which the latex does yellow slowly,andforms in which it discolors tissue buff or
grayish-buff, thus muddling the picture so thoroughly that I begin to yearn for the baseball
season. (Ah, the simplicity, security,andsymmetry of baseball, where each participant has
a fixed name, number,andposition,anda uniqueandindisputable set of statistics and
characteristics.) Other species with a more or less zoned, non-bearded capandacrid white
latex include: L. olymp;anus, a common western conifer-lover, typically with an oranger
capandnon-scrobiculate stalk;andtwo oak-loving easterners, L. psamm;colaf. glaber,
with a yellowish capandlatex that stains wounded tissue buff to pinkish-cinnamon, and
L. yazooensis, a southern species with an orangish cap. Similar species that are bearded
are listed under L. torminosusandL. scrobiculatus. They include L. subvillosus, a com-
mon local species whose cap is often naked in age, but pinker or oranger than that of L.
alnicola. Also worth mentioning is L. payettens;s, a western conifer-lover with white
scanty latex that yellows slowlyandbrownish to grayish fibrils on the cap margin. None of
the above species should be eaten, at least until they are better known.
Lactarius torminosus
(Bearded Milk Cap)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex with a central depressionandstrongly inrolled margin when
young, shallowly depressed in age; surface viscid when moist, yellowish-buff to pinkish-
buff to whitish, the center usually pinkish to pinkish-orange when fresh, or sometimes pale
pinkish to pinkish-orange throughout; margin bearded with a dense white mat of soft,
woolly hairs (while inrolled) that may mimic a veil; hairs sparse orevenabsentin age. Flesh
thick, firm, brittle, white or tinged pinkish; taste very acrid. LATEX often scanty, white
and typically unchanging (but staining gills yellowish in var. nordmanensis). GILLS white
to yellowish-tan or developing a pinkish tinge, crowded, narrow, adnate to slightly
decurrent. STALK 2-7 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, rigid, equal or with a narrowed base,
firm, dry, often hollow in age; colored like cap or paler, sometimes with dingy ochre spots.
SPORE_PRINT creamy-white; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under or near birch or occasionally aspen; common
and very widely distributed. In our area this speciesandL. pubescens (see comments) are
common after the first fall rains on lawns with planted birch trees (often in the company of
Paxil/us involuluS). The mycelium is probably imported on the roots of birch saplings.
EDIBILITY Not recommended, as it is indigestible or even poisonous unless thoroughly
cooked. However, in RussiaandScandinavia it is collected in large quantitiesandpickled,
and in Norway it is roastedandadded to coffee.
COMMENTS The bearded, pinkish-tinged cap, white latex, acrid taste,andgrowth with
birch are the trademarks of this attractive Laclarius. Buttons with an inrolled margin are
reminiscent of Paxil/us involulus (another birch-lover), but paler in color. L. pubescens is
practically identical to L. lorminosus but has smaller spores( 6-8 microns long)and is more
apt to have a whitish cap (see photo on p. 41). It is common with birch in parksandgardens
as well as in forests,andis often mistaken for L. lorminosus. One collection I made had
greenish bands on the gillsandstalkjust like in Russula brevipes var. acrior. Other similar
species: L. subvillosus is common in our tanoak-madrone woodlands. Its pinkish-orange
to orange cap is bearded when young but often naked in age, leading to confusion with L.
alnicola. which has a yellower cap. L. psammicola has an orangish, zoned, bearded cap
but grows under eastern hardwoods. For bearded yellow-stainers, see L. scrobiculalus.
Lactarius scrobiculatus (Scrobiculate Milk Cap)
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane with the center usually depressed, in age often
vase-shaped; surface viscid when moist, smooth or scaly in age, unzoned or faintly zoned,
pale yellow to yellowish to bright ochre, the center sometimes darker; margin inrolled
when youngandtypically bearded with hairs (but hairs absent or inconspicuous in var.
montanusandvar. pubescens). Flesh thick, firm, brittle, whitish but staining yellow when
exposed; taste variable: strongly acrid to mild. LATEX copious or scanty, white, quickly
staining yellow when exposed. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish to pale or dull
yellow, close. STALK 3-11 cm long, (I) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, firm,
dry, hollow in age; white to yellowish, usually scrobiculate (i.e., pitted with large, glazed,
darker or brighter yellow to honey-colored spots). SPORE_PRINT whitish to creamy or
yellowish; spores 6-10 x 5-7.5 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under northernandmountain conifers;
widely distributed. Its various varieties are common in the summerandfall in the Sierra
Nevada, northern California,andother parts ofthe West, but absent in our area.
EDIBILITY Not recommended; yellow-staining milk caps should be avoided.
COMMENTS This robust but variable milk cap can have a mild to strongly peppery
(acrid) tasteandprominently bearded to virtually bald cap margin. However, it can
be recognized by its overall pale yellow to dark ochre color, scrobiculate stalk,andwhite
latex that quickly turns yellow or stains exposed tissue yellow. The latter feature distin-
guishes it from L. alnicola. which stains yellow slowly or not at all. Other species: L.
res;mus is a bearded, yellow-staining species whose stalk is scrobiculate only in age if at
all. Its cap is white when young but often pale yellowish in age. It favors birch, aspen,
alder, manzanita,andconifers. Also see L. payeltensis (under L. alnicola).
Lactarius vinaceorufescens (Yellow-Staining Milk Cap)
CAP 3-7 (9) cm broad, broadly convex with incurved margin, then plane or depressed;
surface dry to slightly viscid, smooth, cinnamon-buff to pinkish, reddish-cinnamon, or
dark reddish, often darkening to vinaceous-brown in old age; often faintly zoned or with
darker watery spots; margin not bearded. Flesh brittle, staining yellow when cut; taste mild
to somewhat bitter or acrid. LATEX white, quickly turning sulfur-yellow when exposed
(within 45 seconds). GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, pallid when young, then
tinged cap colorandeventually aging or staining dark reddish. STALK 3-7 cm long, 1-2.5
cm thick, equal, pallid or colored like cap but usually paler, often stained dark reddish in
age; smooth, not scrobiculate; base often with hairs. SPORE_PRINT white to yellowish;
spores 6.5-9 x 6-7 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops under both hardwoodsandconifers; widely
distributed. It is often abundant in our area from fall through early spring, particularly
with manzanita, oak, Douglas-fir,andpine( often minglingwithL.fragilis. L. rubrilacteus.
Russula emetica.andR. cremoricolor). L. chrysorheus (see comments) is also common.
EDIBILITY Reportedly poisonous-all yellow-staining milk caps should be avoided.
COMMENTS This ubiquitous milk cap superficially resembles L. rubri/acteus. L. rufus.
L. subviscidus. L. fragi/is.andL. rufulus. but is easily distinguished by the prompt
yellowing of the latex when exposed to the air. The rate at which it yellows depends on the
moisture contentandage of the mushroom, but it normally occurs in 5-30 seconds. L.
vinaceorufescens has been confused in the past with L. chrysorheus, widespreadandalso
common in our area, which has a somewhat paler (pallid to yellowish-cinnamon to pale
pinkish), often zoned capandgillsandstalk that do not discolor as much in age. Other
species with yellow-staining latex include: L. maculatipesandL. croceus, found under
hardwoods in eastern North America, the first with a whitish to creamy-yellow, often
spotted capandslimy stalk when fresh, the latter with a bright saffron to yellow-orange or
orange, viscid cap;andL. xanthogalactus of California, probably the same as L. chry-
sorheus or L. v;naceorufescens. For other yellow-staining species, see L. scrob;culatus.
Lactar;us uv;dus group (Purple-Staining Milk Cap)
CAP 3-10 (12) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth,
viscid to slimy when moist, pallid becoming grayish, lilac-gray, or pale lavender-brown,
sometimes obscurely zoned; margin naked. Flesh thick, white, staining lilac slowly when
wounded; taste mild to slowly bitter or acrid. LATEX white or creamy, staining wounded
areas lilac or dull purple. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, white to yellowish;
wounded areas staining purplish, then eventually dingy tan. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2 cm
thick, more or less equal, smooth, viscid when moist but soon dry, rigid, pallid or sometimes
tinged cap color, often ochraceous-stained toward base. SPORE_PRINT yellowish-white;
spores 8-12 x 7-8 microns, elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges. Cap surface staining
green in KOH (potassium hydroxide).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods; widely distributed. In our
area this speciesandits close relatives (see comments) are fairly common in mixed woods
in the late fallandwinter, but seldom fruit in quantity.
EDIBILITY Said to be poisonous. All purple-staining milk caps should be avoided.
COMMENTS The tendency of the latex to stain wounded tissue purple typifies this
species (see photo on p. 897)andits close relatives. A stouter, conifer-loving version, L.
uv;dus var. montanus, has a darker, somewhat browner, nearly dry capandresinous taste.
Other purple-stainers include: L. pallescens, with a slimy or viscid whitish capandstalk,
common under conifers in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest; L. califor-
n;ens;s, an acrid-tasting species whose purplish to brownish-gray cap often has yellowish
tinges or stains; L. cascadens;s, a large northwestern species with dull brownish gills in age,
favoring swampy areas (under alder, etc.); L. maculatus of eastern North America,
with a distinctly zoned capandacrid taste;andL. subpalustr;s, larger, with a grayish to
dingy brown, often spotted cap that does not stain green in KOH, plus a mild taste. For
purple-staining species with a yellowish to buff cap, see L. representaneus.
Lactar;us representaneus (Purple-Staining Bearded Milk Cap)
CAP (4) 6-20 cm broad, broadly convex with a central depressionandinrolled margin,
becoming broadly depressed or vase-shaped in age; surface viscid when moist, sometimes
zoned concentrically, pale yellow to golden-yellow to orange-buff, often developing rusty
and sometimes purple stains; smooth at center but coarsely hairy (fibrillose) toward the
margin, which is bearded with woolly yellowish hairs when young. Flesh thick, brittle,
white, staining dull lilac or purplish slowly where cut or bruised; taste slowly bitter oracrid.
LATEX copious, white 'Or creamy, drying or slowly staining wounded tissue dull purple or
lilac. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, buff to dull ochre or orange-spotted, with lilac
or purplish stains where bruised. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3 (4.5) cm thick, equal or thicker
below, hard, whitish or more often colored like cap, usually prominently scrobiculate,
sometimes lilac-stained; hollow or stuffed. SPORE_PRINT whitish to yellowish; spores
8-12 x 6.5-9 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or often gregarious on ground under northern conifers-
especially spruceandfir; widely distributed but not found in our area. I have seen it under
Engelmann spruce in ColoradoandNew Mexico in August,andunder Sitka spruce in
northern California in November. It is said to be abundant in Alaska.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. The taste is not appealingandit may be poisonous.
COMMENTS This often large, impressive milk cap is easily identified by its yellowish
cap with the hairy margin,andpurple-staining latex. It resembles L. scrobiculatus and
L. alnicola in appearance, but those species have unchanging or yellow-staining latex.
Other purple-staining species (see L. uvidus) are differently coloredanddo not have a
bearded cap. Similar species include: L. speciosus, with a dull buff to tan capandhairy
margin, common under hardwoods in eastern North America (especially the South); and
L. aspideoides, with a viscid, pale yellow cap that is not bearded. Neither should be eaten.
Lactarius argillaceijolius var. megacarpus (Vulgar Milk Cap)
CAP 7-18 (27) cm broad, broadly convex-depressed with an inrolled margin when young,
plane to depressed in age; surface viscid, drab grayish, violet-gray, or sometimes brownish
tinted with violet, often fading in age to dingy tan or grayish-buff; sometimes obscurely
zoned or with rusty-ochraceous spots. Flesh thick, pallid; taste mild or somewhat acrid.
LATEX creamy-white, unchanging, but slowly staining wounded areas dingy brownish.
GILLS pallid becoming dingy yellowish or buff, often darker( dingy yellow-brown) in old
age, slowly staining brownish or grayish where bruised; adnate to slightly decurrent, close.
STALK 6-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick, firm, rigid, slightly viscid or dry; whiteto buff or tinted
cap color, at times with ochre or yellow-brown stains. SPORE_PRINT whitish to buff;
spores 7-11 x 6-9 microns, elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in humus under hardwoods (live oak,
tanoak, madrone), fairly common in our area in the late fallandwinter. It is known only
from the Pacific Coast, but variety argillaceifolius(see comments) is widespread.
EDIBILITY Possibly poisonous; to be avoided.
COMMENTS The robust dimensions, dingy tan to grayish color,andwhite latex are the
distinguishing features of this undistinguished mushroom. It is our largestandleast
attractive Lactarius. The taste is rather variable, but generally the latex isat least somewhat
acrid while the flesh may be mild. The violet tints that sometimes pervade the cap are
reminiscent of L. uvidus (with which it sometimes grows), but that species stains purple
instead of dingy brown. L. argillaceiJolius var. argillaceiJolius is smallerandbrowner than
var. megacarpus.andhas a tendency to become dingy brown or yellow-brown overall in
age. It is a characteristic summer mushroom in the hardwood forests of eastern North
America. Other species: L. caespitosus is similar, but has a gray to olive-brown cap and
grows under western conifers; L. vietus is also similar but favors birchandnorthern coni-
fersandoften has a lilac-or vinaceous-tinged cap;L. cinereus has a gray to olive-gray cap,
non-staining gillsandstalk apex often tinged pale pinkish,andgrows with beech; L. cir-
cellatus favors birchandnorthern conifers, but has non-staining gillsanda brownish-gray
to bluish-gray or lavender-tinged cap,andzebra-like amyloid stripes on the spores. For
years L. argillaceifolius has been called L. trivialis, a similar slimy-stalked species whose
gills discolor scarcely if at all; it occurs in the Pacific Northwest, usually under conifers.
Lactarius pseudomucidus (Slimy Milk Cap)
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth,
viscid (with a thick layer of slime when moist), evenly colored blackish-brown to dark gray;
not zoned; margin naked. Flesh grayish, thin, fragile, taste slowly acrid. LATEX white,
unchanging, but may stain gills tan to brownish, gray, or olive-gray. GILLS adnate to
decurrent, white or tinged gray, sometimes discolored (brownish, etc.) in age. STALK
4-10 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, fragile, smooth, without spots, evenly colored like ca p or paler
(gray); very slimy when wet, usually thicker below. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9x 6-7
microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under conifers in late summerandfall; known only
from northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest, common.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Only the most ardent slippery jack lover would fail to be
deterred by the copious layer of slime coating the capandstem.
COMMENTS The dark grayish-brown capandstalk under a thick layer of slime (when
fresh)andthe white latex are usually enough to distinguish this glutinous woodland
mushroom. It is slimmerandslimier than either L. argillaceifolius or L. trivia lis, and
darker besides. It has been called L. mucidus, but that species. which is commoner in
eastern North America, has a pale cap marginandonly slightly viscid stalk. Another
look-alike, L. glutigriseus, has a slightly viscid stalk that is paler at the apexandbase.
L. kauffmanii. also frequent in the Pacific Northwestandsometimes found with L.
pseudomucidus, is similar but usually largerandstouter, with a distinctly tan or paler
(not gray) stalk. Also see the species listed under L. argillaceifolius var. mega carpus.
Lactariusfallax (Velvety Milk Cap) Color Plate 9
CAP 2.5-7 (9) cm broad, convex to plane (often with an umbo) when young. often shallow-
ly depressed in age; surface dryandmore or less velvety, often wrinkled toward the center;
evenly dark brown to nearly black, not zoned; margin often scalloped. Flesh rather thin,
brittle, whitish, taste mild or slightly acrid. LATEX white, usually copious, slowly stain-
ing wounded tissue dull reddish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, narrow, crowded,
white tocreamy-buff(butedgesdark brown in one form). STALK2.5-7 cmlong.0.5-1.5 cm
thick, rather slender, more or less equal, colored like cap or somewhat paler; dry and
unpolished or velvety. SPORE_PRINT yellowish; spores 9-12 x 8-11 microns, more or
less round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups under conifers (especially fir) or occasionally on
rotting wood; fairly common in the late summerandfall in the Pacific Northwest and
northern California. [have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species is one of several milk caps with a brown to nearly black,
velvety cap. Though not good edibles, they are notable fortheir beauty,andtherefore likely
to attract the attention of even the casual collector. L.fallax is the most common member
of the group in the West,andis easily distinguished from the similarly colored L. pseudo-
mucidus. by its dry, velvety rather than smooth, slimy capandstem. There are several
closely related species found mainly in eastern North America, including: L. lignyotus,
with broader, more widely-spaced gills; L. gerardii, with very well-spaced (distant) gills;
L. fuliginellus, a hardwood-lover with close gills;andL. fumosus, with close gills and
a paler (smoky-brown) cap. None of these are worth eating.
Lactarius volemus (Weeping Milk Cap; Bradley)
CAP 5-10 (13) cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed, or sometimes umbonate;
surface dry, minutely velvety to nearly smooth, golden-tawny to orange-brown or rusty-
orange ( or pale yellowish in var. flavus). Flesh thick, firm but brittle, whitish; odor often
becoming fishy in age; taste mild. LATEX white or creamy, very abundant, slowly staining
brown or staining wounded tissue brown. GILLS close, white to creamy or sometimes pale
tan, adnate to slightly decurrent. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.8-1.2 (2) cm thick, equal or
tapered downward, orange-brown to tawny (colored like cap or slightly paler), dry,
unpolished, minutely velvety to nearly smooth; not scrobiculate. SPORE_PRINT whitish;
spores 7.5-10 x 7.5-9 microns, round or nearly round, with amyloid ridges (reticulate).
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground under hardwoods (especially oak)
or in mixed woods; common in the summerandearly fall in eastern North America.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious when properly cooked! Like most milk caps it has a
slightly granular texture that displeases some people, but the flavor is excellent; slow
cooking is best. L. corrugisandL. hygrophoroides (see comments below) are equally
good if not better. All three species are usually free of maggots.
COMMENTS This species is one of a trio of tasty milk caps (see below) that rank among
the best edible mushrooms of eastern North America. To my knowledge they are not found
in the West, but are to be looked for in southern Arizona, where several so-called "eastern"
mushrooms occur (e.g., Strobilomycesfloccopus). L. volemus is easily recognized by its
dry, tawny to orange-brown capandstalk which are often minutely velvety, its mild taste,
and extremely copious white milk that slowly stains brown. The latex is so copious that
the slightest nick of the gills will cause them to "weep," i.e., exude a stream of milky
droplets. The fishy odor that often develops after it is picked or as it is cooked is also
distinctive, but in no way reflects or affects its flavor. Also common under hardwoods in
eastern North America are three similar species with copious white latex, mild taste, and
minutely velvety cap and/or stalk: L. hygrophoroides is a beautiful, similarly colored or
oranger species with well-spaced gills, a mild odor,andlatex that does not stain brown;
L. corrugis (COLOR PLATE 8) is largerandmore robust, with a frequently wrinkled,
dark brown to reddish-brown to rusty-brown cap, whitish to slightly yellowish or
cinnamon-tinged gills, brown-staining latex,anda (typically) mild odor; L. luteolus has
a white to buff or yellowish cap, brown-staining latex,anda frequently fishy odor. All
of the above species are edible. See p. 79 for a photograph of L. volemus.
Lactar;us subflammeus (Orange Milk Cap)
CAP 2-6 (7) cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth,
viscid, scarlet when young soon fading to bright orangeandeventually dull orange; not
zoned concentrically; margin naked. Flesh thin, fragile; odor mild, taste slowly acrid.
LATEX white, unchanging. GILLS adnate to decurrent, fairly close, whitish or colored
like cap but paler. STALK 4-9 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, usually rather longandthicker
toward the base; hollow, rigid but fragile, colored like cap; not viscid. SPORE_PRINT
whitish; spores 7.5-9 x 6.5-7.5 microns, elliptical, with amyloid ridgesandwarts.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under pine, spruce,andother conifers; found in
western North America in the late summerandfallandespecially common in northern
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest. I have not seen it south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Unknown; best avoided until better known.
COMMENTS The bright orange viscid cap, stalk usually longer than the width of the
cap,andwhite unchanging latex typify several similar species that have traditionally
passed under the name L. aurantiacus. They can be told from the candy cap (L.fragilis)
by their viscid capandbrighter color, plus their mild odor. L. luculentus is a very similar
species with a mild to bitterish taste, an orange to tawny cap that is only slightly viscid,
and gills that may stain brownish; it is also common in northern Californiaandthe Pacific
Northwest. L. cocosiolens, discovered in California by Andrew Methven, has a viscid
orange-brown to caramel-colored cap, mild taste,andcopious white latex,andsmells like
coconut when itdries.L. substriatusis one of several look-a likes with yellow-staining latex.
Lactar;us rufus (Red Hot Milk Cap)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface usually not
viscid; smooth, dark brick-red to bay-red or reddish-brown, not zoned; margin naked.
Flesh dingy reddish, rather fragile; odor mild, taste strongly-but often latently-acrid.
LATEX white, unchanging. GILLS crowded, adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish when
young, flushed reddish in old age. STALK 4-11 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick, equal, rigid but
rather fragile, stuffed or hollow, dry, more or less colored like cap. SPORE_PRINT pale
yellowish; spores 7.5-11 x 5-7.5 microns, elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers; widely distributed. It is
common in northern Californiaandthe Pacific N orthwestfromlate summer through early
winter, but I have not seen it south of San Francisco. It is also abundant in northern
sphagnum bogs. Like L. deliciosus, its favorite mycorrhizal mates are pineandspruce.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Like several other peppery milk caps, it is harvested
and canned commercially in Scandinavia. However, North American variants have not
been thoroughly testedandit may be poisonous raw.
COMMENTS This species occurs in droves under northern conifers. It can be told from
other reddish milk caps by its red-hot taste, unchanging white latex,andfondness for
conifers. Fresh young specimens are among the most acrid of all mushrooms. When you
taste one, take only a small bite,andremember: the burning sensation can be delayed!
Other species: L. manzanitae has a small (2-5 cm), viscid, orangish to coppery-red or
brick-red cap, strongly acrid taste,andunchanging latex; it occurs under manzanita in
California. L. hysginus var. americanus has a brown to dark vinaceous-brown, viscid
capandviscid stalk; it grows under conifers. For similar species with a milder taste, see
L. subviscidus. L. subflammeus.andL. rufu/us.
Lactarius subviscidus
CAP 14 (5) cm broad, shallowly depressed becoming broadly or more deeply depressed in
age; surface smooth, viscid to thinly slimy when wet, dark reddish or reddish-brown
to brick-red or paler(pinkish) inage, not normally zoned; margin sometimes faintly striate.
Flesh thin, tinged cap color, fragile; odor mild, taste mild to slightly acrid. LATEX white,
rather scanty, unchanging. GILLS close, adnate to decurrent, pinkish-buff to pinkish-
cinnamon, or darker in age. STALK 2-5 cm long, 4-8 mm thick, more or less equal, usually
hollow; smooth, not viscid, colored like cap or gills. SPORE_PRINT white to yellowish;
spores 8-10 x 7-8 microns, broadly elliptical, with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground or rotten wood under conifers (spruce,
pine, etc.) in the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia. It is fairly common in our area in the
fallandearly winter under pine, Douglas-fir.andmanzanita.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This small species looks like a candy ca p (L. fragilis or L. rufu/us), butthe
thinly viscid cap (often with debris stuck to it), mild odor,andwhite (rather than watery
white) latex distinguish it. The latex does not stain yellow as in L. vinaceorufescens. but
may slowly stain white paper yellow (overnight). The cap is not orange as in L. subflam-
meusandnot as acrid (peppery) as L. manzanitae (see L. rufus). Similar species include:
L. riparius, common under conifers, alder,andwillow in seepage areas in the Sierra
Nevada, with a brownish-red to brick-red cap that is slightly viscid when moist, mild
taste,andcopious unchanging white or watery-white latex; L. atrobadius, with a viscid
liver-colored to blackish-red capandnon-yellowing latex; andL. hepaticus, with a viscid
or dry capandyellowing latex. For similar species with dry caps, see L. rufu/us.
Lactarius jragilis
(Candy Cap)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly convex or plane or sometimes with an umbo, becoming
slightly to broadly depressed in age; surface dry (never viscid!), often uneven or somewhat
wrinkled; usually colored burnt orange to cinnamon but sometimes reddish-brown;
sometimes darker toward center but not zoned concentrically; margin often wavy or
frilled. Flesh thin, fragile, tinged cap color; taste mild or slightly bitter; odor faintly fragrant
or pungent becoming strongly aromatic (like maple syrup) upon drying. LATEX white or
watery-white, unchanging, often scanty or absent. GILLS adnate becoming decurrent,
close, pale pinkish-cinnamon or tinged cap color (or sometimes more yellowish),
darkening to more or less cap color in age, or dusted whitish with spores. STALK(2)4-9 cm
long, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, usually rather slender; fragile, more or less equal, colored like
cap; often hollow in age, with hairs at base. SPORE_PRINT white to pale yellowish;
spores 6-9 microns, more or less round, with amyloid wartsandridges (reticulate). Cap
and stalk tissue containing numerous nests of sphaerocysts.
HABITAT Widely scattered to densely gregarious or in small clumps on ground in
woods (often along trailsandin other damp places, sometimes on wood). It is apparently
confined to the Pacific CoastandSoutheast, but the very similar L. camphoratus (see
comments) occurs elsewhere. In our area it is normally abundant from the late fall through
early spring, especially under oak but also with other trees (pine, Douglas-fir, etc.).
EDIBILITY Edibleandone of the very best of our late season mushrooms. Fresh speci-
mens can be sauteedandused like any other mushroom; when chopped upandslowly
dried, however, their flavor becomes sweetandthey are great in pancakes, cookies, on
cinnamon toast with sesame seeds, or even in ice cream! Fortunately, they are plentiful
enough to merit collecting in spite of their small size, but be sure of your identification!
A few poor souls, alas, are allergic to them.
COMMENTS The most remarkable feature of candy caps is the sweet, persistent fra-
grance they develop when cooked or dried. If just a few candy caps are sauteed, their odor
will permeate the entire houseandlinger for days. Stranger still, when eaten in quantity
they imbue one's perspirationandbodily exudates with the unmistakable aroma of maple
syrup-thereby provoking some puzzled stares! Their odor has also been likened to that
of butterscotch, fenugreek, burnt sugar,andsweet clover. Fresh specimens may have
only a slight odor, in which case the mild taste, watery-white unchanging latex,andoverall
burnt orange or "ferruginous" color separate them from most other mushrooms (but see
below). In dry weather the latex is often absent, leading to confusion with Laccaria laccata,
Clitocybe in versa, Rhodocybe nuciolens, CollybiaandCortinarius species,andvarious
other similarly colored mushrooms. Fortunately, the odor is usually quite pronounced
under those conditions. Be sure the latex does not stain yellow-L. vinaceorufescens often
mingles with itandcan be practically the same color.
The typical variety of L. fragilis occurs in the Southeastandis slightly tawnier. The
western version, L. fragilis var. rubidus, may actually be a distinct species. F Qr years it has
passed as L. camphoratus. That species, however, is found in northern coniferous and
hardwood forestsandhas a slightly redder, frequently nippled (umbonate) capandnon-
reticulate spores. Still another candy cap, L. rufulus, occurs in California under oak,
but tends to be larger, is often redder, usually has a thickerandfirmer stem,andcontains
few if any sphaerocysts in its tissue (see description of L. rufulus). For similar species with
a mild odor, see L. subviscidusandcomments under L. rufulus.
Lactarius rufulus (Rufous Candy Cap)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly umbonate, becoming wavy or
depressed; surface often uneven or somew hat wrinkled, not viscid, color variable: usually
dark red to reddish-brown or brick-colored, but sometimes oranger; evenly colored or
with darker areas; margin incurved at first. Flesh firm, whitish to buff or tinged cap color,
brittle; taste mild to faintly acrid, odorfragrant to mild orfaintly pungent. LATEX white
or watery white, unchanging, often scanty or even absent. GILLS adnate to decurrent,
fairly close, pallid to cinnamon-buff, pinkish-buff, or tinged cap color( or yellower), often
darker red or reddish-brown in age, at least On the margins. STALK 4-12 cm long, (0.5)
0.8-3 cm thick, equal or slightly tapered, colored more or less like cap, firm, usually solid
or stuffed but sometimes partially hollow in age. SPORE_PRINT creamy to yellowish;
spores 7-9 microns, round or nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges(atleast partially
reticulate). Nests of sphaerocysts scanty to completely absent in capandstalk tissue.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or tufted under oak, late fall through spring;
known only from California. In my experience it is not as common as L.fragilis in regions
of high rainfall (e.g., coastal centralandnorthern California), but more common than
L. fragilis in drier areas (e.g., inlandandsouthern California).
EDIBILITY Edibleandgood, but not quite as fragrant or tasty as L.fragilis.
COMMENTS This oak-loving candy cap tends to be redderandmore robust than L.
fragilis.andoften has a solid stem. The critical difference is microscope, however: the
absence or near absence of swollen cells (sphaerocysts) in the capandstem tissue is highly
unusual for a Lactarius! L. rufu/us can also be confused with L. rufus. but that species has
an acrid tasteandfavors conifers, while L. vinaceorufescens has yellowing latex.
There is a whole slew of very similar, reddish-brown to dull rusty-orange milk caps with
a mild to somewhat bitter tasteandlittle or no odor. These are difficult to differentiate
without a microscope,andfar too numerous to ennumerate. As a group they have passed
under the name L. subdulcis, but of course are not the "true" L. subdu/cis of Europe ( if they
were, we would probably be calling them something else!). These species include: L. sub-
serijluus, with clear latexandorange-brown cap, the oak-loving eastern counterpart of
L. rufu/us (it also lacks sphaerocysts in the cap tissue); L. thiersii, also lacking sphaero-
cysts but much smaller (cap 1-3 cm), known only from California;L. oculatus, with a red-
brown to pinkish, often nippled, dry to slightly viscid cap, found in eastern Sphagnum bogs
and under conifers; L. a/pinus var. mitis, One of several species common under alder and
northern conifers or in seepage areas; L. hepaticus (see comments under L. subviscidus);
and L. thejogalus, with somewhat yellowing latex, occurring in swarms under birch.
L. herpeticus should also be mentioned. For similar viscid-capped species, see L. subvisci-
dus. N one of these species should be eaten until better known.
Russula brevipes (Short-Stemmed Russula)
CAP 7-30 cm broad, broadly convex with a depressed centerandinrolled margin, be-
coming broadly vase-shaped in age; surface dry, unpolished, minutely woolly or felty,
white or whitish but often dirty and/or with yellowish to brown stainsanddiscolorations;
margin not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white, not staining; taste mild or slowly acrid.
GILLS thin, close or crowded, adnate to decurrent, usually alternating longandshort,
white or creamy (but tinged blue-green in one variety), often brownish-stained in age.
STALK 2-7 (10) cm long, 2-5 em thick, hardandrigid, often quite shortandstout, equal or
tapering downward, smooth, dry, dull white or brownish-stained, sometimes with blue-
green tinge at apex. SPORE_PRINT white to pale buff; spores 8-11 x 6.5-9 microns,
elliptical, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary or more often scattered or in groups or troops on ground in woods
of all kinds; widely distributedandoften abundant. It hugs the ground closelyandmay be
visible only as a low mound or "mushrump" in the humus. In our area the major crop is
typically in November or December, but it can be found most any time.
EDIBILITY Edible, but better kicked than picked. In my experience it is insipid and
granular, but some people are apparently fond of it. One authority recommends stewing
it slowly in soups; another says to "throw it in with the sauerkraut." The flavorandtexture
are substantially improved when it is parasitized by Hypomyces lactif/uorum(see p. 884).
COMMENTS "So large, so mediocre"and"Better kicked than picked" typify the
comments this tedious, vulgar, mundane mushroom received when overwhelmingly voted
the "Most Boring Mushroom" of the 8th Annual Santa Cruz Fungus Fair. (Second place
went to "the one behind the desk answering questions.") Actually, it is a rather attractive
mushroom when first encountered, the pristine cleanness (clean pristineness?) ofthegills
contrasting prettily with the dirty hunks of humus hoisted aloft by the concave cap. How-
ever, as the above comments attest, one quickly tires of finding it-not only because of its
ubiquitousness (it is by far the most common of the larger Russulas), but also due to its
annoying habit of forming deceptively promising "mushrumps" in the humus (thwarted
boletivores are not known for their ability to perceive beauty).
R. brevi pes is easily recognized by its dull white color, centrally depressed cap with an
inrolled margin when young, hard stem,andcrisp flesh that does not blacken or redden
when bruised. It has the general aspect of a large Lactarius (e.g., L. piperatus), but lacks a
latex, though the gills when young may be beaded with water droplets. Var. acr;or is the
form with an acrid tasteandblue-green tints in the gillsandstalk apex. Other species:R.
romagnes;ana is a rare but very similar eastern species with smaller spores;R. cascadens;s
also has smaller spores, but has an intensely acrid tasteandsmaller cap (4-12 cm broad)
and occurs under conifers in the Pacific Northwest. R. de/;ca is also close to R. brevi pes,
but is said to have thick, well-spaced gills. It was originally described from Europeandis
apparently rare in North America.
Russula albonigra (Blackening Russula; Integrated Russula)
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, broadly convex or centrally depressed becoming broadly
depressed in age; surface dry to slightly viscid, sometimes polished; smooth, at first white,
soon becoming grayish or blackish-brownandfinally entirely black; margin not striate.
Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white, bruising grayandthen black; taste mild or slightly acrid.
GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close to rather well-spaced, thick, brittle, usually
alternating longandshort; creamy-white staining gray or black, often entirely black in old
age. STALK 3-13 cm long, 2-5 cm thick, very hard, stout, solid, rigid, smooth, equal or
tapered downward, white becoming grayish or brownish-gray in age or where wounded,
then black. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 5.5-7.5 microns, broadly elliptical to
nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops under both hardwoodsandconifers; wide-
ly distributed. It is sporadically common in our oak-madrone woodlands but appears to
be more abundant than it actually is because the fruiting bodies do not decay readily.
In the Pacific Northwest it favors conifers.
EDIBILITY Better punted than hunted. Although said to be edible if thoroughly cooked,
it is hardly temptinganda closely related Oriental species is poisonous.
COMMENTS This sometimes massive Russula is easily identified by its hard cap and
stemandthe blackening of all parts in age or when handled. It is decidedly schizophrenic
in appearance-young specimens are reminiscent of R. brevipesandHygrophorus
sordidus in their whiteness, while elderly individuals are completely jet-black (hence the
epithet albonigra, meaning "white-black"). Most dramatic, however, are those specimens
in transition, i.e., with a black cap, black stem,andwhite gills (the gills generally take longer
to blacken than the capandstem). R. so,dida is a passe synonym. R. at,ataisa very similar
west coast species that also blackens, but has a much thicker cap cuticle. Several allied
species stain reddish before turning black (see R. densifolia),andR. adusta(seecomments
under the R. subnigricans group) darkens less dramatically.
Russula densifolia (Reddening Russula)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed; surface viscid when moist, soon
dryandoften polished; smooth, whitish to pale buff becoming grayish or brownish or
eventually blackish in old age; margin not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, white, slowly bruising
reddish or orange-red, then eventually grayish-brown to black; taste usually acrid. GILLS
adnate to slightly decurrent, close, brittle, whitish, developing sordid reddish to smoky
stains in age, usually alternating longandshort. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, hard,
rigid, smooth, equal; whitish when fresh but staining like the flesh (reddish or orangish,
then smoky-brown to black). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly
elliptical with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods; widely distributed. It is fairly
common locally, along with R. dissimulans (see comments), but is not nearly as numerous
as R. albonigra, R. brevi pes, or R. subnigricans. The majorcrop is in the fall or early winter.
EDIBILITY Better dribbled than nibbled. The sharp taste is said to disappear in cooking,
but the end product is insipid at bestandindigestible or even poisonous at worst.
COMMENTS The slow staining of wounded tissue to reddishandthen grayish-brown,
sooty-gray, or black is the calling card of this coarse Russulaandits close relatives (see
below). The staining is a tactful compromise between R. albonigra, which blackens
directly,andthe R. subnigricans group, which stains reddish but not black. The full
staining sequence may take half an hourandis best seen by scratching the stalk. Other
coarse, closely related Russulas with the same staining reactions include:R. dissimulans,
commonandwidely distributed, with a dry (not viscid) cap, mild taste,andslightly larger
spores;andR. nigricans, fairly common (at least on the west coast), with very thick, well-
spaced gillsandsmaller spores. Both of these species are "better beaten than eaten."
Russula subnigricans group (Rank Russula)
CAP (5) 9-20 (30) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed; surface slightly viscid
when moist, smooth, whitish when young, soon becoming pale smoky-brown or dingy
reddish-brown or dull ochraceous-stained, or often a sordid mixture of these shades;
margin at first inrolled, not striate. Flesh thick, crisp, white, typically bruising slowly
reddish (in 5-20 minutes), then usually browner or grayer within an hour, but sometimes
staining grayish-brown directly (especially in stalk), or not at all; odor strong and
unpleasant, at least in age or upon drying; taste mild to slightly bitter. GILLS thick, brittle,
adnate to slightly decurrent, usually alternating longandshort; pallid, soon stained dark or
sordid reddish; close to fairly well-spaced. STALK(3) 7-13 cm long, (1.5) 3-7 cm thick, very
hard, rigid, solid; equal orwith tapered base, smooth, white, staining sordid reddish andf or
smoky-brown in age or when handled. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-10 microns, nearly
round with low amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under live oak; common in our area from late
summer through early winterandalso reported from Mississippi. In our area it is a good
chanterelle-indicator (see comments).
EDIBILITY Better trampled than sampled. The rank odor is hardly enticingandthe
Japanese version is extremely poisonous according to mycologist Tsuguo Hongo.*
COMMENTS This vulgar giant of the genus is very close both macro-and micro-
scopically to R. subnigricans, a species originally described from Japan. (Our version,
upon which the above description is based, seems to differ only in its slightly larger size,
closer gills,andrank odor at maturity.) The principal field marks are its hard stem, brittle
 Hongo. coincidentally, is the Spanish word for "mushroom."
texture, large size, coarse appearance,andreddening of the gills in age or where wounded.
The staining reactions elsewhere on the fruiting body are rather variable, but at no point
does it blacken as in R. albon;gra. R. densifolia, R. d;ss;mulans, or R. n;gr;cans. The cap
color is rather amorphous-generally an un becoming blend of murky gray, smoky-brown,
and sordid reddish or ochraceous-but in one-collection I made the fruiting body had
bluish-green tinges as in R. brev;pes var. acr;or. Another interesting feature is its affinity for
chanterelles, one or more of which will often grow right out ofthe base of its stem-or if not,
then in the immediate vicinty! Other species: R. adusta is a somewhat similar, widespread
species which has rather erratic staining reactions (the flesh normally bruises smoky-
brown or grayish-black, but may show a slight reddish intermediate phase); its gills,
however, do not redden in age. R. compacta of northernandeastern North America is
also somewhat similar, but stains ochre or brownandhas a pallid to rusty-or reddish-
brown to ochre-brown cap. Both of these are "better stomped than chomped."
Russula decolorans group (Graying Russula)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, nearly round becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed; sur-
face smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: dull red to orange, red mixed with yellow,
coppery-brown, or at times with cinnamon or tawny tones; margin striate in old age. Flesh
thick, firm, white, becoming gray, ashy, or black when bruised or exposed (sometimes
slowly); odorandtaste mild. GILLS typically adnate to adnexed, fairly close, creamy
becoming pale ochre or yellowish, sometimes grayish-stained in old age. STALK4-12 cm
long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or often thicker below. very firm when young(but often softer in
age), white, stainingandaging grayish. SPORE_PRINT yellowish to pale ochre; spores
9-14x 7-10 (12) microns, elliptical, with isolated amyloid warts.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in mixed woods and
under conifers, associated principally with pine; widely distributed.
EDIBILITY Better smashed than stashed-it is said to be edible, but there are several
look-alikes of unknown edibility.
COMMENTS The graying flesh, reddish to orange cap,andmild taste are the fallible
field marks of this firm, rather robust Russula, which is actually a close-knit" complex" of
species. One striking form found in our coastal pine forests is very firmandhasa somewhat
shiny cap in dry weather. Other species: R. paludosa has a reddish capandflesh that grays
somewhat, but the taste is usually slightly bitter or acrid. R. obscura has a darker (purple-
red to brownish) cap, mild taste,andflesh that stains pinkish orreddish before blackening.
Both of the above species are quite firmandrobust, have ochre spores,andgrow with
conifers. Another distinctive species, R. occidental is, has a grayish to olive-brown to buff,
brownish, or vinaceous cap (usually a mixture of these colors)andmild taste. Its stalk
and flesh are white but usually stain reddishandthen gray (or gray directly) when bruised.
It is fairly common under mountain conifers in the Pacific Northwest.
Russula claroflava (Yellow Russula)
CAP (3) 4-12 cm broad, nearly round becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed;
surface slightly viscid, soon dry, yellow to golden-yellow, smooth; margin slightly striate in
age. Flesh white, slowly staining grayish when rubbed; odorandtaste mild. GILLS adnate
to adnexed or free, close, creamy becoming pale ochre; sometimes grayish-stained in age.
STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, more or less equal, white to pale yellow, dry, smooth,
aging or slowly bruising grayish. SPORE_PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 8.5-10 x 7.5-8
microns, broadly elliptical with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups in woods; mainly northern or montane in distri-
butionandpartial to birch, aspen,andvarious conifers. I have found it in New Mexico
under aspen, but not in California. I t fruits mainly in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Edible.
COMMENTS The pretty yellow capandtendency to stain or age ashy-gray rescue this
species from "JAR" status. R. flava is a synonym. R. ochroleuca is a similar species with
a yellow-ochre cap, acrid taste,andflesh that grays quickly. Another yellow-capped spe-
cies, R. lutea, is rather fragile, has a mild taste, ochre gills,anddoes not stain gray. All of
these are fairly common in northern North America under conifers, birch,andaspen.
Russula fragrantissima group Color Plate 11
(Fragrant Russula; Fetid Russula)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, nearly round becoming convex, then plane or somewhat
depressed; surface viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, yellowish to yellow-brown to bright
ochre, stra w-colored, orange-brown, or brown, often darker (or reddish-spotted) at the
center; margin usually radially furrowed with small bumps (tuberculate-striate), at least in
old age. Flesh thick, white or tinted cap color; odor heavyandpenetrating-at first sweet
(like maraschino cherries, almond extract, or benzaldehyde), but in age with a nauseating
(fetid) component; taste nauseating; taste of gills acrid. GILLS creamy-white becoming
yellowish or pale ochre, brownish-spotted in age, often beaded with water droplets when
fresh; adnate to adnexed or free, fairly close. STALK 3-20 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, equal or
somewhat tapered below, whitish to buff becoming yellowish or brownish-stained in age,
especially near base; smooth or longitudinally lined, dry. SPORE_PRINT pale ora-nge-
yellow; spores 6-9 x 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round with amyloid warts and
at least partially reticulate.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and
conifers, widely distributed. In our area it fruits mainly in the fall under oak, tanoak, and
madrone; it can be found every year but is not nearly as numerous as the R. sororia group.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedibleandpossibly poisonous-in other words, it is better
punched than munched. The disgusting tasteandstrong odor should discourage most
people from sampling it.
COMMENTS Anyone under the mistaken impression that all mushrooms smell alike
should get a whiff of this robust, odoriferous Russula. The penetrating odor is reminiscent
of maraschino cherries, but with a fetid component that becomes moreandmore pro-
nounced as the mushroom matures. The cap is often merely flat at maturity, rather than
depressed as in most of the larger R ussulas,andthe stalk is often long in relation to the ca p.
The yellow-brown to ochre cap, fairly large size,andwater droplets on the gills (when
moist) are also distinctive. Other species in the "complex" include:: R. lauroceras;
(possibly the one in the color plate), a slightly yellower, cleaner, slimmer, larger-spored
version of R.Jragrantissimawhose odoris strongly fragrant through maturity, albeit witha
subtle fetid component; it is also widely distributedandthe two appearto intergrade. Both
have passed under the name R.joetens, a European species with a nauseating odor even in
youthandnon-reticulate spores. Its North American counterpart, R. subjoetens (=R.
joetentula?) is smaller, has a bright rusty-orange to rusty-yellow to brownish cap, and
does not smell as strong. Finally, there is R. ventricosipes, which grows in sand under
northern conifersandhas a large, conspicuously swollen (ventricose) stalk.
Russula soror;a group (Comb Russula)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface viscid when
moist, smooth, dark grayish-brown to hazel-brown when young (rarely whitish), usually
paler (yellow-brown to straw-colored or pale grayish-brown) toward margin or in age;
margin usually furrowed with low bumps (tuberculate-striate) in age. Flesh brittle, firm,
white, not bruising; odor unpleasant (rancid or "spermatic"); taste mild or slightly acrid;
taste of gills slowly but distinctly acrid. GILLS white or creamy, but often brownish-or
rusty-stained in age; close, adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick,
equal or tapered downward, whitish, but often rusty-stained near base; often with large
cavities (usually 3) within. SPORE_PRINT creamy to pale yellow; spores 6-9 x 5-7
microns, broadly elliptical with amyloid warts.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in woods or at their edges, on lawns under
trees, etc; commonandwidely distributed. In. our area it is often abundant in the fall and
winter, especially under pine, oak,andDouglas-fir.
EDIBILITY Better stomped than chomped-it might be poisonousanddoesn't taste
good anyway.
COMMENTS The brown to grayish-brown to dingy straw-colored cap, tuberculate-
striate margin in age, peppery-tasting gills, unpleasant odor,andmoderate size typify a
group of R ussulas that are at times exceedingly abundant. They differ from the R.Jragran-
tissima group in their smaller size, gra yer color,anddifferent odor. They ha ve passed under
the names R. pectinata, a European species with a yellower cap,andR. pectinatoides,
a North American species that is also yellower than R. sororia.andhas a less acrid taste
and darker (yellower) spores. Other species: R. amoenolens is the same as R. sororia
(as defined here); R. cerolens is practically the same but has partially reticulate spores;
R. granulataandR. pulverulenta have scurfy-granulose caps.
Russula cyanoxantha
(Variegated Russula)
CAP 5-18 cm or more broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface viscid when
moist but soon dry, smooth, color variable, sometimes entirely but more often a mixture of:
pinkish-lilac, dull purple, green, olive, yellow, blue-green, white, and/or brown; margin
sometimes obscurely striate. Flesh thick, firm, white, crisp; odor mild or pleasant, taste
mild. GILLS adnexed to adnate or slightly decurrent, many of them forked at least once;
white or with a few brownish stains, slightly greasy to the touch. STALK 5-13 cm long, 1.5-5
cm thick, solid or stuffed, rather hard; more or less equal, smooth, white, but the flesh in
base sometimes grayish. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly
elliptical to nearly round with isolated amyloid warts. Stalk not staining salmon in ferrous
sulfate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops under hardwoods or sometimes
conifers; widely distributed. It is often abundant shortly after the first fall rains in our
live oak-tanoak-madrone forests, but fruits on into the winter. Like many Russulas, it
is often concealed by fallen leaves.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice; it is delectably sweet when youngandrated highly in
Europe. The hard, crisp buttons are hard to beat in omelets or with scalloped potatoes, but
alas, they are also considered "edibleandchoice" by maggots!
COMMENTS This variable species is more difficult to characterize than it is to recognize
(see photo on p. 897). The telltale traits are its fairly large size, white gillsandspores, firm
white stalk, mild taste,andvariegated cap (typically a mixture of pinkish-lilac, dull purple,
green, yellow or even blue). In our form young specimens-especially those still covered
by leaves-are often uniformly colored a beautiful pinkish-lilac-mauve. When exposed
to light they gradually become spotted with yellow, green, etc.,andin old age are often a
washed-out whitish color at the center, with slight greenish or lilac tones showing on the
margin. Another distinctive feature is its soft, somewhat greasy gills: they are not as brittle
as those of most Russulas. R. parazurea (see comments under R. aeruginea) is easily
mistaken harmlessly for greenish forms of R. cyanoxantha. but is usually slightly smaller,
not so variegated,andhas reticulate or partially reticulate spores. R. variata (=R. cyano-
xantha var. vadata), common in northernandeastern North America, differs in its more
promiscuously forked gills, often acrid taste,andsomewhat different cap color-tending
more toward brownish-olive, greenish, dull purplish, or vinaceous-brown. Two other
species, R. vescaandR. brunneola, also have a mild tasteandwhitish spores, but their
stalks stain salmon or deep salmon in ferrous sulfate. The cap cuticle in R. vesca tends
to be slightly redder or more flesh-colored (and is often wrinkled and/or recedes from
the margin in age), while that of R. brunneola tends to have a brownish to yellowish-
brown to olive-brown or grayish-olive cast. Both are widely distributedandeasily
confused with each other (as well as with R. cyanoxanrha) when not "typically" colored.
Both are edible, however, so it hardly matters. For similar species with creamy or yellow-
tinged spores, see R. parazureaandR. grisea (under R. aeruginea).
Russula aerug;nea (Green Russula)
CAP 3-9 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface viscid when
moist, dull greeen to dark green, sometimes with brown, gray, or yellowish tints or blotches;
margin often striate. Flesh white, brittle; taste mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free,
close, brittle, white becoming pale yellowish, often with brownish stains. STALK 4-8 cm
long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or with tapered base, white or faintly yellow, base often with pale
brown stains. SPORE_PRINT creamy to pale yellow or pale orange-yellow; spores 6-9 x
5-7 microns, nearly round with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods; widely distributed. In California
I have found it only a few times, but it is sometimes abundant under aspen in the Rocky
MountainsandSouthwest,andunder oak in the South.
EDIBILITY Edible. I have fried it.
COMMENTS This moderate-sized Russu/a can be told by its smooth green cap, pallid
or brownish-spotted gills,andpale yellow spore print. There is no red or purple in the cap
as in some of the larger, yellow-spored Russulas (e.g., R. o/ivaceaandR. xerampe/ina).
There are several similar species, including: R. parazurea, a bea utiful green-ca pped species
with a matt appearance, firm white stem,andwhite spores, found under oakandtanoak
in our area;andR. grisea, fairly common in our area under oak, with a slightly duller
or grayer cap (green mixed with brown, gray, etc., or sometimes purplish or lilac) and
yellowish spores. Also see R. cyanoxanrhaandthe species listed under it.
Russula v;rescens (Quilted Green Russula)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, nearly round at first becoming convex to plane or slightly depressed;
surface dryandsometimes slightly velvety, markedly areolate at maturity (i.e., cracked
into small flattened scales or patches); dull green to greenish-gray or sometimes dull
bluish-green, at times with ochre, buff, or creamy discolorations; margin not striate or
only very slightly so, often lobed. Flesh thick, white, brittle; odorandtaste mild. GILLS
white or creamy, fairly close, adnate to adnexed orevenfree. STALK 3-9 cm long, 1-3 (4)
cm thick, more or less equal, dry, firm, brittle, white, more or less smooth. SPORE
PRINT white or with a faint yellow tinge; spores 6-9 (10)x 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly
round, with amyloid warts and/or ridges.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in groups under hardwoods, especially oak
and beech; common (along with R. cruslOsa-see comments) during the summer months
in eastern North America. It has also been recorded from Montana under birchandis to
be expected in southern ArizonaandNew Mexico, where several "eastern" species occur.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-along with R. cyanoxanlhaandR. xerampe/ina, among
the best of the Russulas for the table.
COMMENTS One of the most distinctive of all the Russulas, this species is easily told by
its greenish to greenish-gray, areolate (cracked or quilted) cap, white spores,andasso-
ciation with hardwoods. It is one of the characteristic summertime mushrooms of eastern
hardwood forests, where it sometimes fruits with the equally edible Laclarius vo/emus
and/or L. corrugis. Other species: R. crustosa is a closely related edible species
with an areolate cap that is slightly viscid when wetandmore variable in color (usually
browner or more ochre-buff, but sometimes with a greenish tinge); R. macu/osa of the
Southeast resembles R. cruslosa, but has a paler capanddisagreeable odor in age.
Russula mariae (Powdered Russula)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, purple to
reddish-purple, amethyst. dark crimson. or maroon (sometimes toned with gray or olive).
finely powdered or velvety from a whitish bloom; margin sometimes striate when old.
Flesh thin, brittle, white; taste mild or slightly acrid. GILLS close, white becoming creamy
or pale yellowish, typically adnate to adnexed. STALK 2.5-7.5 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick,
equal or tapering downward, firm, rigid, white ortinged reddish to purple. SPORE_PRINT
creamy-yellow; spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid warts
and ridges.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground in woods; rather rare in California, where I
have found it in the fall under oakandDouglas-fir, but acommon mid-summer mushroom
in the hardwood forests of eastern North America.
EDIBILITY Edible, but hardly incredible.
COMMENTS This exq uisite, rather dainty Russula is one of the more easily recognized
species in the genus. The dry, velvety or finely powdered reddish to purple cap, creamy
spore print,andmild taste distinguish it. The "splitters" recognize two species, the purple-
capped forms being called R. alachuana. The name R. mariae should not be confused
with R. mairei, a member of the R. emetica group.
Russula albidulagroup (Boring White Russula)
CAP 3-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface smooth,
slightly viscid when moist, then dry; white or tinged buff at center; margin not striate or
very obscurely so. Flesh fragile, white; taste acrid. GILLS adnate to'adnexed or free. brit-
tle, close, white or creamy. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below,
dry, smooth, rigid, white; often spongy or hollow in age. SPORE_PRINT white or creamy-
white; spores 7-10 microns, nearly round with amyloid ridges.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woods or at their edges, widely distributed. It is
fairly common in our area from late summer through the spring, usually with oak but never
in large numbers (like lipsandscissors. it tends to occur in pairs). It is partial to poor
soil along trails or roadcuts.
EDIBILITY Better whacked than sacked-the acrid taste is a deterrent.
COMMENTS This plain, unprepossessing, profoundly forgettable Russula can be
recognized by its white color, modest size,andacrid taste. It is smallerandmore fragile
than R. brevi pesanddoes not have a strongly inrolled cap margin when young. There are
several very similar, confusing, widespread, wishy-washy Russulas. They include R. al-
bellaandR. albida, with a mild to slightly bitter taste,andR. anomalaandR. subalbidula,
with an acrid taste, but distinguishing between them is a matter for the specialist. For a
comparison of the R. albidula group to R. cremoricolor, see comments under the latter.
Russula cremoricolor (Creamy Russula)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane to centrally or broadly depressed; surface viscid
when moist, smooth, white to pallid to very pale yellowish-white, the center often slightly
darker (yellowish or buff); margin usually striate in age (but sometimes obscurely). Flesh
brittle, white; odor mild or slightly fragrant; taste distinctly acrid. GILLS white, adnate
to adnexed or ocasionally free, fairly close. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.7-2.5 (3) cm thick,
equal or slightly thicker below, dry, white or whitish, usually longitudinally lined or striate.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7.5-10 x 7.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical, with
amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or troops in woods; widely distributed.
In our area it is often abundant in the late fallandwinter in the same habitatsasR. emet;ca.
In the Pacific Northwest it favors conifers.
EDIBILITY Better obliterated than refrigerated-the acrid taste is a deterrent.
COMMENTS This species looks like an albno R. emet;ca.andsave for the whitish cap,
there is little difference. The cap, although whitish, is slightly yellower than that of R.
alb;dula,andis usually cleanerandmore markedly striate. Also, R. cremor;color tends to
fruit in larger numbers. Other species: R. crenulataandR. raoult;; are two very similar
species that are yellower (cap more or less pale yellow); the latter also has smaller spores.
Another pale capped, bitter-or acrid-tasting species, R. crassotun;cata, can be distin-
guished by its thick, rubbery or leathery cap cuticle that is often slightly scurfyandits
white stalk that frequently develops brownish spots in age. It occurs under northern
conifers. "Eating raoultii'" (or any of the other species discussed here) is not recommended.
Russula emetica group (Emetic Russula; The Sickener)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, rounded-convex becoming plane or broadly depressed; surface viscid
when moist, smooth, bright red to scarlet, the center often darker; fading in age or wet
weather to pink, orange, or blotched with white; margin eventually striate (but some-
times obscurely). Flesh white (but pink under the cuticle), brittle, odor mild, taste very
acrid. GILLS white orcreamy-white, brittle, close, adnate toadnexed or free. STALK3-1 0
cm long, 0.7-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, dry, white or whitish, usually with
longitudinal lines. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 6.5-9 microns, elliptical with
amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops in woods, widely distributed and
common. Our member of the R. emetica group fruits late in the season( winter) in chaparral
and mixed woods (oak, madrone, manzanita,andpine), often intermingled with R.
cremoricolorandLactarius vinaceorufescens. It also grows on very rotten wood-
unorthodox behavior for a Russula.
EDIBILITY Pleasing to the eyes of all, to the tongues of some, but to the stomachs of none.
As its name implies, it is poisonous, at least raw,andcan be used to induce vomiting.
Parboiling may destroy the toxins, but it hardly seems worth the trouble or risk. It is
collected by Himalayan villagers, presumably for use in curries (consult your local travel
agent for details).
COMMENTS This attractive mushroom is easily recognized by its red cap, white stem
and gills,andred-hot taste. As in many Russulas, the skin peels rather easily from the cap.
For years the name R. emetica has been applied toaconfusinggroup of Russulas with the
above features. I see no compelling reason to discontinue this trend, though the present
consensus seems to be that the "real" R. emeticaoccurs principally with conifersandfavors
sphagnum bogs. Other species in the group include: R. s;/v;co/a, an eastern species with a
red to pinkish-yellow capandslightly smaller spores, common with both hardwoods and
conifers;andR. ma;re;, colored like R. emetica but associated with hardwoodsandwith a
firmer textureandsmaller spores, 6-8.5 x 5-7 microns (it may well be our local species).
Russula fragilis
(Fragile Russula)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, viscid when
moist, color variable: purplish to pinkish, olive-brown, greenish, or even yellow, or a
mixture of these colors, but most often blackish at the centerandpinkish or pinkish-yellow
at the margin, with a grayish-olive zone in between; margin striate in age. Flesh thin, very
fragile, white; odor variable; taste acrid. GILLS adnate to adnexed Or even free, fairly close,
white or creamy-w hite. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at
either end, dry, whitish; fragile. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 6-9 x 5-8 microns, broadly
elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods of all kinds, but especially under
conifers; widespread. I have not seen it in our area, but several similar species occur.
EDIBILITY Not recommended-the acrid taste is a deterrent.
COMMENTS This species is apt to befuddle the color-conscious beginner with its
numerous color guises, but is rather distinctive when "typical," i.e., dark at the center,
pinkish toward the marginandgrayish-olive between. The other critical features are the
fragile texture, peppery taste, white gills,andwhite spores. Other species: R. aquosa is a
closely related but slightly larger species; its cap is viscid with a greasy feelandshiny
appearance when wet,andis usually reddish to orange-red or pink with grayish, brownish,
or yellow tints.
Russula gracilis group
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed, sometimes retaining a
slight umbo; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: usually some shade of
pink, but often with a dull greenish or grayish-olive to brownish-black centerandpale
pinkish margin,andsometimes a rather deep pink or violet-tinged; margin usually striate
in old age. Flesh fragile, white; taste acrid. GILLS typically adnate to slightly decurrent,
whitish becoming creamyandfinally tinged yellow, close. STALK 3.5-8 cm long,0.5-1.5
cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, usually quite softandfragile, whitish, but usually
tinged or flushed pink to grayish-rose. SPORE_PRINT creamy to pale ochre; spores 7-9 x
5-7 microns. elliptical. with isolated amyloid warts.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; it is said to grow only
with birch, but a very similar if not identical species is abundant in our area with Douglas-
fir in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Not edible due to the acrid taste.
COMMENTS Also known asR. graci/lima, this species can be told by its fragile pinkish-
tinged stalk, yellowish spores, acrid (peppery) taste,andpinkish or pink-and-greenish cap.
R. fragilis is quite similar in cap color but has whitish sporesanda white stalk, while the
R. placita group, which also occurs commonly with Douglas-fir in our area, has a mild
taste, white stem,anddarker cap. Other species: R. pe/argonia also has a pinkish-tinged
stalkandacrid tasteandgrows with conifers (especially Douglas-fir), but it has creamy
spores, a more erratically colored cap (grayish, pinkish, brownish, reddish, etc.),anda
distinct geranium-like odor (at least when the flesh is crushed).
Russula rosacea
(Rosy Russula)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when moist,
smooth, dark red to bright red. fading in old age to pink or pink blotched with white. Flesh
white, firm, brittle, odor mild, taste very acrid. GILLS creamy-white to pale yellow, adnate
to decurrent, close, brittle. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or with a narrowed
base, smooth, dry, pink or red, or at times only with a blush of red; hollow in age. SPORE
PRINT pale yellow; spores 7-9x 6-8 microns, nearly round with amyloid warts.
HABITAT Scattered or in large troops under conifers, especially pine. Abundant on the
Pacific Coast from fall through early spring, fruiting in our area mainly in coastal stands
of Monterey pine, often in the company of Lactarius deliciosus.
EDIBILITY To be avoided because ofthe acrid taste.
COMMENTS This common, conspicuous, colorful inhabitant of our coastal forests is
readily recognized by its red cap, red to rosy stem, creamy gills,andacrid (peppery) taste.
It is one of our prettiest mushrooms-the clean, pale gills contrasting beautifully with the
red capandstem. At a distance it is sometimes mistaken for Amanita muscaria, which also
grows commonly with pines but has a white stem with a ring (annulus)andvolva. The pale
yellow sporesandred or pink stem distinguish R. rosacea from R. emetica, while "the acrid
taste separates it from R. xerampelinaandthe R. alutacea group. Other species: R. san-
guinea is probably a synonym. A form with reddish-purple capandstem-possibly
distinct-is sometimes found in our area growing with R. rosacea.
Russula maculata group
CAP 4-10 (12) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface
viscid when moist, smooth, color variable: red to pink, reddish-orange, peachy-pink,
yellowish-buff, or whitish, or often a mixture of these colors, Qr buffy-white with pinkish
tints on the margin; margin obscurely striate in age. Flesh white, firm becoming fragile in
age; taste mild or slightly peppery. GILLS creamy becoming pale ochre, close, adnexed,
or free. STALK 4-10 (13) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below, white, the base
sometimes brownish-stained. SPORE_PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 7-10 x 6-9 microns,
nearly round, with amyloid wartsandridges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under hardwoods; common in our area in the
fallandwinter (sometimes spring) with live oak, but more widely distributed.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The cap color in this species "complex" is quite variable, but within a well-
defined range: red, pink, orange, yellowish-buff,andwhitish. The association with oak,
yellow spores,andrather fragile texture in age are also distinctive. The "true" R. maculata
of Europe is said to have a mild to peppery tasteandslightly fragrant odor. Our version has
a consistently mild tasteandlittle or no odor. Whether it is the "true" R. maculata or a
closely related species is for the Russula-researchers to decide. There are a number of
similar reddish-capped, mild-tasting species, such as R. velenovskyi, which do not fade
as drastically and/or differ microscopically.
Russula plac;ta group (Pleasing Russula)
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when
moist, smooth, dark purple to wine-colored, reddish-violet, or brownish-purple, often
darker at the centerandpaler toward margin, but sometimes brown to yellowish atcenter,
and sometimes washed out in age; margin usually striate in age, at least obscurely. Flesh
rather thin, fragile, white, odorandtaste mild. GILLS close, white or creamy soon
becoming yellowandfinally dull ochre-yellow; adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 2-8 cm
long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end, white, dry, softandspongy
inside; fragile in age. SPORE_PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 7-10 x 6-9 microns, broadly
elliptical to nearly round, with amyloid wartsandsometimes ridges.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in woods, associated mainly with conifers;
widely distributed. In our area this group is quite common in the fallandwinter, especially
with Douglas-fir (often accompanied by R. xerampelina. R. integra.andLactarius
rubrilacteus); elsewhere it often grows with spruce, fir, hemlock,andpine.
EDIBILITY Edible but forgettable-thin-fleshedandvirtually tasteless. Similar species
are probably-but not definitely-harmless.
COMMENTS A large number of small, fragile, mild-tasting, yellow-spored Russulas will
fit the above description. Their caps vary considerably in color but usually have some
purple or reddish-purple in them. Their fragility is such that it's difficult to transport them
home without crushing them( the stalk, though fragile, breaks cleanly like chalk). They lack
the shrimpy odor of R. xerampelinaanddo not stain brown,andare not as firm as R.
integra. Their identification is best left to the specialist armed with monographsanda
microscope. Some related species that bear mentioning are: R. lilacea, whose spores
have isolated warts; R. abietina, cap often greenish or brownish; R. puellaTis, with pale
creamy-yellow spores;R. caeTulea, with frequently umbonate cap; andR. chamaeleontina,
with a small, thin, fragile, purplish to lilac to reddish to orange or yellow cap. The latter has
proved invaluable to compulsive categorizers exasperated by the endless nuances of color
in these Russulas. Aberrant forms with yellow spores, fragile texture,anda mild taste can
simply be referred to R. chamaeleontinaandconveniently forgotten about. R. fragilis
has served the same purpose in the fragile, white-spored, acrid-tasting group.
Russula integra group
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth, viscid
when moist, color variable: usually burgundy to vinaceous-brown to livid red or rusty-
red with the margin paler (reddish-buff), but in older specimens often buff or brownish in
the central areaandsometimes entirely reddish-buff; margin obscurely striate in old age.
Flesh crisp, firm, white, not staining, odorandtaste mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or
free, white becoming yellowish or pale ochre; close. STALK 3-9 cm long, 1-3 cm thick;
usually equal or tapering upward, dry, white, sometimes with brownish or yellow-brown
spotsandstains. SPORE_PRINT yellow-ochre; spores 8-11 x 6-9 microns, broadly
elliptical with amyloid warts.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under conifers, widely distributed. Common at times
in our area in the fallandearly winter. I have seen large fruitings under Douglas-fir.
EDIBILITY Edibleandgood when youngandcrisp; however, there are many similar
species of unknown edibility, so exercise caution.
COMMENTS Also known as R. polychToma, this medium-sized speciesandits close
relatives can be recognized by their mild odorandtaste, yellow spores, white or brownish-
stained stem,andreddish to wine-colored to brownish cap. They are larger thanandnot
nearly so fragile as the R. placita group,andsmaller than R. xerampelinaandR. alutacea.
As is commonly the case in Russula. this "complex" is in need of critical study.
Russula alutacea group
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface viscid when moist
but soon dry, smooth, color variable: dark red to red, purplish, purple-brown, or purple-
red, or buff to straw-colored at the center or throughout, or with olive shades, or often
a mixture of these colors; margin striate in age. Flesh brittle, white, firm at first, fragile in
age; odorandtaste mild. GILLS pale to dull ochre or straw-color; close, adnateto adnexed
or free; brittle. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick, more or less equal, smooth, dry, white
or sometimes tinged pinkish. SPORE_PRINT ochre-yellow; spores 8-11 x 6.5-9 microns,
broadly elliptical with amyloid warts. Phenol solution staining stalkandflesh purple-red.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in mixed woodsandunder conifers, widely
distributed. In our area this group is especially abundant in old coastal pine forests in
the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. A large number of species will key out here-and we are
not yet sure whether they're all edible.
COMMENTS The above description embr.:lces a number of medium-to-large, mild-
tasting, yellow-spored Russulas. Distinguishing between them is ajob for rabid Russula
buffs. The most common variety in our area sometimes grows with R. xerampelina, but is
easily distinguished by its mild odorandmarked fragility in age; older caps often disin-
tegrate in transit unless carefully collectedandpacked. Another local species is much
firmer, with a reddish, often burnished cap (see comments under R. decolorans). R.
olivacea, which occurs in Europe under hardwoodsandin America under conifers, is a
very firm, sometimes massive (cap to 35 cm broad!) species with a more frequently rose-
tinted stem. It is closely related to the true R. alutacea by virtue of its purple-red phenol
reaction. There are also a number of medium-sized to fairly large yellow-spored Russulas
with an acrid taste. These include R. veternosaandR. tenuiceps of eastern North America
(and of questionable occurrence in California);andan unidentified western conifer-
lover that has a buffy-brown to pinkish-brown or flesh-colored cap, mild-tasting flesh,
and acrid-tasting gills.
Russula xerampelina
(Shrimp Russula)
CAP 5-30 cm broad, convex becoming plane orcentrallydepressed; surface smooth, viscid
when moist, color variable: typically red to dark red, purple, or brownish-olive, but often
laced with( or sometimes entirely) green, brown, yellow-brown, purple-brown, etc.; margin
usually striate in age (at least obscurely). Flesh thick, creamy-white, bruising yellowish and
then brown or discolored brownish in old age, brittle; odor mild becoming shrimpy or
crablike in old age; taste mild. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed, creamy-white becoming
dull yellowish, staining like the flesh, drying brownish or grayish. STALK 3-1 2 cmlong, 1-
4 cm thick, equal or with slightly enlarged base, often longitudinally lined; dry, sometimes
entirely rose-pink, but more often white with just a tinge of pink, or occasionally pure
white; staining yellowish where scratched, then slowly brown; interior spongyandoften
discolored in age. SPORE_PRINT yellowish; spores 8-11 x 6-8.5 microns, elliptical to
nearly round, with amyloid warts. Fleshandstalk turning deep green in ferrous sulfate.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under conifers; widely distributedandcommon,
ranging as far north as the Arctic Circle. In our area it is associated almost exclusively with
Douglas-firandis often abundant in the fall, less so in the winterandearly spring.
EDIBILITY Edibleandunforgettable-but one of the least appreciated of our edible
fungi, perhaps due to the mediocrity of its brethren. The young, nutty caps are superb
stuffed with grated cheese, chives, walnuts,andparsleyandthen broiled. In contrast to
R. cyanoxantha, they are rarely riddled with maggots!
COMMENTS This beautiful but extremely variable species can be recognized by the
following combination of characteristics: (1) cap viscid when wet, usually with adhering
debris when dry (2) stem usually-but not always-tinted pinkishandalways staining
yellowishandfinally brown when handled or bruised (3) yellow spore print (4) mild (not
peppery) taste (5) fishy odor at maturity, which is accentuated by cooking or drying
(6) tendency of the gills to age or dry brownish to grayish. In addition, the young buttons
are remarkably rotundandsymmetrical-but this character can be appreciated only by
religiously observing a large number of Russulas. Given the extreme variation in color and
size, R. xerampelina may well be a composite species. At least two distinctive-but
intergrading-varieties occur: one with a red to purple capandlovely rosy stem, the other
with a brownish-olive capandwhite or nearly white stem (in addition to the color plate,
there is a black-and-white photo on p. 83). Another distinctive variety occurs in our area
with oakandmanzanita; it differs in having a pale greenish-yellow to buff or whitish cap.
Camarophyllus borealis (Snowy Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-5 cm broad, convex or obtusely umbonate, often expanding in age to plane or
depressed; surface smooth, moist or lubricous but not viscid, watery white to dull white.
Flesh thin, soft, white, odor mild. GILLS usually decurrent, well-spaced, thick, soft,
somewhat waxy; white. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm thick, equal or tapering down-
ward, smooth, firm, dry, often curved or sinuous, white. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 7-9 (12)x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups on groundandhumus in woods or at their edges, widely
distributed. In our area this speciesandits relatives C. virgineusandC. niveus (see com-
ments) are fairly common throughout the mushroom season, but seldom occur in the
large numbers typical of Hygrophorus eburneus. The best fruitings usually occur in the
winter, often in relatively dry weather.
EDIBILITY Edible but fleshless, flavorless,andsavorless.
COMMENTS Also known as Hygrophorus borealis, this is one of several rather small,
whitish waxy caps with a dry to slightly viscid (not slimy) cap. slender non-viscid stalk,
and interwoven gill tissue. Others include: C. niveus, common. cap slightly viscid and
slightly striate when moist; C. virgineus, especially common in California. cap dry and
usually tinged yellow in age or dry weather.andspores 8-12 microns long; C. angustiJolius,
dull white with spores 5-8 microns long; C. cremicolor, with pale yellow gills when young;
and three species with parallel gill hyphaeandnon-decurrent gills: Hygrocybe subaustrali-
ga, small, cap scarcely viscid, gills notched or adnexed, fairly common; H. albinella. cap
whiteandconical at first, stalk dry. rare;andH.fornicata. with a grayish-tinged viscid cap.
All ofthese have been placed in Hygrophorus. None have the slimycapand stalk of Hygro-
phorus eburneus. Alboleptonia sericellaandInocybe geophylla can be similar but have
pinkishandbrown spores respectively. See also the undescribed Marasmius on p. 206.
Camarophyllus russocor;aceus (Cedar Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-3 (5) cm broad. convex to plane or slightly umbonate to slightly depressed; surface
smooth, not viscid. white or often tinged pale tan to yellowish. especially at the center. Flesh
whitish, thin; odor fragrant when fresh (like arborvitae or cedar). GILLS well-spaced,
usually decurrent. thick, slightly waxy, white or whitish. STALK 3-10 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm
thick, equal or tapered downward. often long in relation to cap; dry, smooth, colored more
or less like cap, often curved or sinuous. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6.5-9x
4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven.
HABITAT Widely scattered or in small groups in woods or at their edges, known only
from the west coast (in addition to Europe). Common in our area in the fallandwinter,
especially at higher elevations in the coastal mountains, but rarely in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Not recommended-it has a slightly medicinal flavor, at least raw.
COMMENTS The piquant cedarlike odor distinguishes this plain-looking waxy cap
from C. borealisandother look-alikes. Other species: Hygrophoruspusillusisasomewhat
similar species with a viscid cap that is usually tinged cream or pale brownish-flesh-color.
I t has a slight fragrant odor, divergent to nearly parallel gill tissue,andoccurs in groups or
troops under conifers in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest.
Camarophy//us pratensis (Meadow Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-9 (10) cm broad, obtuse to broadly convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane to
depressed in age; surface smooth or sometimes cracking in age (especially at center), not
viscid; rufous to dull orange or pale dull orange, fading to salmon-buff, pinkish-tan, buff,
tawny, or even whitish; margin often wavy. Flesh white or tinged cap color; odor mild.
GILLS typically decurrent, same color as cap or paler (usually pale dull orange or salmon-
buff to nearly white); well-spaced, thick, broad, somewhat waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long,
0.5-2 cm thick, whitish or tinged cap color, equal or tapering downward, dry, smooth or
fibrillose. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5.5-8x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to
nearly round. Gill tissue interwoven.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in damp places-commonandvery widely
distributed-from Europe to Iceland to South America. In our area it fruits mainly in
the winter under redwood, but as its name implies (pratensis=fields), it can also occur in
open or grassy situations.
EDIBILITY Edibleandrated highly in Europe (one author even puts in on a par with
morels!). However, my own experience with it gave me no great cause for enthusiasm.
Unlike the similarly-colored chanterelle, it is readily attacked by maggots.
COMMENTS Better known as Hygrophorus pratensis, this common waxy cap is ex-
tremely variable in sizeandshape, but can generally be recognized by its pale, dull orange
coloranddecurrent gills. The capandstem are not viscid, but the gills are thickandrather
waxy. Robust individuals are slightly reminiscent of chanterelles (Cantharellus cibarius).
but differ in their duller colorandbroad, well-developed gills with acute rather than blunt
edges. A similarly colored species, Hygrophorus nemoreus, is fairly common in our area
with oak in the fallandwinter. It is largerandfleshier than C. pratensis(cap 5-1 3 cm broad,
stalk 1.5-4 cm thick)andhas a slightly viscid to dry, orangish or cinnamon-orange cap,
adnexed to adnate or slightly decurrent gills, a mild to radish-or cucumberlike odor, and
divergent gill tissue. It is large enoughandcommon enough to be worth sampling, but
I can find no information on its edibility.
Camarophyllus subviolaceus (Violet-Gray Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-6 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly depressed with an uplifted margin;
surface slightly viscid when moist, hygrophanous: violet-gray to violet-brown at least at the
margin when moist (center often paler), fading as it dries to gray or pallid; margin trans-
lucent striate when fresh. Flesh rather thin, colored like cap or paler; taste mild to bitter or
slightly acrid. GILLS decurrent, whitish soon becoming smoky-violet or gray with a violet
tinge; well-spaced, thick, soft, rather waxy. STALK 3-7 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or
tapered downward, dry, smooth, white or tinged cap color, often curved. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven.
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups in woodsandswamps throughout northern North
America, late summer through early winter. I have found it several times in the
Pacific Northwest but it is not particularly common.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Better known as Hygrophorus subviolaceus, this beautiful species has
been included because its violet-tinged gills are unusual for a waxy cap. There are several
similarly-colored species, including: C. pallidus, with smaller, round or nearly round
sporesanda viscid, violet-gray cap; C. angelesianus, with amyloid sporesanda viscid
cap that does not fade appreciably, usually found at high elevations in the spring and
summer; C. rainierensis, with a strong green corn odorandslightly viscid cap;andC.
cinereus, with a non-viscid cap, mild taste,andlarger spores. Other species include:
C. colemannianus, closely related, but with a viscid, brown to pinkish-gray to buff cap
and pinkish-gray to pale buff colors; Hygrocybe caerulescens, a bluish-tinged species
with parallel gill tissue;andHygrocybe purpureojolia, with lavender to dull purplish
gillsanda brown cap that fades to yellow-orange, found in eastern North America.
Camarophyllus recurvatus (Little Brown Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-3 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed, sometimes with a small
pointed umbo; surface smooth or cracking into small scales, dry to slightly viscid, dark to
pale olive-brown or at times pallid; margin often wavy or pleated. Flesh thin, olive-brown,
odor mild. GILLS decurrent, well-spaced, broad, thick, softandrather waxy, white or
grayish-white. STALK 2-5 cm long, 3-6 mm thick, equal or tapering downward, smooth,
not viscid, whitish or colored like cap. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 4-
6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue interwoven.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under conifersandin open, grassy areas; widely
distributed. I've seen large fruitings in northern California but have yet tofind it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as Hygrophorus recurvatus, this is one of a number of
undistinguished, brown to grayish waxy caps that qualify as "LBM's." As they are unlikely
to interest the a verage collector, only a few others are worth mentioning: Hygrocybeovina,
with deeply notched to adnate gillsanda convex to plane, grayish-brown cap that often has
a paler or yellower margin; Hygrocybe nitrata, with a nitrous odor; Camarophyllus
paupertinus, with a small (1-2 cm) capandexceedingly strong, disagreeable odor (known
only from northern California under red woods); Hygrocybe acuta, with a sharply conical,
dull gray to gray-brown cap, growing under conifers on the west coast;andHygrocybe
atro-olivacea, with a minutely scaly cap that is dark at the center or throughout.
Hygrocybe marginata (Orange-Gilled Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-5 cm broad, conical or convex becoming umbonate, plane, orwith uplifted margin;
surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid: deep yellow to yellow-orange or orange
when moist, sometimes with an olive tinge, fading to pale yellow or whitish as it dries. Flesh
thin, fragile, waxy. GILLS slightly decurrent to adnate, adnexed, or even free; well-spaced,
broad, thick, soft, waxy; brilliant orange or at times orange-yellow, not fading. STALK
4-10 cm long, 3-6 mm thick, more or less equal, smooth, fragile, not viscid; pale orange to
buff or pale yellow-orange, often curved; hollow. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 7-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel to somewhat interwoven.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in humusandon very rotten wood,
under both hardwoodsandconifers; common in eastern North America in summer and
fall, known also from the Pacific Northwestandto be expected in northern California.
I have not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible but of negligible substanceandflavor.
COMMENTS The gills' ability to retain their bright orange color long after the cap has
faded is the outstanding attribute of this modest waxy cap. also known as HygTOphoTUS
maTg;natus. The cap is at times slightly greasy or tacky to the touch, but never truly viscid.
Several color forms occur. including one with an olive cap (fairly common in Washington)
and another with yellow gills (in eastern North America).
Hygrocybe m;n;ata (Miniature Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-4 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth or minutely scaly,
hygrophanous but not viscid: bright red to scarlet when moist, quickly fading as it dries to
orangeandfinally yellow. Flesh very thin, waxy, colored more or less like cap. GILLS
adnexed to adnate or very slightly decurrent, soft, waxy, thick, broad, red to orange,
yellow, or peachy (fading like cap). STALK 2-5 (8) cm long. 2-4 mm thick, equal, smooth,
dry, red to orange or yellow (fading like the cap but more slowly). VEIL absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small tufts on ground, rotting logs, or in
moss; widely distributedandcommon. In our area it fruits in the late fallandwinter in a
variety of habitats, but usually in deep shade. The largest fruitings I've seen were in a
dense stand of pole-size redwood saplingsandin a-plot of cypresses mixed with oaks.
EDIBILITY Edible but of negligible substanceandaccording to most sources, bland.
However, Captain Charles McIlvaine says: "The gunner for partridges will not shoot
rabbits; the knowing toadstool-seeker will pass all others where H. miniatus abounds."
COMMENTS The small size, waxy gills,andconvex to plane, non-viscid cap that fades
markedly from red to yellow or orange are the far-from-infallible fieldmarks of this dainty
fungus. I t is better known as HygTOphoTUS m;n;atus. The cap is neither viscid nor conical,
and is often minutely scaly (squamulose). Its frequent occurrence on rotten wood
is unorthodox behavior for a waxy cap. Other species: H. squamulosa has thicker. firmer
flesh but is otherwise similar. H. canthaTellus is very similar but has a longer stemandde-
current gills; H. moseT; has a less scaly capanddecurrent gills. H. subm;n;ata has a
minute( up to 1.5 cm broad), scarlet to orange, slightly viscid cap plus decurrent, whitish to
pale yellowish gillsanda very thin (about 2 mm) stalk; it is fairly common in our area,
especially under redwood. H. tUTunda is a widespread miniature northern species with
minute brown to grayish sq uamules (scales) on a red to yellow background. There are also
several minute species with a slimy-viscid capandstalk when fresh, including: H. reai, with
a bitter-tasting cap; H. minutula, with a stalk that fades to yellowish in age;andH. sub.
minutula, whose stalk scarcely fades from red. All of the above species have a red to scarlet
cap when moist,andall were originally placed in Hygrophorus. N one are worth eating.
Hygrocybe coccinea (Righteous Red Waxy Cap) Color Plate 20
CAP 1.5-4 (6) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate;
surface smooth, dry or tacky, deep red, blood-red, or bright red when fresh, fading some-
what in age or developing paler streaks or splotches. Flesh thin, reddish to orange, waxy.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, reddish to orange or peachy, or red with yellow edges;
thick, broad, soft, waxy. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 3-8 mm thick, equal, smooth, not viscid,
hollow; usually red to reddish-orange with a yellow base (but base sometimes appearing
whitish from mycelium); typically not fibrillose-striate. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 7-10.5x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woodsandother wet places; widely
distributed, but not as common in North America as H. punicea. Like H. punicea, it is
frequent in our area in the winter under redwoods or in mixed woods. Curiously, in some
regions (such as England) it grows mainly in open fields!
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but easily confused with H. punicea. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known as Hygrophorus coccineus, this exquisite bright red waxy cap
ranks among our most beautiful mushroomsandis definitely worth seeking out. It is
redder than H. miniataanddoes not fade nearly as drastically. It is often confused with
H. punicea. but that species is usually more robust, has a distinctly viscid cap (when moist),
and most often has a yellow to orange, fibrillose-striate stem with a whitish base rather
than a red stem with a yellow base (see color plates 20and21). Other species: H. marchii
is a similar species with a viscid red cap that soon dries outandfades to orange or yellow-
orange. Like H. coccinea. it is a rather small, slender species (stalk 3-6 mm thick) that calls
to mind H.flavescens but for its color. It is widely distributed but I have not seen it locally.
Hygrocybe punicea
(Scarlet Waxy Cap)
CAP 2.5-12 (14) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex when young, then plane to broadly
umbonate or with uplifted margin in age; surface smooth, viscid or lubricous when moist,
deep red to bright red, fading (often in streaks or splotches) to reddish-orangeandfinally
orange. Flesh rather thin, waxy, watery reddish-orange to yellow-orange. GILLS adnateto
adnexed or free, reddish-orange to yellow or peachy, well-spaced, thick, broad, soft, waxy.
STALK 3-12 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, smooth, not viscid, often
fibrillose-striate; yellow or sometimes red soon fading to orange or yellow; base usually
whitish but sometimes yellow. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-12 x 4-6
microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in cool, damp places (usually in woods); widely
distributedandfairly common in our area in the winterandearly spring, especially under
redwood. It is usually the last waxy cap to appear (mid-January or later).
EDIBILITY Listed as edible in most books, but poisonous at least to some people! I know
two toadstool-testers who had very unpleasant experiences with it. It is an efficient con-
centrator of the malleable metallic element cadmium, which is decidedly deleterious
when consumed on a regular basis.
COMMENTS Better known as Hygrophorus puniceus, this beautiful mushroom is as
easy to recognize as it is difficult to overlook. The bright red sticky capandindisputably
waxy gills make it stand out vividly in the dim, damp milieu where it thrives. It is just as
common in our wintertime woods as H. coccinea, but much more conspicuous because of
its larger size. For a com parison of the two, see comments under H. coccinea. Other species
in the H. punicea "complex" include: H. laetissima, with an even brighter red cap plus a
white stalk when young; H. splendidissima, stalk white becoming reddish-striate in age;
and H. aurantiosplendens, whose cap fades more markedly. All of these favor redwoods
in Californiaandcould just as well be treated as variations of H. punicea.
lIygrocybeflavescens
(Golden Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or with margin slightly uplifted;
surface smooth, viscid when moist, bright lemon-yellow to golden-yellow (or sometimes
orange toward the center). Flesh thin, yellow, waxy. GILLS typically adnexed or free,
soft, thick, waxy, yellow or pale yellow . STALK 4-9 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal,
smooth, sometimes tacky or slightly viscid but not slimy; easily splitting, often grooved,
yellow to yellow-orange with a whitish base. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-
9 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground, usually in woods,
widely distributed. Common in our area in the winter, especially under redwood but also
with oak, madrone, etc. It usually peaks well after H. acutoconica has finished fruiting,
sometimes when the bright red waxy caps (H. puniceaandH. coccinea) appear.
EDIBILITY Edible, but far from incredible: it is wateryandhas little substance or taste.
One author says it "would make a colorfulandnovel addition to a salad." So would a
banana slug.
COMMENTS The bright yellow to lemon-yellow color, convex to plane cap,andwaxy
gills identify this beautiful mushroom, better known as Hygrophorusjlavescens. The cap is
never red as in H. punicea, nor is it conical as in H. acutoconica. In rainy weather the
surface ofthe cap can be quite viscid or even slippery-giving it the appearance of ajust-
licked lollipop-but in dry weather it is often somewhat silky or shiny. Other widely dis-
tributed yellow to orange species with non-conical caps include: H. chlorophana, often
confused with H.j7avescens, but slightly smaller with a distinctly slimy stalk when moist;
H. ceracea, with a slightly viscid capandsta)kandadnate to decurrent gills; H. citrino-
pallida, with a slimy-viscid capandstalk that fade from yellow to whitishandgills that
retain their yellow color; H.jlavijolia, with a slimy-viscid capandwhite, slimy-viscid stalk;
H. parvula, with a non-viscid stalkanddecurrent gills;andH. nitida, always yellow when
fresh, with a centrally depressed cap (even when young), gills that are soon deeply de-
current,anda frequently viscid stalk. The latter species is widely distributed but espe-
cially common in mossy or boggy areas in eastern North America. In both H. nitida and
H.j7avifolia the cap often fades to creamy or whitish as it loses moisture or ages.
lIygrocybe acutoconica (A Cute Conic Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, bluntly or acutely (sharply) conical when young, sometimes
expanding in age but usually retaining pointed umbo; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when
moist, bright yellow to yellow-orange or orange (the orange usually toward center). Flesh
soft, thin, waxy, yellow. GILLS adnexed to free, thick, soft, broad, waxy, yellow, never
blackening. STALK 5-8 (12) cm long, 3-6 (I 0) mm thick, equal or thicker below. usually
longitudinally striate and/or twisted, easily splitting; smooth, moist or slightly viscid,
yellow to yellow-orange, but usually white at base; not blackening when handled, but
base may bruise or age grayish to nearly black. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
9-15 x 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods or under trees, widely distributed.
In our area it fruits in the fallandearly winter, mostly under redwoodandoak. It is nearly
as common as its blackening counterpart, H. conica, but has a shorter season.
EDIBILITY Harmless, fleshless, flavorless (see comments on edibility of H.j1avescens).
COMMENTS Better known as Hygrophorus acutoconicus, this cute, conic waxy
cap differs from H. conica in its yellowish gillsand"failure" to blacken when handled.
Scientists may scoff at our tendency to anthropomorphize (attribute human qualities to
inhuman beings or inanimate objects), yet our language leaves us little choice. For instance,
the word "failure" (with its attendant implications of inadequacy, its connotation of
"attempting to, but not succeeding") is often utilized by taxonomists to denote "absence."
Before I'm accused of lending credence to this trend, let me earnestly put this question to
you philosophical few among the myopic many (or you fungophilic few among the
mycophobic many): Is the "failure" in this case an innate inability to succeed? An admirable
example of genetic (or aesthetic) restraint? A coincidentalandpointless byproduct of
circumstance? Or none ofthe above? . . . Other species: H. langeiandH. aurantiolutescens
are very similar if not the same; H. cuspidata ( called H. persistens by some) is also similar
but has a conical red cap when fresh that fades with age, plus an orange to yellow stem. It
is widely distributed, but I have yet to find it south of San Francisco.
Hygrocybe conica (Witch's Hat; Conical Waxy Cap) Color Plate 19
CAP 1-5(12cm broad, bluntly to sharply conical, sometimes expanding in age but usually
retaining a pointed umbo; surface smooth, dry to moist or slightly viscid, sometimes red
but more often orange, yellow, or olive-yellow; blackening in age or upon handling; margin
sometimes uplifted in old age. Flesh thin, waxy, blackening in age. GILLS adnexed or
free, thick, broad, soft, waxy, usually whitish but sometimes tinged yellow, soon becoming
grayishandfinally black. STALK (2) 4-20 cm long, 0.3-] (1.5) cm thick, equal, not viscid
or only slightly so, usually striate and/or twisted, hollow in ageandeasily splitting; pallid to
yellow, olive-yellow, orange, or red, with a whitish to gray base, but turning gray or black
when handled or in age. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-14 x 5-7 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue paralleL
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in damp places (usually in
woods); widely distributedandvery common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It is
known from a wide variety of habitats in North America, but in our area shows a pro-
nounced preference for redwoodandcypress. It fruits in the fallandwinterand,alongwith
H. aCUloconica, is usually the first of the brightly colored waxy caps to appear. Bob
Winter says it often grows on lawns in Fresno, California.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It was once considered poisonous, perhaps due to its
blackening qualities, but also because four deaths in China were (mistakenly?) attributed
to it. Now it's generally regarded as harmless, but Larry Stickney, chef eXlra ordina ire,
meandering mainstay of the Mycological Society of San Francisco,andan inimitable
mushroom-loving marvel of a man, says it "elicited an odd sensation of lightheadedness
and numbness" when he tried it. At any rate, it hardly seems worth experimenting with
such a thin-fleshed, watery, tasteless morsel.
COMMENTS The conical capandtendency of all parts to blacken when handled im-
mediately identify this cosmopolitan mushroom. It is likely to be among the first waxy caps
encountered by beginnersandis quite beautifulandwaxy-looking when growing in the
woods. By time it is brought home, however, it is often barely recognizable because of the
grayandblack stains that develop. Old, withered, completely black speimens are
sometimes found growing alongside vividly colored fresh ones. When growing in deep
humus (e.g., redwood duff) the stalk is often quite long, but when growing in bare soil or
grass or shallow humus it is apt to be shorterand/or stouter;Hygrophorusconicusisa syn-
onym. The "splitters" recognize several closely related blackening species, including: Hy-
grocybe nigrescens, with a bluntly conical, red to scarlet cap, often found under oak; H.
singeri, capandstalk distinctly viscid;andH. olivaceoniger, small, thin,andolive-green.
Hygrocybe calyptraeform;s (Salmon Waxy Cap) Color Plate 23
CAP 2.5-7 cm broad, acutely (sharply) conical at first, then expanding somewhat but
retaining a pointed umbo; surface dry or slightly viscid, smooth, coral-pink to pink to
salmon when young (rarely tinged lavender), paler (or pinker or oranger, sometimes
with whitish areas) in age; margin often splitting at maturityandsometimes uplifted. Flesh
thin, watery pinkish, waxy. GILLS adnate to adnexed or even free, thick, soft, waxy, pink
to pale pink. STALK 3-16 cm long, 3-8 (10) mm thick, usually rather longandslender,
equal, smooth, often longitudinally striate and/or twisted; fragile, hollow,andeasily
splitting, white or tinged pinkish (or rarely lavender), not truly viscid. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-9 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in woods or at their
edges (often rooted deeply in the humus); widely distributed but not common. I have found
it only twice in our area, under redwoods, in the winter.
EDIBILITY Edible.
COMMENTS In my fickle fungal opinion, this striking species is one of the most beautiful
and elegantof all the waxy caps, its rarity serving to accentuate its beauty. In a genus noted
for its bright colors. this species still manages to stand out-its pointed pink to
salmon capandpink gills render it distinct. H. psittacinaandH. /aeta can be pinkish, but
are smaller, usually slimy,andare never as sharply conical. No/anea sa/monea of eastern
North America is also similar, but gives a pinkish spore printanddoes not have waxy gills.
Hygrophorus calyptraeJormis is a synonym.
Hygrocybe virescens (Lime-Green Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, 0 btusely conical or convex becoming plane, urn bonate, or with uplifted
margin in age; surface smooth, moist or tacky but not truly viscid; color variable when
young (honey-yellow or green mixed with dull orange, etc.), but soon becoming citrine-
green to yellow-green ("lime-green") overall. Flesh thin, fragile, greenish, waxy. GILLS
adnexed to free, whitish or with citrine-green tints, thick, soft. waxy. STALK 3-7 cm long,
3-8 mm thick, more or less equal, smooth, hollow in age, not viscid; lime-green with a
whitish base. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT In scattered groups or tufts under redwood. northern California, apparently
quite rare. I have seen only one substantial fruiting-in December of 1971 at Van Damm
State Park in Mendocino County. Subsequent expeditions to the same area failed to turn
it up.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The striking "lime-green" color of the capandstalk make this one of the
easiest of all waxy caps to identify. Unfortunately, it is one ofthe most difficult of all waxy
caps to find! The above description is adapted from that of Alexander Smith. who
originally found it near Trinidad, California. Whereas many waxy caps are cosmopolitan
(particularly Hygrocybes), this one appears to have a sharply limited habitat and
geographical distribution. The only other green waxy cap, H. psittacina. is smaller.
slimmer,andslimier,andis green when young rather than in age.
Hygrocybe psittacina
(Parrot Waxy Cap)
CAP 1-3 cm broad, bell-shaped or convex to broadly umbonate or plane in age; surface
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, usually shiny when dry; color extremely variable: at
first dark green to bright green or olive-green, but soon fading to some shade of yellow,
pink, orange, rufous, vinaceous, ochre-buff, tawny, etc.; margin translucent-striate when
moist. Flesh thin, soft, waxy, odor mild. GILLS adnate to very slightly decurrent, but
sometimes seceding; well-spaced, soft, thick, waxy; at first greenish. then fading like the
cap (but often yellower or redder),andoften retaining slight greenish tints. STALK 2-6 (8)
cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapering upward, hollow, smooth, very slimy or viscid
when moist, greenish when young but soon fading to yellow or cap color (pink, orange,
etc.). VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6.5-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
Gill tissue parallel.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in damp soil, moss, humus, etc.; widely
distributed. Fairly common in our area in late fallandwinter but easily overlooked. Like
most of our Hygrocybes it favors redwood, but also occurs under other trees as well as on
mossy road banks or in grass. The largest fruiting I've seen was in a swampy hardwood
forest in Pennsylvania.
EDIBILITY Edible, but slimyandinsubstantial. Raw specimens make a colorful but
slippery supplement to salads, sliding down your throat before you can savor them.
COMMENTS Also known as Hygrophorus ps;ttac;nus, this slippery little fungus is a
cinch to recognize when youngandfresh-there is no other small green agaric with a
glutinous capandstem! As it dries out, however, it changes color drastically,andfaded
specimens have been known to fool the most seasoned Hygrocybe-hound. The rate,
extent,andnature of the color changes seem to vary according to environmental condi-
tions, but close inspection will often reveal a faint olive tinge somewhere on the fruiting
body. Even when there is no green present, the small sizeandslimy-viscid stalk will dis-
tinguish it from all but H. laeta (see below). The stalk can be so slimy that it is difficult to
pluck. Other species: H. ps;ttac;na var. californ;ca is a rare fungus with a beautiful blue
rather than gorgeous green cap in youth. H. laeta is a widely distributed species of variable
color (violet-gray to pinkish, orange, vinaceous, etc.), but is never green when young and
usually has decurrent gills. I t, too, has a slimy-viscid capandstalk. H. ungu;nosa has a
slimy-viscid, gray to dark brown to nearly black capandstem,andis also widely dis-
tributed. For viscid-stalked Hygrocybes with bright yellow to orange or red caps, see
comments under H.flavescensandH. miniata.
Hygrophorus chrysodon (Flaky Waxy Cap) Color Plate 17
CAP 2.5-8 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface smooth, viscid
when moist, white except for delicate yellow to golden-orange flakes or granules on the
margin (or sometimes tinted yellow throughout); margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick, soft,
white. GILLS typically decurrent, well-spaced, white, soft, rather waxy. STALK 3-10 cm
long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal, viscid when moist, white except for a ring of yellow to golden-
orange granules at apex (or in rainy weather, the granules dispersed throughout). VEIL
evanescent, leaving slime on stalk. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 3.5-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in woods; widely distributed, but not very common
in our area. It is said to favor conifers, but in coastal California it shows a definite pre-
ference for madroneandtanoak, fruiting sporadically during the late fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Edible, but slimyandbland (for more details see H. sordidus).
COMMENTS The exquisite flakes of gold on the cap margin and/orstalk apex (see color
plate!) are unique to this beautiful species. However, rain may obliterate the granules or
disperse their yellow pigment over the entire capandstem surfaces, leading to confusion
with H. gliocyclus. H. eburneus,andother white or yellowish waxy caps.
Hygrophorus eburneus (Ivory Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly umbonate to plane or with
uplifted margin; surface smooth, extremely slimy or viscid when wet, pure white or some-
times slightly yellowish in old age or occasionally with small pinkish spots; margin at first
inrolled. Flesh soft, white, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, well-spaced, thick, soft,
waxy, pure white to very slightly yellowish in old age. STALK 4-15 (18) cm long, 0.3-1 (2)
cm thick, equal or tapered toward base, usually rather slender; smooth or with punctate
apex, slimy-viscid when moist, pure white, but sometimes discoloring slightly yellowish Qr
pinkish in age. VEIL evanescent, depositing slime on stalk. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
6-9 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or tufted on ground in woods, very widely distributed
but most common on the west coast. In our area it is mycorrhizal with hardwoodsandis the
most common fallandwinter Hygrophorus of our oak-madrone woodlands. In other
regions it may grow with conifers, e.g., in Oregon it is often abundant in oak-pine forests
and in New Mexico it fruits in the late summerandfall under pinyon pine.
EDIBILITY Edibleandcollected by some people in spite of its sliminess (see comments
on edibility of H. sordidus).
COMMENTS The pure white slimy capandslimy stem plus the soft, waxy white gills
typify this cosmopolitan Hygrophorus. which is the type species ofthe genus. Sometimes
the layer of slime is so thick that it's difficult to pick up the mushroom. At other times the
slime dries out, in which case there is likely to be debris glued irrevocably to the cap-a sure
sign that H. eburneus ranks with Limacella illinitaandH. gliocyclus (among others) as
the ..slipperiestandslimiest gilled fungus among us." (L. il/inita is also white, but has free
gills, while H. gliocyclus is squatter, slightly yellower,andis monogamous with pine).
H. piceae is a very similar species with a pure white viscid capandnon-viscid stalk. It is
common under conifers, especially spruce, in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern Califor-
nia. For similar species with a buff-or ochre-tinged cap, see comments under H. gliocyclus.
Hygrophorus gl;ocyclus (Glutinous Waxy Cap)
CAP (2) 4-10 (15) cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming broadly umbonate, plane, or even
shallowly depressed; surface smooth, very slimy or viscid when moist, white to pale cream,
usually more yellowish or buff toward the center; margin at first inrolled. Flesh white,
fairly firm. GILLS adnate to decurrent, fairly well-spaced, thick, soft, somewhat waxy;
whitish to pale or dingy yellow, or sometimes tinged faintly pinkish. STALK 2-6 cm long,
(0.6) 1-2.5 cm thick, typically rather squat, equal to ventricose (swollen in the middle) or
tapered at base, smooth, very slimy when moist except at apex; dingy white to creamy,
solid. VEIL evanescent, leaving slime on stalk and sometimes an obscure ring (annulus).
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in needle duff under pines, widely distributed. Fairly
common in our area in fall, winter,andearly spring, sometimes growing with H. hypo-
thejus. I have found it along the coast with Montereyandbishop pines,andin great
numbers inland with Coulter, digger,andponderosa pines.
EDIBILITY Edibleand"choice," according to some, but like H. eburneus. disagreeable
to collect because of the copious slime (see comments on edibility of H. sordidus). One
book describes how to remove the slime from the mushrooms, but says nothing about
removing the slime from your hands.
COMMENTS The creamy-white to yellowish cap, stocky stature, thick layer of slime on
the capandstem (when moist), somewhat waxy gills,andassociation with pine are the
hallmarks of this humdrum Hygrophorus. It is thicker, squatter,andyellower than H.
eburneus.andthe stalk is indisputably viscid, in contrast to H. sordidus. A closely-related,
equally slimy pine-lover, H. flavod;scus, is also widespread but has pinkish gills in youth;
H. glut;nosus of eastern North Americaandthe Pacific Northwest is the same color as
H. gliocyclus but favors hardwoodsandshows reddish-brown spots on the stalk apex as it
dries; H. white;; of northern California has the color of H. gliocyclus but the stature of
H. eburneus; H. cossus is a slimy white species that develops ochraceous tones on the cap
as it agesandhas a distinctive odor (like "goat moth larvae"), but is more common in
Europe than North America; H. chrysasp;s also discolors in age but has no odorandgills
that dry dark brown. H. ponderalus (see H. sordidus) is largeandwhite.
Hygrophorus subalpinus (Subalpine Waxy Cap)
CAP 4-15 (25) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface
viscid when moist but soon dry, smooth, pure white or developing a slight yellowish tinge
in age; margin sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh thick, firm at first but soft in age, white;
odorandtaste mild. GILLS white when young, often creamy or tinged dingy yellowish in
age; typically adnate to decurrent, narrow, close, soft and/or waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long,
1-5 (7) cm thick at apex, usually thickandstout, often with a rounded basal bulb when
young (but often more or less equal in age); firm, dry, solid, white. VEIL somewhat mem-
branous, disappearing or forming a narrow, flaring or flange-like, median to inferior
ring on the stalk (just above the bulb). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground under conifers; known only from the
mountains of western North America. It is a common "snowbank" species in the Sierra
Nevada, Cascades,andRocky Mountains, but also appears in the summerandlate fall.
I have yet to find it on the coast.
EDIBILITY Deer consider it a delicacy; I don't. Although tempting because of its
robustnessandpenchant for growin in the spring when there are few edible agarics out
and about, it decays quicklyanddoes not have the greatest textureandflavor (see com-
ments on edibility of H. sordidus).
COMMENTS This hefty white Hygrophorus is easily told from other waxy caps (H.
sordidus. et al) by its thick dry stalkandwhitish color, the presence of a veil that often
forms an annulus (ring),andassociation with mountain conifers (see photograph at top of
p. 109). The annulus, when present, can mimic the volva of an Amanita because it tends
to sit so low on the stalk. Amanitas, however, do not have decurrent gillsandare rarely as
robust. The presence of an annulus can also lead to confusion with Armillaria ponderosa
and A. olida(another springtime conifer-lover), but both of those mushrooms have strong
odors. Russula brevipes is also somewhat similar, but has brittle fleshandlacks a veil.
Hygrophorus sordidus (Sordid Waxy Cap)
CAP 5-20 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or with uplifted margin; surface
smooth, viscid when moist but not often slimyandsoon dry; white or sometimes tinged
yellowish-buff at center; margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick, firm, white. GILLS adnate
to decurrent, soft but only slightly waxy; white, sometimes dingy yellowish in age. STALK
6-10 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, solid, smooth, firm, white, not
viscid. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, associated
principally (if not exclusively) with oaks, widespread but primarily southern. In our area
it fruits with live oak in the fallandwinter. It is quite abundant some years, but almost
completely absent others.
EDIBILITY Edible but not choice. I ruined an otherwise superb curry in my sole attempt
to make it palatable. The sliced caps neither absorbed the surrounding spices nor
contributed any special flavor of their own. The turmeric did turn them yellow, however,
making them look for all the world like undercookedandoverfed banana slugs-gummy,
amorphous masses of slime that coagulated around or completely engulfed the peas
and savory chunks of potato, rendering the entire dish inedible (though unforgettable).
Since its attractive appearance belies its "slugulose" qualities, I can only conclude that the
scientific soul who named it had a similarandequally sordid experience with it.
COMMENTS Our heftiest Hygrophorus. its size alone distinguishes it from most
other white members of the genus. The stalk is not viscid as in H. gliocyclusandH. ebur-
neus. nor is there a veil as in H. subalpinus. It is likely to be mistaken for a Clitocybe or
Russula because of its fleshiness, but the gills are soft,andat least to the experienced
Hygrophorus-hunter, waxy. H. penarius has a slightly darker cap but is otherwise similar.
H. PerJumus of the Sierra Nevada has a fragrant odor. H. ponderatus is a similar but
slightly more flavorful, widespread species whose stalk is viscid or lubricous(at least over
the lower portion); in California it usually grows with conifers.
Hygrophorus russula (Russula-Like Waxy Cap)
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex to plane or with uplifted margin in age; surface viscid when wet
but soon dry; coral-pink to vinaceous-red, usually streaked with purple-red or vinaceous
fibrils; smooth or minutely scaly, occasionally staining yellowish when rubbed or in age;
margin often paler or whitishandincurved when young. Flesh thick, white or tinged pink;
odorandtaste typically mild. GILLS usually adnate but sometimes adnexed or slightly
decurrent, close to crowded (120-150 reach the stalk), soft, slightly waxy; white at first but
soon flushed pinkanddeveloping purple-red to vinaceous stains in age. STALK 3-10 cm
long, 1.5-3.5 cm thick, usually rather stout; solid, dry, smooth, equal or tapered below;
white, soon stained or streaked pink to reddish or vinaceous. VEIL absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue slightly divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in rings in mixed woodsandunder hardwoods,
associated mainly with oaks; widely distributedandcommon in eastern North America,
but infrequent on the west coast. In our area I find it occasionally in the late fallandearly
winter in tanoak-madrone woods at higher elevations in the coastal mountains.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, according to some, but my lingering distaste for fleshy
waxy caps (see comments on edibility of H. sordidus) has discouraged me from sampling it.
One authority calls it "the best of the family for the table"-a classic example of damning
with faint praise, if you ask me. On the other hand, local Hygrophorus-hound Luen Miller,
who suffers from an acute case of"McIlvaine-mania,"* says of H. russula: "N ot as good as
H. sordidus, but as an edible species it is not to be despised. It has a noble waxy texture and
makes a toothsome meal. Although it lacks the supreme succulence of H. sordidus, it
largely makes up for it in possessing a copious supply of wax, which coats the mouth and
throat for hours after eating it, the way good ice cream does. All authorities pronounce it
excellent. It is delightful scalloped or stewed, or better yet, made into catchu pandpoured
over food. The Tartars, I am told, know it as 'poor man's candle' since the dried 'carps
offer a weak flickering flame when lit."
.See footnote on p. 419!
COMMENTS A beautiful, robust Hygrophorus. best recognized by its coral-pink to
vinaceous (wine-colored) or vinaceous-red color, absence of a veil,andgrowth with
hardwoods. As the name implies, it has somewhat the stature of a Russula. but the stalk
does not snap open cleanly like chalk. It was originally placed in Tricholoma. but the gills
are usually adnate rather than notched,andquite softandwaxy. For similar waxy caps
associated with conifers, see H. purpurascens.
Hygrophorus purpurascens (Purple-Red Waxy Cap)
CAP (3) 6-12 (20) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface slightly
viscid when wet, otherwise dry; whitish to coral-pink with darker (vinaceous-red to purple-
brown) splashes, streaks, and/or fibrils; margin incurved at firstandusually paler. Flesh
thick, firm, white; odor mild, taste mild or bitter. GILLS adnate to decurrent, white at first
but soon flushed pink, then spotted or stained purple-red to vinaceous; fairly close, soft,
slightly waxy. STALK (3) 5-12(15) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick. equal ortapered below, solid,
firm, not viscid; colored or stained more or less like the cap. VEIL fibrillose, white, forming
a slight superior or apical ring or hairy zone on stalk, or disappearing entirely. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered, gregarious, orin troops under conifers, especially spruce
and pine; widely distributed in northernandwestern North America. It does not occur in
our area, but is fairly common in the Sierra NevadaandCascades from spring through
fall,andfruits prolifically in late summer in the spruce forests of the Rocky Mountains.
EDIBILITY Edible, but some variants are unpalatable (bitter) even when cooked-as
I can personally attest.
COMMENTS This waxy capandits close relatives {see below) are very common at times
in our western mountains. They resemble H. russula in their reddish-pink to vinaceous-
red color, but favor conifers rather than hardwoods. H. purpurascens is distinct by virtue
of its fibrillose veil, which is often evident only in young, unexpanded specimens. Its
close relatives include: H. erubescens, quite similar but lacking a veilandwith a frequent
tendency to slowly stain yellow when bruised or left overnight in the refrigerator. It is
normally a fairly robust mushroom, but a slender form occurs rarely in our area with pine.
H. capreolar;us is a similar but smaller, more slender (stalk about 1 cm thick), spruce-
loving species with well-spaced gillsandfruiting body evenly colored dark vinaceous-red
in age. I have collected it several times under Sitka spruce in northern coastal California,
but its distribution parallels that of H. purpurascens. H. amarus is also similar, but
is very bitter-tastingandtends to develop pronounced pale yellow to bright yellow tones on
the cap (or whole fruiting body) in age. It mayor may not have a very slight fibrillose veil
(check young specimens!); it's fairly common under spruceandfir in the Rocky Mountains.
Hygrophorus pudor;nus (Spruce Waxy Cap) Color Plate 16
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, obtuse or convex with an inrolled margin, becoming broadly
convex or plane in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, pale tan to pinkish or flesh-
color, or pinkish-orange toward the centerandpinker or paler at the margin. Flesh thick,
firm, white or tinged cap color; odor mild to faintly fragrant. GILLS adnate to decurrent,
fairly close, soft, waxy, sometimes whitish but more often pinkish to pale flesh-color; not
developing reddish stains. STALK 4-20 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or narrowed below,
solid, dry to tacky but not truly viscid, whitish to buff or pinkish or colored like cap; lower
portion fibrillose, upper portion conspicuously punctate (with tiny whitish scurfy scales or
tufts that darken to reddish-brown when dried or in age,andturn yellow-orange in KG H).
VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6.5-9.5 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, particularly spruce; widely
distributed but erratic in its fruiting habits. It does not occur in our area (probably due to
the absence of spruce), but [ have seen large fruitings in December with Sitka spruce in
northern California,andin August with Engelmann spruce in the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Edible but mediocre. Some variants are said to have a "turpentine-like taste,"
but I cannot vouch for the accuracy of this comparison, since [ have never tasted tur-
pentine. (Have you?)
COMMENTS This attractive, rather robust waxy cap is difficult to characterize but
relatively easy to recognize (see color plate). The viscid pinkish to pinkish-salmon or pale
tan cap, punctate stalk apex,andwaxy gills are good fieldmarks. The viscid cap distin-
guishes it from the similarly colored Camarophyllus pralensis. Several varietiesandcolor
forms have been described, including var. fragrans, largeandtall, with a yellow-orange
stalk baseandtendency to stain yellow or orange when bruised. Another beautiful waxy
cap, H. saxati/is, occurs with conifers in the Pacific Northwest, especially on rocky hill-
sides. It has a viscid, whitish to pale buff cap (sometimes with darker watery spots) and
lovely pale apricot to pinkish, decurrent gills. Still another distinctive species, H. goetzii,
is rather smallandslender, with a rosy or pinkish capandcreamy gills often tinged with the
cap color. It is sometimes common in the late springandsummer in the Sierra N evadaand
Cascades, often near or even in melting snow.
Hygrophorus roseibrunneus (Rosy-Brown Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-10 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, or with an uplifted
margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, reddish-brown to pinkish-cinnamon to
rosy-brown or brown at least at the centerandoften overall; margin often paler or whitish.
Flesh white, soft, odor mild. GILLS usually ad nate, but sometimes decurrent or adnexed;
close, soft, somewhat waxy, white. STALK 3-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or
tapered below, often curved near base; smooth, white, not viscid; apex often prominently
punctate. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-9 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in groups, associated with oak in our area
and sometimes common in the late fallandwinter (along with H. brunneus). It was first
collected in Palo Alto, California, but also occurs in eastern North America.
EDIBILITY Edible. I have tried it.
COMMENTS The reddish-to rosy-brown color of the cap (or center of the cap), non-
viscid stalk, waxy white gills,andmild odor are the fallible fieldmarks ofthis species. The
punctate stem apex is characteristic of many waxy caps, but in this one it is especially at-
tractive. Leucopaxillus amarus is similarly colored but has adrycap, non-waxy gills, bitter
taste,andwhite mycelium at the base of the stem. Just as common in our area isH. brun-
neus, very similar but for its yellow-brown to tawny-brown cap (or cap center). A species
endemic to California, H. albicastaneus, is also similar, but ranges from pure white (when
young) to yellow-brown to peach-or ochre-tinged (in age). It has a non-viscid stalk and
usually grows with oak, but stains rusty orfulvous in potassium hydroxide.H. subpungens
is a small, slender-stemmed species with a pinkish-brown to yellow-brown to salmon-
centered capandvery faint fruity odor; it occurs locally under alder, oak,andDouglas-fir.
H. tennesseensis, widespread, is also similar but favors conifersandhas a bitter taste and
potato-like odor. There are also several similar species with a viscid stalk, including: H.
/aurae, with a whitish cap margin, favoring hardwoods; H. discoideus, slightly darker,
favoring conifers;andH. verna/is, a western springtime "snowbank" species with a pink-
ish-buff to pale vinaceous capandsordid yellowish patches on the lower half of the stalk.
Hygrophorus bakerensis (Brown Almond Waxy Cap)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface smooth,
slimy or viscid when moist, cinnamon-brown to yellow-brown or tawny, the margin
usually paler or whitish. Flesh thick, white; odor sweet but sometimes faint, like almond
extract or crushed peach pits. GILLS white to creamy or pinkish-buff, usually decurrent
but varying to adnate; soft, somewhat waxy. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.8-2.5 cm thick, equal
or tapered downward, smooth, solid, dry; white to pinkish-buff. VEIL absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 7.5-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious under conifers, known only from the Pacific
Northwestandnorthern California; very common at times in the fallandearly winter.
EDIBILITY Edible but bland (it doesn't taste like it smells).
COMMENTS This species is one of the commonestandmost characteristic waxy caps of
the Pacific Northwest. The reddish-brown to yellow-brown cap, waxy decurrent gills, non-
viscid stalk,andalmondy odor set it apart. The gillsandstalk are sometimes beaded with
droplets in moist weather, but there is no latex as in Lactarius. The gills are usually decur-
rent, in contrast to Co/lybia oregonensis. a similarly colored, strongly fragrant mushroom
with adnexed or notched, non-waxy gills. H. agathosmus has the same odor, but its cap is
gray, not brown. Other fragrant waxy caps from the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia
include: H. monticolaandH. vinicolor, similar but with larger spores (the latter with an
unpleasant taste); H. variicolor, also similar but with lower half of stalk distinctly viscid
or glutinous;andH. paciJicus, a strongly aromatic (but not almondy) species with a russet
to tawny to pinkish-buff, often lobed or wavy cap, pale yellowish ills.andlarger spores.
Hygrophorus speciosus (Larch Waxy Cap) Color Plate 15
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate orexpandingto plane or even centrally
depressed; surface slimy or viscid when moist, smooth, bright orange-red to orange, often
fading to orange-yellow; margin often paler. Flesh white or tinted yellow, soft. GILLS
adnate to decurrent, white to pale yellow, the edges usually yellow; well-spaced, thick, soft,
waxy. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or thicker below, white or with
yellow to orange stains over lower portion; viscid to slimy when moist, at least below. VEIL
single (var. speciosus) or double-layered (var. kauffmani,); outer layer evanescent, leaving
slime on stalk; inner layer when present fibrillose, sometimes forming a slight ring on stalk.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in woodsandbogs under conifers, especially
larch but also pine; common in the late summerandfall throughout the range of larch, but
also frequent with ponderosa pine in the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This is one of the few brightly colored waxy caps belonging to the genus
Hygrophorus in its strictest sense(i.e., waxy caps with divergent gill tissue). It is easily told
from the numerous red to orange Hygrocybes by its habitat, viscid stalk,andwhite to pale
yellow decurrent gills. The cap is never olive-brown as in H. hypothejus. H. pyrophilus
is similar; it has a red cap, less viscid stalk,andwas found in burnt ground near Mt. Shasta.
Hygrophorus hypothejus (Olive-Brown Waxy Cap)
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate, plane, or depressed; surface smooth,
viscid or slimy when wet, color variable: typically dark brown to olive-brown at the center
and greenish-yellow to yellow at the margin when young (but sometimes entirely olive-
brown), often developing yellow-orange to reddish-orange tones in age, especially near
the margin. Flesh thin, yellowish to whitish; odor mild. GILLS decurrent or occasionally
adnate, well-spaced, thick, soft, waxy, at first pallid but soon becoming pale yellow,andin
age sometimes brightly colored (like margin of cap). STALK (3) 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2)
cm thick, equal or tapered downward; yellow at apex, otherwise pallid or variously colored
(like cap)andviscid or slimy when moist. VEIL evanescent, leaving slime on stalk and
sometimes an obscure fibrillose ring. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9 x 4-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in troops under conifers, particularly pine-very
widely distributedandoften abundant in cool weather. It is common from late fall through
early spring in our coastal pine forests.
EDIBILITY Bountiful, but bland. See H. sordidus for details.
COMMENTS This waxy cap is best recognized by its olive-brown to olive-yellow cap
when young which is sticky or slimyandconvex to depressed in age, the decurrent gills, and
association with pine. The colors are extremely variable, especially in age,andyoung
specimens bear little resemblance to old ones until you find stages in between. Both slim and
relatively robust specimens can be found. Other species with an olive-brown to grayish cap
and viscid stalk include: H. Juligineus, very similar but with a darker ( olive to blackish)
cap, common in cool weather under conifers (mainly in eastern North America); H.Jusco-
albus, with larger spores (9-13 microns long)andH. limacinus, with even larger (10-17
microns) spores;andtwo species which lack an inner (fibrillose) veil: H. occidentalis,
small-spored, cap brown to grayish with a pallid margin, often under oak;andH. mega-
sporus, with spores 12-18 microns long. All ofthese species favor conifersandhave white
to grayish gills; none develop the bright colors typical of mature H. hypothejus.
Hygrophorus olivaceoalbus (Sheathed Waxy Cap)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex or broadly umbonate to more or less plane; surface slimy or
viscid when moist, dark brown to nearly black at the center, usually paler (grayish to
olive-brown) toward the margin,andusually with a streaked appearance from darker
fibrils. Flesh thick, white, soft, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent. thick, soft, waxy,
pure white or pallid, sometimes becoming grayish. STALK (3) 5-12 (15) cm long, 1-3 cm
thick, equal or thicker below; smoothandwhite above the ring, viscid to slimy (when moist)
belowandsheathed with blackish to grayish-brown, olive-brown, or gray fibrils which
break up into patches or scaly rings. VEIL double-layered, the outer layer evanescent and
depositing slime on stalk, the inner layer fibrillose and sometimes forming an obscure ring
at top of fibrillose sheath. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-12 x 5-6 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers (especially spruce)
in westernandnorthern North America, fruiting from late summer through early winter.
I have seen it in northern California under Sitka spruceandin the southern Rocky
Mountains under Engelmann spruceandblue spruce.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but blandandslimy.
COMMENTS This handsome Hygrophorus can be distinguished from similarly colored
waxy caps by the gray to dark brown fibrillose sheath on the stem. The contrasting colors
are very striking. The coastal variety (also called H. persoonil) is usually quite dark and
slimy; the Rocky Mountain version is often paler (grayer)andonly slightly viscid if at all.
Other species: H. ;nocybiform;s has a grayish-brown sheathandveil, but its stalk is not
viscid,andits dark gray cap is only 3-7 cm broad; it occurs in the Pacific Northwest under
conifers. H. tephro/eucus, H. pustu/atus,andH. morris;; are even smallerandhave small,
pointlike grayish scales on the stalk. See also the species listed under H. hypothejus.
Hygrophorus agathosmus (Gray Almond Waxy Cap)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane or with margin uplifted; surface smooth, viscid when
moist, dull gray to ashy-gray, brownish-gray, or at times grayish-olive; margin incurved at
first. Flesh soft, whitish; odor sweet, like almond extract (but sometimes faint). GILLS
adnate to slightly decurrent, close orwell-spaced, soft, waxy, white or sometimes grayish in
age. STALK 4-10 (16) cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, equal or narrowed below, smooth, not
viscid; white or tinged gray. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10.5x 4.5-5.5
microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under conifers, widely distributedandfairly common
in cool weather, but rather infrequent in our area. It is partial to spruce, but is associated
locally with Douglas-fir (probably because there isn't any spruce).
EDIBILITY Edible, but bland. It is unfortunate that it doesn't taste like it smells.
COMMENTS The grayish cap, waxy gills, dry stalk, almondy fragrance,andassociation
with conifers are the telltale traits of this fine fungus. The odor is sometimes faint, but if
several are placed together in a closed container it usually becomes evident. H. calophyllus
and H. camarophyllus are somewhat similar but do not have an almondy odor. Other
species: H. odoratus is a small, slender version of H. agathosmus with an almondy odor
and larger spores (11-14 microns long); it occurs in the Pacific Northwest under conifers.
H. occ;denta/;s has a viscid stalk, weaker odor,andgrows under oak or conifers.
Hygrophorus calophyllus (Gray-Brown Waxy Cap)
CAP 4-11 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface smooth, viscid or
slimy when moist, evenly colored deep olive-brown to dark gray-brown to umber, the
margin sometimes slightly paler. Flesh soft, white, thick; odor mild or faintly fragrant.
GILLS white or flushed a delicate pink, well-spaced, thick, soft, waxy, usually decurrent.
STALK 5-12 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, smooth, not viscid; apex
white, otherwise colored like the cap but usually slightly paler. VEIL absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on ground under conifers, western North America,
not common. I have found it only once in our area. with Douglas-fir, in December.
EDIBILITY Edible.
COMMENTS Whether white or pink, the gills contrast sharply with the dark cap and
stem, making this a most attractive mushroom. Often the gills will develop their pinkish
tint only as they mature, leading one to wrongly assume that the developing spores are
pink! The stalk is not viscid as in H. h}pothejusandH. olivaceoalbus,andthe soft, clean,
waxy gills distinguish it from Clitocybe. Very similar but more common is H. camaro-
phyllus, with a dry to only slightly viscid (never slimy), streaked, grayish-brown cap and
white to grayish-tinted (never pink) gills. It also fruits under conifers, sometimes near
melting snow,andis easily mistaken for a Clitocybe. H. marzuolus grows almost
exclusively in the spring, often near snow. It has well-spaced gillsandis entirely pallid
when young, but soon becomes grayish overall (including the gills).
Pleurotus ostreatus
(Oyster Mushroom)
CAP 4-15 cm broad or more, oyster-or fan-shaped, convex becoming plane or sometimes
funnel-shaped; surface smooth, slightly lubricous when moist but not viscid; color
variable: white to gray, grayish-brown, tan, or dark brown (sometimes yellowish in old
age); margin inrolled when young, often wavy or lobed. Flesh thick, white, firm but soft,
tougher near the stalk; odorandtaste mild. GILLS fairly close, broad, decurrent (if stalk
is present), white or tinged gray but often discoloring yellowish in old age. STALK absent
or if present usually short, stout,andoff-center or lateral (but sometimes central); 0.5-4
cm longandthick; solid, firm, dry, usually hairy or downy at least at base. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT white to pale lilac or lilac-gray; spores 7-9 x 3-4 microns, oblong to
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Occasionally solitary but usually in shelving masses or overlapping rows or
columns on hardwood logsandstumps; sometimes also on standing trees, rarely on
conifers; common throughout most of the northern hemisphere. Its preferred hosts
include elm, cottonwood, alder,andsycamore, but in our area it favors oakandtanoak,
prod ucing large crops after the first fall rainsandsmaller crops thereafter through the
spring. I have also seen stupendous fruitings (several hundred pounds!) growing in clusters
in a treeless field where crushed coffee beans were dumped. It is easily cultivated on a wide
variety of substrates, including compressed sawdust, shredded Time magazines, and
presumably coffee grounds. If an "oyster log" is dragged home from the wildandkept
moist, it will produce crops regularly.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious-breadedandfried it is superbandremarkably remi-
niscent of seafood. Be sure to check for small beetles between the gills (these can be re-
moved by dousing the mushroom briefly in water),andof course, for maggots. The tough
stem or basal stump of tissue should be removed. Large specimens can be pounded like
abalone to make them tender. P. ostreatusandits Asian counterpart, P. sajor-cajou, are
now cultivated commerciallyandsold fresh under the name "tree oysters."
COMMENTS Pure, pale,andgraceful, the oyster mushroom is easily distinguished by its
white gills, tender flesh, smooth cap,andshelflike growth habit on wood. The cap color
and position of the stem depend to some extent on the location of the fruiting body. When
growing out of the side of a log, the stem is lateral or absent, since there is no need to elevate
the. cap. When growing from the top of a log, however, the stem can be central, leading to
confusion with ClilOcybe. The cap is generally darker in sunlightandcorrespondingly paler
in dim surroundings, but distinct color forms also seem to occur, including a brown-
capped form that grows on bush lupine along the oceananda giant thick-fleshed form
that is common on cottonwood in inland valleys. In fact, P. ostreatus has long been
recognized as a "collective" species, i.e., a group of closely related but distinct forms.
Fortunately, they all appear to be edible, so that their exact taxonomy needn't concern you
(at least, it doesn't concern me!). Other species:P. sapidus is now regarded as a synonym for
P. ostreatus; P. columbinus is a rare species with a bluish-or greenish-tinted cap, but is
otherwise very similar;P. cornucopiae grows in dense, upright clusters on woody debris in
the Rocky Mountainsandprobably elsewhere. It has a lined or ridged, nearly central stalk
and depressed or funnel-shaped cap that is open (incised) on one side. It is edible when
young but often develops a bitter or unpleasant taste in age. For a smaller, thinner, white
species growing on conifers, see P. porrigens.
Pleurotus porrigens (Angel Wings)
CAP 4-8 (I 0) x 2-5 cm, fan-shaped to tongue-or petal-shaped; surface smooth, not viscid,
pure white to milky-white, but sometimes creamy in old age; margin at first incurved, often
lobed or wavy. Flesh very thin, pliant, white, odorandtaste mild. GILLS crowded, thin,
narrow, white or yellowish, decurrent if a stalk is present. STALK absent or present only
as a narrowed, stubby white base. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-7x 5-6
microns, nearly round, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In shelving groups or overlapping clusters on old rotting conifers, especially
hemlock; widely distributed. It is very common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and
northern California, but I have yet to find it south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Edible, but in my humble fungal opinion, blandandinsubstantial. However,
some people proclaim it superior to P. ostreatus.
COMMENTS Also known as Pleurocybella porrigensandPleurotellus porrigens, this
species can be distinguished from other types of Pleurotus by its thin, pliant, white fruiting
bodyandnarrow, crowded gills. It is to rotting conifers what P. ostreatus is to rotting
hardwoods-i.e., commonandcosmopolitan. The shining white fruiting bodies stand
out vividly in the forest gloom, looking so exquisitely pureandunsullied that it is easy to
see how they acq uired the nickname" Angel Wings." Other species: P. lignatilis (=C litocybe
lignatilis) is a similar whitish species with narrow, crowded gillsanda more prominent
stem. It frequently has a farinaceous odorandprefers hardwoods rather than conifers.
Pleurotus dryinus
(Veiled Oyster Mushroom)
CAP 4-20 cm broad, broadly convex sometimes becoming plane or slightly depressed in
age; surface dry, with soft grayish fibrils or scales, but sometimes whitish or in age yellow-
ish; margin at first inrolled. Flesh very thick, white, firm; odor mild to pungent or fragrant.
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, often veined or forking on the stalk; white, but sometimes
discoloring yellowish in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually off-centerbut
sometimes central; rather tough, often short, equal or tapered downward; solid, whitish.
VEIL membranous, white to grayish, forming a slight ring on stalk or leaving remnants
on cap margin or disappearing entirely. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-12 (17) x 3.5-5
microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on hardwoods (usually living); widely distributed
but not common. Alder is a favorite host; it is also reported on oak,andI've found it
growing locally from the wound of a living madrone, in December.
EDIBILITY Edible but rather tough.
COMMENTS The thick firm fleshandsoft hairs or scales on the capare good fieldmarks;
so is the veil when it is visible (see photograph at bottom of p. 135). It might be confused
with Lentinus lepideus, which has serrated gills, or Panus strigosus, which is differently
colored. P. corticatus, Panus dryinus,andArmillaria dryina are synonyms.
Hohenbuehelia petaloides group (Shoehorn Oyster Mushroom)
CAP 2-7x 3-7 (10) cm, spatula-to funnel-shaped or shoehorn-like when upright (i.e, split
or open on one side), fan-or petal-shaped when shelflike; tapering to a stemlike base;
surface smooth or with a whitish bloom when youngandoften downy toward the base,
moist to somewhat rubbery-gelatinous but not viscid except when very wet; some shade of
brown, tan, or grayish-brown; margin often lobed or wavy, at first incurved or inrolled.
Flesh pliant, usually white (sometimes watery tan). GILLS narrow, thin, crowded, deeply
decurrent, white or tinged gray, often becoming yellowish or creamy in ageandoften
becoming crisped (wavy) in dry weather. STALK lateral or off-center, continuous with
cap, often short (14 cm long), equal or tapered downward, up to 2.5 cm thick, white or
grayish; fuzzy, downy, or minutely hairy. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9
x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Gills with large, thick-walled cystidia.
HABITAT Usually in groups or small clusters on rotting or buried wood, sawdust mulch,
etc.; widely distributed. This species "complex" is common year-round in our area in
nurseries, flower pots, landscaped areas where wood chip mulch has been used, etc. It
occurs less commonly in the wild, usually on rotting conifers such as hemlock. I have seen
it in Yosemite National Park in the springandfall.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice (according to most sources); I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known as Pleurotus petaloides, this speciesandits close relatives
are best distinguished by their crowded gills, brown cap, white spores,andlateral stem
or stemlike base. Terrestrial fruiting bodies are often reminiscent of upright, rolled-up
leaves or shoehorns, while those that grow shelflike on wood are usually fan-shaped as in
other oyster mushrooms. The gelatinized layer of tissue beneath the surface of the cap is
seldom evident unless the specimens are waterlogged. U nd.er the microscope, however, it is
often discernible. H. geogenia is a very similar species with a hazel-brown to yellow-brown
cap that differs mi<:roscopically. Like H. petaloides. it is apt to be looked for in Clitocybe,
but the cap is open or split on one sideandthe stalk is usually off-center. Other species:
H. atrocaerulea has a brown to bluish-black, mussel-shaped cap which is felty at least
toward the base; it grows on wood, including yucca. H. angustatus has a pale (pinkish-
buff) capandround spores. H. mastrucatus has a grayish cap, unpleasant taste,andbroad
gills that are fairly well-spaced. All of these species were formerly included in Pleurotus.
Panellus serot;nus (Late Oyster Mushroom)
CAP 2.5-10 (15) c,m broad, kidney-or fan-shaped; surface viscid when moist or in age,
color variable: olive-green to yellow-green, ochre, greenish-brown, or with violet tones;
margin incurved, often lobed or wavy. Flesh thick, firm, white, with a gelatinous layer
under the cuticle. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, pale orange to ochraceous to pale
yellow, often fading in age. STALK absent or if present, laterally attached, short, and
stubby (0.5-2.5 cm long); yellow to brownish or colored like cap, but hairy or velvety . VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT yellowish; spores 4-6 x 1-2 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth,
typically amyloid (at least in dried specimens).
HABITAT Scattered or in shelving groups on dead hardwood logsandbranches (espe-
cially wild cherry), sometimes also on conifers; widely distributed. Fairly common in the
Pacific Northwest in the fallandwinter, but I have yet to find it in our area. Like Flammu-
lina velutipes. it is a cold-weather fungus,andits appearance is usually a sign that the
mushroom season is almost over.
EDIBILITY Edible but mediocre; it sometimes develops a bitter taste as it ages.
COMMENTS The viscid, greenish to yellowish or violet-tinted capandpale yellow to
orange gills, plus the short, stubby stemandgrowth on wood make this an easy mushroom
to recognize. According to Alexander Smith, the spores of some forms do not display
the amyloid reaction until dried out or stored in a herbarium.
Panel/us stipticus
CAP 0.5-3 cm broad, spatula-, kidney-, or fan-shaped, convex to plane or depressed near
the stalk; surface dry, minutely hairy or scurfy, buff to ochre-buff, tan, brownish, or
cinnamon-brown, sometimes concentrically zoned. Flesh thin, tough, white or pale
yellowish; taste usually acrid or astringent. GILLS close, narrow, often forked, brownish
to pale cinnamon or ochre-buff; adnate to decurrent, often luminescent. STALK 0.5-2 cm
long, 3-8 mm thick, offenter to lateral, usually narrowed at base, often somewhat
flattened; same color as cap or paler (to nearly whitish). VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 3-5 x 1.5-3 microns, elliptical to oblong orsa usage-shaped, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Usually gregarious or in clusters or overlapping tiers on dead hardwoods;
widely distributed, more common in eastern North America than in the West. It occurs in
California but I have yet to find it in our area. It usually fruits in the fall, but the fruiting
bodies do not rot quicklyandconsequently can be found practically year-round.
EDIBILITY Inedible due to its small size, tough texture,andbitter taste.
COMMENTS But for its luminescent gills, this listless little wood-rotter wouldn't
attract enough attention to merit mention. Because of the brownish gills it can be mistaken
for a Crepidotus or small Paxillus, but the spore print is whiteandthe texture much
tougher. The species epithet refers to its use as a styptic (bloodlotter). For other listless
Panel/us species, see the key to PleurotusandAllies.
Panus conchatus (Smooth Panus; Conch Panus)
CAP 4-17 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or broadly depressed in age; surface
dry, smooth or minutely downy, often cracked into small scales in age; vinaceous-brown or
violet-tinted when youngandmoist, fading to brownish, reddish-brown, or tan in age or
as it dries; margin often wavy, at first inrolled. Flesh rather tough, firm, white; taste mild.
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, narrow, often forking near stalk, tan to buff, or when moist
often violet-tinted. STALK 2-5 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick; off-center to lateral or sometimes
central, usually tapered downward; solid, tough, colored more or less like cap; covered with
fine hairs at least when young. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7x 2.5-3.5
microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups or clusters on hardwood logs, stumps,andfallen
branches; widely distributed but rather infrequent in our area, where it fruits in the winter.
EDIBILITY Tough but apparently harmless.
COMMENTS Also known as P. torulosus, this mushroom is almost entirely violet when
youngandmoist, but fades in age to tan or reddish-tan. The color, plus the growth on
wood, decurrent gills,andnon-hairy cap are good field marks. The stem is sometimes
central, leading to confusion with Clitocybe,andit is consequently keyed out under that
,genus. The cap is not hairy as in P. rudis, nor do the gills have serrated edges as in
Lentinus.
Panus rudis (Hairy Panus)
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, fan-shaped or wedge-shaped to somewhat irregular in outline,
convex becoming plane or depressed; surface dry, covered with dense, coarse, stiff,
velvety hairs, reddish-brown to tan, but often violet when freshandwet; margin incurved,
often lobed. Flesh tough, thin, white; taste slightly bitter. GILLS decurrent, close, nar-
row, edges entire; white, creamy, or colored like cap. STALK a short, stout plug oftissue
up to 2 cm long, off-center to lateral or sometimes central; tough, solid, hairy like the cap
and more or less same color. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white or yellowish; spores
5-7 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Usually in groups on rotting hardwood stumpsandlogs, widely distributed.
I have seen it several times in the fall on tanoak, but it is rather rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible but very hairy. You'd do better to brush your teeth with it than eat it.
COMMENTS The hairy cap, tough texture, white spores,andshort lateral to offenter
stem set this singular fungus apart. As in P. conchatus, fresh wet caps are a gorgeous deep
violet, but soon fade to reddish-or pinkish-brown.
Panus strigosus (Giant Panus)
CAP 10-40 cm broad or more, fan-shaped to broadly convex, plane, or slightly depressed;
surface dry, with coarse hairs, white to buff or creamy, discoloring yellowish in old age or
when dried. Flesh thick, rather tough, white or yellowish, taste mild. GILLS broad, white
to buff or even tinged lilac or brownish, becoming yellowish in old age; usually decurrent,
edges typically entire. STALK 2-15 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, usually off-center or lateral;
solid, tough, white to buff or aging yellowish; equal or thicker below, coarsely hairy
especially toward base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 10-13 x 3-5 microns, oblong,
smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or clustered (but rarely more than four together), usually in wounds
of living hardwoods; widely distributed but rare, at least in the West. It favors maple and
birch, but occurs in Arizona on walnut. Three gigantic local specimens were brought to
me, but the collector didn't note the host. Each cap was more than two feet in diameter!
EDIBILITY Reportedly edible, but too rareandtough to be of consequence.
COMMENTS But for the hairy cap this humongus fungus might be mistaken for a giant
oyster mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus). Lentinus ponderosus rivals it in size but grows on
conifersandis not as hairy. The species epithet means "strigose," which means hairy.
Phyllotopsis nidulans
CAP 2-8 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped to scallop-shaped in outline, broadly convex
to plane; surface dry, often covered at first with a white chamois-like, cottony pubescence,
otherwise pale orange to orange-buff, yellow-orange, or fading to buff,anddensely hairy
or fuzzy; margin at first inrolled. Flesh colored like cap or paler; odor typically strong and
disagreeable (like sewer gas or rotten eggs), but sometimes mild. GILLS close, narrow,
orange-buff to orange-yellow or pale orange. STALK absent or rudimentary. VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT pale pinkish to apricot-pink to pinkish-brown; spores 5-8 x
2-4 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In groups or shelving masses on rotting logsandstumps (of both hardwoods
and conifers); widely distributed. In our area it is common on dead oaks in the fall and
winter,andin the Sierra NevadaandRocky Mountains I have seen it on aspen.
EDIBILITY Unknown. The odor is so disgusting that only a zealot with the iron con-
stitution of Charles McIlvaine would consider eating it.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Claudopus nidulansandPanel Ius nidulans, this
rather attractive pale orange shelving mushroom is easily recognized by its peach-fuzz-
like capandobnoxious odor (the latter feature, however, is lacking in some collections).
Paxillus panuoides is somewhat similar, but has yellowish-buff sporesandveined or
forked gills. Crepidolus species have brown spores, Panellus species have white to yel-
lowish spores, while C/audopus species have pinkish spores but do not have orange gills.
Lentinus lepideus (Train-Wrecker)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid, whitish to buff or
pale yellow, but usually with darker (brownish) scales; margin sometimes beaded with
droplets when young. Flesh thick, tough, white, but often aging or bruising yellow; not
decaying readily, odor usually distinctive (pungent or fragrant). GILLS usually decurrent
but sometimes notched or adnate, whitish to buff or in one form yellow, often bruising
brownish and/or yellowish in age; edges entire when young but often serrated in age.
STALK 3-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central to somewhat off-center, tapered at base; solid,
toughandhard, colored more or less like cap, usually with brownish to reddish-brown
scales or fibrils below ring. VEIL membranous, forming a pallid, superior to apical ring
on stalk which may be slight or disappear in age. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 9-12
x 4-5 microns, almost cylindrical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on conifer logs, stumps, fence posts, and
other lumber, sometimes also on oak; widely distributedandfairly common in cool
weather in the coniferous forests of the West, but rare in our areaandless frequent than
L. ponderosus in the Sierra Nevada. It used to be common on railroad ties, resulting
in derailmentsandthe common name, "train-wrecker." It causes a brown rot in its host.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good, but the tough flesh requires thorough cooking.
Use only young caps-older specimens may have an unpleasant taste.
COMMENTS The scaly cap, serrated gills (at least in age), membranous veil, white
spores,andgrowth on wood (sometimes buried!) set apart this species. Like L. ponde-
rosus, it decays slowly,andold or weathered specimens can be difficult to recognize.
Several variants occur, including a yellow one.
Lentinus ponderosus (Ponderous Lentinus)
CAP 10-50 cm broad or more, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface dry or
slightly tacky, at first smooth but in most cases soon breaking up into large scales, revealing
the white flesh beneath; color variable depending on ageandexposure: white to tan,
yellowish, brownish, or pinkish-brown, usually discoloring yellowish or orangish in
age. Flesh thick, tough, not readily decaying, white (but may age or bruise yellowish); odor
often fragrant. GILLS typically decurrent, fairly close, white to yellowish, but often
developing orangish to rusty-brown stains in age; edges serrated or torn, at least at
maturity. STALK 5-20 cm long, 2-8 cm thick, central or off-center, usually with a nar-
rowed, rooting base; solid, hard, tough, whitish aging yellowish to brown or rusty-orange,
often with brownish patches or scales. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-12
x 3-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters on or near dead conifers (but often appearing
terrestrial) in the late spring, summer,andearly fall; known only from western North
America. Although not common in ost areas, it is very conspicuous because of its large
size. I have never seen it at low elevations, but it is often abundant in the Sierra Nevada
in the summer on lodgepole pine. I have also collected it on ponderosa pine in the South-
west. It produces a brown rot in its host.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, but thorough cooking or parboiling is required because
of its toughness. Biologist Bob Winter of Fresno says that it is avidly sought by Japanese-
Americans as a shiitake-and matsutake-substitute, perhaps because of its chewy texture.
COMMENTS This large, tough mushroom rivals Catathelasma imperiaUsandCUto-
cybe giganrea for the title of "Most Humongus Gilled Fungus Among Us." The former,
however, has a veilandthe latter has a fragile cap,andboth are terrestrial, whereas L.
ponderosus lacks a veilandgrows on or near wood. Panus strigosus can also be very large,
but grows on hardwoodsandhas a hairy capandnon-serrated gills. The fragrant odor of
L. ponderosus is sometimes reminiscent of the matsutake (Armillaria ponderosa), but
that species is terrestrialandhas a prominent veil. Smaller specimens can be confused
with L. lepideus, which is rather similar in overall aspect but also has a veil. The cap color
and degree of scaliness vary considerably from specimen to specimen (depending on age,
temperature,andexposure to direct sunlight), but the size, toughness,anddecurrent
gills with serrated edges are distinctive.
Lentinellus ursinus
CAP 3-10 x 2-5 em, kidney-to fan-shaped in outline, broadly convex becoming plane;
surface dry, dark brown to brown, yellow-brown, or reddish-brown, with sparse to dense,
brown to dark brown pubescence (fine hairs), at least toward the stalk; margin usually
smooth, often palerandlobed, at first incurved. Flesh thin; taste slowly acrid or bitter.
GILLS decurrent (if stalk present), close, broad, dingy white to pinkish-brown with ragged
or coarsely toothed edges. STALK absent or rudimentary. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 2.5-5x 2-3.5 microns, nearly round, with minute amyloid spines.
HABITAT On rotting logsandstumps, usually in groups or shelving clusters; widely
distributed. It grows on both hardwoodsandconifers but is not common in our area. I
have found it in the late fallandwinter on Douglas-firandlive oak.
EDIBILITY Inedible due to the bitter or acrid taste.
COMMENTS This flaccid, fleshless, featureless fungus could carelessly be mistaken for
for a decrepit oyster mushroom (PleuTOrus oSlrearus) were it not for the ragged gills and
hairy cap. L. flabelliform;s is a similar but slightly smaller species with whitish pubesence
on the cap. Another widespread species,L. vulp;nus, also has whitish pubescence (at least
at the base of the cap), but is often ribbed or reticulateandsometimes has a stalk; it favors
hardwoods. Still another species, L. montanus, can be told by its well-spaced gills and
tendency to fruit on dead conifers, usually at higher elevations after the snow melts.
Tricholomopsis rutilans
(PlumsandCustard)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, yellow, but covered with dark red
to purple-red scales or fibrils which become sparser in age or toward the margin. Flesh
thick, firm, pale yellow, odor mild. GILLS adnate or notched, close, yellow to pale yellow.
STALK 5-10 (18) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, dry, yellow with
reddish or reddish-purple scales like those on the cap (but usually sparserandsometimes
entirely yellow in old age. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gill edges numerous, club-shaped.
HABITAT Solitary, tufted, or in small grou ps on or near rotting conifers, wood chips, and
humus rich in lignin; widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in cool weather (late
fall, winter), but rarely fruiting in large numbers. I find it most often with red woodandpine.
EDIBILITY Edible, but according to Chroogomphus-connoisseur Ciro Milazzo-
who was bornandraised in Brooklyn-"it tastes like rotting wood." Since I've never tasted
rotting wood, I cannot attest to the validity of this statement. I wasn't bornandraised in
Brooklyn either.
COMMENTS A real beauty when fresh, this mushroom is easily recognized by the dark
red or purple-red fibrillose scales on a yellow background (hence its British name, "plums
and custard"). This color combination is practically unique among fleshy-stemmed,
white-spored agarics. If you find what looks to be a small T. rutilans with an entirely
yellow stem, you probably have T. Jlammula, a questionably distinct species. T. decora
is also quite similar, but has gray to brownish or black cap center and/or scales. I find it
occasionally on rotting redwood, but it is more common farther north. Finally, there are
several entirely yellow species also found on rotting conifers, including: T.Jlavissima, with
a fibrillose, fringed cap margin;andT. sulfureoides, partial to hemlock, with an evanescent
veil,anda cap that develops small brownish scales or streaks in age. T. rutilans was origi-
nally placed in Tricholoma. T. decora in Clitocybe.andT. sulfureoides in Pleurotus.
Tricholomopsis platyphylla (Broad-Gill)
CAP 4-12 em broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth, not viscid,
often streaked; dark brown to grayish-brown, or sometimes pallid with a darker center
and/or fibrils. Flesh pallid, thin. GILLS adnate or more often notched, well-spaced, very
broad (deep), often splitting or with eroded edges in age, white or grayish. STALK 6-12
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below, white or flushed cap color, hollow in age with
a tough outer rind; base usually with white mycelial cords attached. VEIL absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 7-9x 4-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidia abundant on gill edges.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on or near rotting logsandstumps, especially of
hardwoods, widely distributed. In eastern North America it is common in the spring and
early summer when few other mushrooms are outandabout,andit is also said to be quite
common in Arizona. In our area, however, it is rather rareandfruits in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some people are adversely affected by itandthe flavor
is poor. Also, it is not particularly easy to identify.
COMMENTS This mushroom has few obvious relativesandhas consequently been
placed in several different genera, including Co/lybiaandOudemansie/la. It is somewhat
reminiscent of Pluteus cervinus. but does not ha ve pinkish spores. If not clearly growing on
wood it can be mistaken for a Tricholoma or robust Co/lybia, but the very broad, fre-
quently eroded gillsandwhite mycelial cords (rhizomorphs) are distinctive. The latter
may only be evident ifthe mushroom is dug out carefullyandcompletely,andeven then are
sometimes absent. T.Jallaxis a closely related species with yellowish-tinted gillsandstalk,
found on conifers in the Rocky Mountains.
Omphalotus olivascens Color Plates 40, 4]
(Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom; Western Jack-O-Lantern Mushroom)
CAP 4-16 (25) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth,
not viscid, color variable: bright golden-yellow to orange with olive tones often present
also, varying to dull orange, brownish-orange, olive, or slightly reddish. Flesh rather
thin, pliant, colored more or less like cap; odor mild. GILLS olive to bright yellow-orange
(often yellow with olive tints), decurrent, close, usually luminescent when fresh. STALK
4-20 cm long, 1-4 (8) cm thick, central to off-center, equal or tapered downward, solid,
dry, more or less colored like cap or gills, or dingier olive. SPORE_PRINT white to yellow-
ish; spores 6-8x 5.5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth.
HABITAT In tufts or clusters or occasionally solitary on or around hardwood trunks,
stumps,andburied wood; known only from the west coast, but replaced elsewhere by
O. o/earius (see comments). Common in our area from fall through early spring, especially
on oak, manzanita, madrone,andchinquapin.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! Profuse sweatingandgastrointestinal distress are typical symp-
toms; muscarine is one of the toxins (see p. 894). It is sometimes eaten under the mistaken
impression that it is a chanterelle.
COMMENTS The bright yellow-orange to olive color, decurrent gills, pale spores, and
tendency to grow in clusters distinguish this handsome mushroom. The chanterelle
(Cantharel/us cibarius) is somewhat similar but has thick, shallow, blunt, fold like gills and
white flesh; the false chanterelle (H ygrophoropsis aurantiacus) is smallerandhas oranger,
repeatedly forked gills, while Gymnopilus species have dark orange to rusty-brown spores.
All lack the olive tones characteristic of mature O. o/ivascens.
The commonjack-o-Iantern mushroom of eastern North America is essentially the same
as O. o/ivascens except that it is pumpkin colored (bright orange to yellow-orange, without
any olive tones). Formerly called Clitocybe illudens, it is now called O. olearius (or O. i/-
ludens by those who consider it distinct from the O. olearius of Europe). According to one
report, its luminescence is sometimes bright enough to read a newspaper by. And then
there's the tale ofthe shipwrecked sailor on an uninhabited island, who wrote a last message
by the light of a jack-o-Iantern mushroom, using the ink from a shaggy maneandthe stalk
of an Agaricus as a pen. Unfortunately, he starved to death because he was afraid to eat any
of the mushrooms he found!
Clitocybe tarda
CAP 1-6 (9) cm broad, convex with an incurved margin, then plane to broadly funnel-
shaped or at times umbonate; surface smooth, not viscid, flesh-colored to brownish or
grayish with a faint lilac or vinaceous tinge when moist, fading as it dries. Flesh thin, odor
mild or slightly fragrant. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent or at times notched, close,
grayish to brownish-buff or pinkish-buff, often with a lilac tint when fresh. STALK 2-6 cm
long, 3-8 mm thick, usually slender, equal or slightly thicker below, colored more or less
like cap or paler, fibrillose. SPORE_PRINT dingy pale pinkish; spores 6-8x 3-5 microns,
elliptical, finely roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered or sometimes in rings in grass, dung,
manure, straw heaps, old fields, compost piles, etc. Widespreadandnot uncommon in
our area after heavy rains, late fall through spring.
EDIBILITY Edible but thin..;fleshedandnot particularly easy to identify. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known as Lepista tardaandTrich%ma sordidum, this is a smaller,
slimmer version of the blew it. It isn't purple, but when freshandmoist it often has a slight
lilac or vinaceous hue-especially the gills. It can easily be mistaken for a Melanoleuca,
but the spore print is pale pinkish. The cap color is difficult to characterize but is generally
some shade of buff, brown, or even gray. Two other pinkish-spored" Lepistas" with subtle
purple tints are: C. graveo/ens, with a strong, disagreeable odor (like "moldy hay"), and
C. g/aucocana. Both of these are much largerandmore robust than C. tarda,andin fact
they closely resemble the blew it (c. nuda) but for their subtler color( older specimens can
scarcely be distinguished). Both species are rareandfortunately, not poisonous.
Clitocybe nuda
(Blewit)
CAP 4-14 (18) cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming broadly
umbonate to plane, or with an uplifted, often wavy margin in age; surface smooth,lubri-
cous when moist but not viscid, often somewhat lustrous when dry; purple, or purple
shaded with brown or gray when fresh, soon fading to brownish, flesh-color, tan, etc.,
but the margin often retaining purple tones well into maturity. Flesh thick, rather soft, pur-
plish to lilac-buff; odor faintly fragrant when fresh (like frozen orangejuice), taste pleasant
to slightly bitter. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, or sometimes decurrent;
purple or pale purple to bluish-purple or grayish-purple when fresh, fading to buff, pinkish-
buff, or brownish in age. STALK 2.5-7 (10) cm long, 1-2.5 (3) cm thick at apex, equal or
more often with an enlarged base; dry, fibrillose, purple to pale purple or colored like the
gills; base often covered with downy purple mycelium. SPORE_PRINT dull pinkish to
pinkish-buff; spores 5.5-8 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, often in rings or arcs-in woods, brush, gardens,
compost piles, i.e., wherever there is organic debris; widely distributed. It seems to favor
cool weather but is common in our area throughout the mushroom season. A favorite
abode is in brambles under live oak, often in the company of chanterelles; it is also common
under pineandcypress,andI have found it on Ano Nuevo Island in beach grass and
elephant seal dung. A single mycelium will produce several crops a year, so check your
patches regularly. I know of one fairy ring sixty feet in diameter that produces about 200
blewits each time it fruits! Known as a"trashinhabitor" because of its fondness for virtually
any type of decomposing organic matter, it can be grown on a wide range of substrates,
including shredded newspapersandcompost.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery popular-a favorite with beginnersandgourmets alike,
and one of the most plentiful edible wild mushrooms in our area. It has the dubious dis-
tinction of being one of the few purple foods that actually tastes good. It is even popular
in fungophobic EnglandandScotland, where it is sometimes sold in markets.
COMMENTS The ubiquitous blewit is the quintessential embodiment of spunk and
persistence-cut one downandtwo will grow back! Decapitated stems will often continue
to grow as if nothing had happened-a new cap will not form,anda grotesque (but edible)
cancerous-looking pale purple growth will take its place. The blewit's trademarks are its
beautiful purple to bluish-purple color with inrolled cap margin when young, stout stature,
absence of a veil, faintly fruity fragrance,anddull pinkish spores. The cap has a character-
istic lu bricous feel when moist, but may look quite different-polishedandsilvery-violet-
when dry. The amount of purple present varies considerably depending on the age and
moisture content of the mushroom,andpossibly the habitat or geographical area (some
forms, such as the one commonly found under cypress, tend to be quite pale, with only a
slight violet tinge). Old faded blewits are barely recognizable, but by that stage are usually
bug-bitten anyway.
Other purple mushrooms include: Inocybe lilacina. with brown gills (when mature),
brown spores,anda small umbonate cap; many Cortinarius species, with a cobwebby veil
when youngandrusty-brown spores; Mycena pura. smallandslender with white spores;
the Laccaria amethystina group, with white or lilac-tinged sporesanda long, tough,
fibrous stem. Of these, onJy the Inocybeandpossibly the Mycenaare poisonous. There are
also several bluish EntolomaandLeplOnia species, but they are not nearly as purple.
Synonyms for the blew it are almost as numerous as the blew it itself. They include:
Tr;ch%ma nudum, Rhodopx;llus nudus, Lep;sta nuda,andincorrectly, Tricholoma
personatum. "Blewit," incidentally, is a corruption of "blue hat"-though the blewit is
more purple than blue. In Europe the blewit is often called the "wood blewit." to distinguish
it from the "field blewit" or "blue-leg," C. saeva(=Lep;stasaeva, Tr;cholomapersonatum).
The latter is very similar to C. nuda in shapeandstatureandis equally delicious, but shows
purple only on the stem-the capandgills being grayish to pinkish-buff to watery tan (or
the gills tinged vinaceous). Also, it tends to grow in pastures or grass rather than in the
woods. It is infrequent in North America but has been reported from California. See also
C. tarda.andthe species discussed under it.
Clitocybe brunneocephala
CAP 4-13 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming broadly umbonate to plane
or uplifted; surface moist or lubricous but not viscid, smooth, watery brown to tan, hazel,
buff, or even whitish (usually darker when young). Flesh thick, pallid, odor mild or
pleasant. GILLS usually notched but often adnate or slightly decurrent, close, buff to
grayish-buff or pale brown, then dusted pinkish with spores. STALK 2-5 (10) cm long, 1-3
(4) cm thick (usually about 2); equal or enlarged below, often stoutandrelatively short,
solid, dry, smooth, buff or colored like the cap (but usually paler). SPORE_PRINT rosy-
buff or dull pinkish; spores 5-8 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, often forming fairy rings, late fall through early
spring, mainly in lawnsandpastures, but also at the edges of woods or under trees ( cypress,
oak, etc.); known only from California. It was very abundant in our area during the warm
and wet winter of 1977-78, but has been rather rare since.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good-I have tried it. Be sure not to confuse it with
poisonous Entolomas, however, or C. olesonii (see comments below).
COMMENTS Listed in the first edition as "Lepista sp. (unidentified)," this interesting
relative of the blewit has recently been rechristened C. brunneocephala by clitocybiologist
Howard Bigelow. The shape, stature,andcharacteristically lubricous feel of the cap when
moist are very reminiscent of the blewitandblue-leg, but there is no purple anywhere on
the fruiting body. The gills are usually notched, but as in most "Lepistas" their attachment
varies considerably. I nearly always find it growing in grass, but a very similar species with
a pungent or unpleasant odor, C. oleson;;, is common und<;r oak in southern California
and the Sierra Nevada foothills. Both C. brunneocephalaandC. olesonii(whose edibility
I haven't determined) are largerandstouter than C. tarda.anddo not grow in clusters
like C. subconnexaandC. densifolia. They can be separated from most Entolomas by their
duller spore color, non-angular spores,andin the case of C. brunneocephala. by the grass-
land milieu. Other pinkish-spored species: C. praemagna, a western prairieandsagebrush
species, is quite similar but has a white cap when young that becomes tan to dull brownish
in old age; C. (=Lep;sta) ;r;na is a widespread woodland species that often has a fragrant
blewit-like odor. Its cap is white to pinkish-buff, dingy buff, or pale tan,andits spores
are slightly larger than those of C. brunneocephala.
Clitocybesubconnexagroup
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex with an incurved margin becoming plane or with uplifted
margin; surface smooth, dry, satiny white at first, often discolored or spotted slightly in
age. Flesh thick, whitish, rather brittle; odor usually mild or faintly pleasant. GILLS
adnate to decurrent, crowded, narrow, pallid soon becoming buff, then dull pinkish as
the spores ripen. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.5-2 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker below, smooth,
dry, dull grayish to buff with a whitish silky-fibrilose coating. SPORE_PRINT pinkish-buff
or flesh-colored; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT In groups on ground, usually tufted or clustered, widely distributed. In our
area both this speciesandC. densifolia (see comments) are fairly common from fall through
early spring in woods or at their edges, brushy areas,andopen places.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended. It is good when fresh according to some
sources, but can develop an unpleasant astringent taste in age. There is also the possibility
of confusing it with C. dilatata or a poisonous Entoloma.
COMMENTS This common species can be identified by its whitish color, adnate to
decurrent gills, dull pinkish spores,andtendency to grow in clusters-though solitary
fruiting bodies can be found. A very similarandequally common species, C. densiJolia, also
grows in clusters, but has smaller spores, narrower gills,anda whitish cap that becomes
dingy buff to grayish in age. Both species, like the blewit, seem to grow almost anywhere.
They are largerandfleshier than Clitopilus prunulusanddo not smell as nice, nor have
they longitudinally ridged spores. They differ from Clitocybe brunneocephala in their
more typically decurrent gillsandclustered growth habit,andfrom C. dilatata in their
pinkish spores. Other species: c.fasc;culata(=Tr;cholomapanaeolum var. caesp;tosus) is
also very similar, but has a rancid-farinaceous odorandtasteandtends to grow in clusters
along roads; C. subalpi1Ul is a brown to dark brown clustered species known from the
Pacific Northwest; C. polygonarum has a tan to brown or purple-brown cap, but has
off-white to pale buff spores; it also grows in clustersandis common in Alaska.
C litocybe inversa
CAP 2-10 cm broad, broadly convex or centrally depressed with an incurved margin,
becoming broadly depressed or even funnel-shaped in age; surface dry, dull orange to pale
orange-brown, orange-tan, tan, reddish-tan, ochre-buff, or cinnamon-brown; margin
often paler. Flesh thin; odor mild or sharp. GILLS distinctly decurrent, close, buffto pale
pinkish-cinnamon or colored like cap but paler. STALK 3-10 cm long, 4-8 mm thick, equal
or thickened below, typically rather slenderandoften curved, colored like cap or paler,
smooth or with whitish hairs at base. SPORE_PRINT white to creamy-yellowish; spores
4-5 x 3.5-4 microns, nearly round, minutely prickly (or appearing smooth).
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or tufted on ground in woods; widespread but
particularly common on the west coast, from Alaska to southern California. In our area it is
fairly common in the late fallandwinter in mixed woodsandunder oak or pine, sometimes
in large fairy rings.
EDIBILITY Not recommended
COMMENTS Also known as Lepista in versa, this species can be told by its cheerful
color, depressed cap, decurrent gills,andwhite or pale spores. C. gibba is rather similar
but differently colored, while Rhodocybe nuciolens has pinkish spores. The common form
of C. in versa in our area has a slightly yellowish spore printandsharp, spicy or pepperlike
odor. It may actually be C. flaccida, a very similar species. In eastern North America C.
gilva is quite common; it differs in having a plane to only slightly depressed, yellowish to
dull pinkish cap. Other similarly-colored Clitocybes include: C. sinopica, in humus or on
burnt ground, with an orange-brown to rusty-cinnamon cap, yellowish spores, and
farinaceous odorandtaste; C. ectypoides, northern, growing on rotting conifers, with a
minutely scaly ochre-brown cap;andC. americana, the most commonandwidespread
wood-inhabiting Clitocybe, with a watery brown to pinkish-brown or cinnamon cap that
fades to whitish as it dries, growing on hardwood stumpsandlogs.
Clitocybe gibba
(Funnel Cap)
CAP 3-8 cm broad, plane or with a central depression, soon becoming funnel-shaped;
surface smooth, not viscid, tan to pinkish-tan, flesh-colored, or pinkish-cinnamon, but
fading in age; margin often wavy. Flesh thin, whitish; odor mild or faintly sweet (like
cyanide). GILLS deeply decurrent, crowded, white or pale buff. STALK 3-8 cm long, 0.4-1
cm thick, usually rather slender, equal or thicker below, smooth or faintly fibrillose; whitish
to buff, the base often with white down. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-8x 3.5-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups on ground in woods, especially under
oak but also with conifers; widely distributed. In coastal California it fruits in the winter
and early spring but is not common; in New Mexico it is common in August along with
C. squamulosa(see comments).
EDIBILITY Edibleandexcellent, but not a good mushroom for beginners-too many
species of unknown edibility resemble it. Many mushroom books rate it as mediocre, but
it's probably a case of each author taking another's word for it.
COMMENTS The pale pinkish-tan cap which is funnel-shaped at maturity plus the
crowded, whitish, decurrent gillsandpallid slender stem render this species distinct.
C. infundibuliformis is a lengthy synonym. It is paler than C. inversa, especially in its gill
color,andmore slender than C. maxima. C. squamulosa is a very similar species in which
the stalk is the same color as the cap or darker. It is a prominent feature of our western
coniferous forests, particularly at higher elevations in the springandfall. It is interesting
to note that C. gibba releases hydrogen cyanide gas into the atmosphere. So does the
common fairy ring mushroom, Marasmius oreades, as well as several other mushr90ms
and plants such as lupineandalmond. The gas is not released in sufficient quantity to
harm humans, however.
Clitocybe maxima (Large Funnel Cap)
CAP (4) 7-20 (30) cm broad, at first broadly convex or plane with an inrolled margin,
becoming depressed or broadly funnel-shaped; surface dry, usually smooth, pale pinkish-
tan or flesh-colored varying to reddish-tan, sometimes spotted; margin sometimes paler
and sometimes lobed or radially ribbed. Flesh thin, white, firm becoming flaccid; odor mild
or rather unpleasant. GILLS soon deeply decurrent, close, white to pale buff or tinged
pinkish-buff. STALK 3-10 (15) cm long (I) 1.5-3 (4) cm thick, equal or with an enlarged
base; solid, fairly firm, whitish to buff or becoming colored like cap, fibrillose-striate, base
usually with white down. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-9 x 4-6 microns, elliptical,
smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in groups or rings on ground in woods or clearings;
widely distributedandfairly common in the late summerandfall in the mountains of
western North America. I've see large fruitings near Mr. Rainier in Washingtonandin
the Sacramento Mountains of southern New Mexico, but I have not found it in California.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This large, handsome Clitocybe is easily told by its thick stem, decurrent
whitish gills,andpinkish-tan, broadly funnel-shaped cap. It is essentially an overgrown
C. gibba.andsome consider it a variety ofthat species. C. geotropa is a very similar edible
species with more or less round spores. It tends to be longer-stemmedandmore leather-
colored when young,andits cap often has a broad central umbo, even when funnel-
shaped. It is also widely distributed, but rare; I have seen it only in the southern Rockies.
Clitocybe gigantea (Giant Clitocybe)
CAP (5) 8-35 (45) cm broad, convex becoming planeandthen broadly funnel-shaped;
surface smooth, not viscid; white becoming buff or pale tan, especially at the center; easily
broken when mature; margin at first inrolled, often obscurely ribbed in age. Flesh white,
in age becoming fragile; odorandtaste pleasant to slightly disagreeable. GILLS close,
pallid soon becoming pale buff or creamy-buff, often pale dingy tan in old age; crowded,
decurrent, at least some forked. STALK 4-10 cm long, 24 (6) cm thick, often rather stout,
equal or enlarged slightly at either end; white, or in age pallid with darker fibrils. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 34.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious, often in arcs or huge rings, in open woods
and grassy (but usually wooded) areas; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific
NorthwestandRocky Mountains. I have seen itandthe very similar C. candida (see com-
ments) in the mountains of northern New Mexicoandsouthern Arizona. Neither species
has been reported from California, but they may well occur.
EDIBILITY Temptingly largeandhandsome, but poor in flavoranddifficult to digest.
COMMENTS This mammoth mushroom is often so wide in proportion to its thickness
that the cap breaks or crumbles if handled carelessly. Its sizeandfragility, plus the buff-
colored decurrent gills, pale cap,andwhite spore print are diagnostic. Young, compact
specimens can be mistaken for C. irina, C. praemagna, or C. robusta, but have white
spores. Older individuals resemble Leucopaxillus, but are not nearly so tough,andlack
the white mycelial mat at the stem base. C. candida is a very similar but more common
species with a slightly "smaller" cap (6-30 cm) that remains white until old age. Another
large species, C. septentrionalis, has a dull grayish to dingy tan ca p, strong unpleasant odor,
and short thick stalk. I have seen it in groups or clumps under ponderosa pine in both
OregonandNew Mexico. Along with C. giganteaandC. candida it is placed in the genus
Leucopaxillus by some mycologists because of its weakly amyloid spores. There are also
numerous large grayish Clitocybes with white, non-amyloid spores. The most common in
our area is C. harperi (see comments under C. nebularis).
C litocybe dilatata
CAP 2-15 cm broad, convex to plane or often somewhat misshapen; surface dry, smooth,
gray when young, but soon white or chalky-white, sometimes with buff areas; margin at
first incurved, often wavy in age. Flesh white to grayish, firm; odor mild, taste typically
somewhat sour or disagreeable. GILLS adnate to decurrent, whitish to buff, close. STALK
5-12 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, whitish, fibrillose, fibrous, often
curved. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-6 x 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Basidia
lacking siderophilous granules.
HABITAT In densely-packed groups or clusters in sandy or gravelly soil along roads,
trails, etc.; very common in the fall in thePacificN orthwestandYukon. I have not seen it in
California, but it may occur in the northern part ofthe state,andChuck Barrows reports it
from New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Probably poisonous-it is thought to contain muscarine.
COMMENTS The white sporesandgrowth habit in clusters (often quite large) in dis-
turbed ground is unusual for a Clitocybeandserves to distinguish this species from its
brethren. It is most likely to be confused with the Lyophy/lum decastes group (espe-
cially L. connarum), which also grows along roads,andwith the C. subconnexa group,
which has pinkish spores. C. cerussata var. difJormis is a synonym.
Clitocybe nebularis (Cloudy Clitocybe)
CAP 6-25 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface dry, finely
fibrillose or often with a hoary bloom, gray to grayish-brown to buff, often darker at the
center, sometimes with watery spots or appearing streaked; margin at first incurved, often
wavy or lobed in age. Flesh thick, white; odor rancidanddisagreeable. GILLS adnate to
decurrent, close, whitish becoming dingy yellowish or buff. STALK 6-15 cm long, 1.54 cm
thick, base often enlargedandcovered with white down; whitish, or with dingy brownish
fibrils, firm but easily broken. SPORE_PRINT pale buffto yellowish; spores 5.5-8.5 x 3.5-
4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, often in large rings, under both hardwoods and
conifers; widely distributed but especially common on the west coast. It is fond of cold
weatherandin our area seldom appears before December.
EDIBILITY Edible but far from incredible. It is indigestible unless thoroughly cooked,
its flavor is said to be poor,andits rank odor doesn't exactly make you want to rush home
and throw it in the frying pan.
COMMENTS The outstanding feature of this large, drab, cold-weather C/itocybe is the
unpleasant odor, which has been likened to that rancid flour, rotting cucumbers, skunk
cabbage, mice cages,andbeer barf. In sizeandstature it is reminiscent of Leucopaxillus
albissimus, but is grayer, decays much more rapidly,andhas pale yellowish spores.
C. robusta (=c. alba) is a closely related species with the same stature, spore color, and
rancid odor. However, it has a pure white, sometimes lustrous cap. I have found it several
times in our area in mixed woods but it is more common in eastern North America. There
are also a number of large, undistinguished grayish Clitocybes that have white sporesanda
more or less mild odor. These include: C. harper;, with darker (grayish) gills, fairly
common in our areaandthroughout the West under conifers;andC. crassa, a springtime
Rocky Mountain species with a thick, massive stalk.
Clitocybe clavipes (Club-Foot)
CAP 2-10 cm broad, broadly convex or plane becoming depressed or funnel-shaped; sur-
face more or less smooth, not viscid, brownish to grayish-brown or olive-brown, often
paler toward the margin. Flesh pallid, odor mild or often somewhat fragrant or fruity.
GILLS decurrent, fairly close, at first white, then yellowish-buff in age. STALK 2-7 cm
long, 0.5-1.2 cm thick at apex, typically club-shaped (enlarged below), pallid with grayish
or sordid olive-buff fibrils; base often spongyandcovered with white down. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-8.5 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious under conifersandin mixed woods, late
fallandwinter; widely distributed. It is particularly abundant in pine plantations in
eastern North America, rather infrequent in California (although several similar species
occur). I have not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended. Not only is there the danger of confusing it
with poisonous species, but it has reportedly caused coprine-like poisoning when
consumed with alcohol (see p. 896).
COMMENTS I must often strain to find something interesting to say about Clitocybes,
and this species-the type of the genus-is no exception. The drab grayish-brown cap,
decurrent gills, white spores,andclub-shaped stem are characteristic, but there are many
more or less equal stalk. It has been found by Greg Wright in southern California.
Clitocybe albirhiza (Snowmelt Clitocybe)
CAP 2-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane to broadly umbonate, then depressed; surface
smooth or with whitish down, or sometimes with riverlike lines; watery brown to pale buff
to cinnamon-, pinkish-, or grayish-buff. Flesh thin, colored like cap; odor unpleasant or
mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, pale buff or colored more or less like cap. STALK
3-8 cm long, 0.4-2 cm thick, equal or tapered at either end, often hollow in age, sometimes
fluted; colored more or less like cap, the base with a dense mass of white mycelial threads.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-6 x 2.5-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious, often in small clusters or rings, on ground
under conifers; common in the mountains of western North America, especially in the
spring shortly after the snow melts (sometimes found with Lyophyllum montanum).
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species is merely one of a metagrobolizing myriad of mundane white
to buffy-brown or grayish Clitocybes that are exceedingly difficult to distinguish. In other
words, they are better neglected than collected! It can be separated from its numerous look-
alikes, however, by the dense mass of white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at the base of
the stemandin the surrounding humus. I ts growth in the spring is also distinctive. Other
smallish Clitocybes include: C. cerussata, with whitish cap; C. variDbilis, with pure white
cap when freshandspores 5.5-8 microns long, found under conifers; C. candicans, also
with a white cap, but favoring hardwoods;andC. conijerophila, one of several conifer-
loving species with a dingy buff cap. All of these lack the rhizomorphs characteristic of
C. albirhiza,andin California are more likely to fruit in the fall or winter than the spring.
C litocybe odora
(Blue-Green Anise Mushroom)
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed; surface smooth, not viscid,
bluish-green to dingy greenish, gray, or grayish-brown with a slight blue-green tinge, to
nearly whitish in dry weather. Flesh whitish or tinged cap color; odor strongly fragrant,
anise-like, at least when fresh. GILLS adnate to decurrent, close, blue-green to greenish or
dark green in one form, whitish to buff or pinkish-buff in another. STALK 2-6 (9) cm long,
0.5-1.5 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker at either end; smooth, white to buff or cap-colored.
SPORE_PRINT pinkish-cream or buff; spores 6-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups in woods; widely distributed. It favors oak in eastern
North America, but in the Rocky MountainsandPacific Northwest it is often abundant
under conifers. In our area it is rare-I have seen it only twice, under oak in the winter.
EDIBILITY Edible, but best used as a flavoring agent because of the strong taste.
COMMENTS The blue-green to dull greenish color combined with the anise or licorice
odor immediately identify this mushroom. The form with blue-green tints in the gills and
stalk is var. pacificus, while the typical variety shows the color mainly in the cap. The other
anise-scented Clitocybes( C. decepliva, etc.) are never blue-green. C. aerug;nosaofeastern
North America has a greenish cap, but has white sporesanddoes not smelllike anise; a very
similar but unidentified greenish species with a distinctive (but not anise-like) odor occurs
in the Sierra Nevada under conifers. There are also several small (cap 1-2.5 cm broad, stalk
1-4 mm thick) greenish species that connect Clitocybe to Omphalina. These include: C.
atrov;rid;s (=Omphalina chlorocyanea?), with a green to blackish-green to olive-gray cap
and paler gills, found in grass, moss, or on lichens; Omphal;na grossula, greenish-yellow
to olive-yellow, favoring lichensandmoss;andO. wynn;ae, with a greenish-yellow to
olive-brown capandyellow to greenish-yellow gills, usually found on rotting conifers.
Clitocybe deceptiva
(Anise Mushroom)
CAP 1-6 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, not
viscid, color variable: pale brown to grayish-brown fading to buff or watery whitish,
sometimes with a darker marginal band; margin at first incurved. Flesh thin, pallid, odor
distinctly fragrantandanise-like when fresh. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close,
white or cap-colored or slightly darker. STALK 2-7 cm long, 1.5-5 (7) mm thick, equal or
thicker at base, smooth, more or less colored like cap, usually rather slender. SPORE
PRINT pale pinkish-buff; spores 6.5-9x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in damp places under conifers; western North
America. I n our area this speciesandits close relatives( see comments) are often common in
the fall, winter,andearly spring under redwoodandpine, or occasionally oak.
EDIBILITY Edible, but best used as a flavoring agent (in cakes, breads, cookies, etc.),
because of its strong, anise-like (but not sweet) flavor. Be sure eachandevery specimen
smells like anise-there are numerous look-alikes without the anise odor, some of
which grow in the same habitatsandare poisonous!
COMMENTS Better known as C. suaveolens, the distinct anise odor of this species and
its close relatives separate them from the dozens of other small, nondescript white to
grayish or buff-colored Clitocybes (see C. albirhiza). Similar anise-smelling species in-
clude: c.Jragrans, practically identical, but with a paler capandwhite spores,andgrowing
under hardwoods as well as conifers; C. oramophila, with a dull pinkish or flesh-colored
cap when moistandpale creamy spores;andC. obsoleta, with a strongly fragrant but not
aniselike odor.
Clitocybe dealbata (Sweat-Producing Clitocybe)
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed; surface smooth, not viscid,
white to dingy white, grayish, or buff, sometimes with a pinkish tinge in wet weather,
sometimes with watery spots. Flesh thin, grayish to white; odor mild. GILLS grayish-white
to buff or pinkish-buff, close, adnate to decurrent. STALK 1-4 cm long, 2-7 mm thick,
equal or slightly thicker at either end, colored like cap, smooth, rather tough. SPORE
PRINT white or rarely creamy; spores 4-5.5 x 2-4 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in rings, in pasturesandother grassy places; widely
distributedandcommon locally in the fallandwinter. In the Pacific Northwest it fre-
quently mixes company with Marasmius oreades, but in our area is more often found
with Agaricus campeslrisandA. cupreobrunneus.
EDIBILITY Poisonous-and potentially fatal to small children in the" grazing" stage! It
produces profuse sweating, salivation, diarrhea, etc. Muscarine is the main toxin (see
p. 894 for details).
COMMENTS The dingy grayish-white color, close decurrent gills, white spores, small
size,andgrowth in grass distinguish this drab, undistinguished mushroom, also known
as C. sudorifica. In our area it frequents pastures while the edibleandsomewhat similar
fairy ring mushroom (Mar.asmius oreades) grows mainly on lawns; in other regions, how-
ever, they may grow together. However, the fairy ring mushroom has a browner, frequently
umbonate capandwell-spaced gills that are never decurrent. The edible ClilOpilus
prunulus is also similar, but has pinkish spores. There are numerous woodland look-alikes
in the genus ClilOcybe,andall should be strictly avoided. Closely related, poisonous
grass-inhabiting species include: C. augeana, very similar but with a farinaceous odor,
sometimes rivulose in age (developing riverlike lines or cracks on the cap),andgrowing in
manureandcompost as well as in grass; C. rivulosa, with cap often rivuloseandtinged
flesh-color, growing in grass;andC. morbifera, with a grayish-brown cap, in grass.
Clitocybe sclerotoidea (Parasitic Clitocybe)
CAP 0.5-4 (5) cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed centrally; surface dry,
unpolished, with a fine whitish fibrillose coating which rubs off; pallid to sordid buffto
brownish or grayish, sometimes with darker watery spots. Flesh whitish, odor mild. GILLS
adnate or slightly notched becoming decurrent, pale buff or pinkish-buff darkening to
gray, olive-gray, or grayish-brown. STALK2-4(8)cmlong,3-10 mmthick,equalorthicker
at either end, solid, colored like cap or paler from soft, matted, downy white hairs; arising
from a fleshy mass of tissue which is often at least partially buried. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 8-11 x 3-4 microns, subfusiform (elongated), smooth.
HABITAT Typically in small, tight clumps on ground under pine, known only from the
Pacific Coast; common at times in our area in the winterandspring. The fluted black
elfin saddle (Helvella lacunosa) is often found nearby.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike myself, likely to remain so.
COMMENTS I can find hidden virtues in almost any fungus, but this drab Clitocybe
defies me-its mediocrity is downright stupefying. It serves as a compelling reminder that
organisms do not exist for our enjoyment alone,andshould not bejudged accordingly. It
can be recognized by its small size, dingy color ( or lack of color),andhabit of growing in
compact clumps from a fleshy mass of tissue. S mall, aborted individ uals are usually present
in each clump,andoccasionally large, solitary specimens are encountered. The tissue mass
from which they arise ("sclerotium") is actually composed of hyphae from both C.
sclerotoideaandHelvella lacunosa-suggesting that the Clitocybe is parasitic on the
Helvella. It is interesting to note, however, that the Helvella occurs with both hardwoods
and conifers, while C. scleroto;dea is confined to pine, at least in my experience.
Clitocybe cyathijormis
CAP 2.5-8 cm broad, centrally depressed with an inrolled margin, becoming funnel-
shaped in age; surface smooth, not viscid, dark brown to dark gray-brown, but fading in
age to grayish or paler brown. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild. GILLS at first adnate butsoon
deeply decurrent, pallid becoming grayish or grayish-brown, close. STALK 5-12 cm long,
0.4-1 cm thick, equal or thicker below, often rather long, colored like cap or paler, fibrillose,
often with whitish down at base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-6 microns,
elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in humus or on rotten logs, in woodsandat their
edges; widely distributed. Not uncommon in our area in the fallandwinter, especially
under redwood.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It is said to be edible, but there are many very similar
species of unknown edibility.
COMMENTS This species is one of numerous small to medium-sized, grayish, white-
spored agarics with decurrent gillsanda depressed to funnel-shaped cap. Because of its
amyloid spores it has been placed in several different genera, including Cantharellula and
Pseudoclitocybe. Similar species with amyloid spores include: Canthare//u/a umbonata,
common in moss beds in northernandeastern North America, with crowded, narrow,
whitish, forked gills that stain reddish in age;andC/itocybu/a atria/ba, cap 2-10 cm broad
and blackish-brown, gills well-spacedandwhite to grayish, stalk clothed with dark scurfy
scales, growing in rich humus or on rotting hardwoods in the Pacific Northwest. The first of
these were formerly placed in Cantharellus. the second in Clitocybe. Also see Myx-
ompha/ia mauraandC/itocybe albirhiza.
Myxomphalia maura
CAP 1-3.5 (5) cm broad, convex or centrally depressed with an in curved margin, be-
coming plane or centrally depressed; surface viscid when moist but soon dryandoften
shiny, smooth, dark grayish-brown or olive-brown to blackish-brown, fading to gray or
paler as it dries. Flesh thin, white to grayish. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close,
white to pale grayish (usually paler than cap). STALK2-6 cm long, 2-5 (6) mmthick,more
or less equal, smooth, colored more or less like cap or slightly paler, but not fading as
quickly. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-6.5x 3.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptical
to nearly round, smooth or very minutely ornamented, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on burnt soilanddebris, especially under
conifers; widely distributedandfairly common in our area in the appropriate habitat, fall
through spring. I often find it with Pho/iota brunnescensandPsathyrella carbonicola.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too puny to be of value.
COMMENTS The habitat on burnt soil distinguishes this undistinguished mushroom
from a host of similar grayish-brown look-alikes. Lyophyllum atratum (=C ollybia atrata)
is another species that grows in burned-over areas; it is quite similar but has darker (gray)
gillsandnon-amyloid spores (the two are sometimes found growing together). Fayodia
anthracobia is a minute charcoal-lover (cap upto 1 cm broad) with round, warted,amyloid
spores. Omphaliaster asterosporusandO. borealis have warted or starlike spores, but
are larger (cap 2-5 cm broad), have grayish to grayish-brown gills,andprefer moss (under
conifers) to burnt soil. Another small widespread species, Clitocybe (=Omphalina)
epichysium, has a dry cap about 2 cm broad that is dark sooty-brown to olive-brown or
ashyandminutely scaly or scurfy at the center. It is fairly common in our area in mixed
woodsandunder conifers, but not in burnt soil. See also C. cyathiformis.
Leucopaxillus albissimus (Large White Leucopaxillus)
CAP 5-20 (40) cm broad or more, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming
plane or depressed in age; surface dry, dull, unpolished. white becoming buff, yellowish,
or even tan (at least toward center) in age, often cracked or splitting in age or dry weather;
margin sometimes obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick, tough, white; odor unpleasant or frag-
rant, taste also variable (mild or bitter). GILLS white to slightly yellowish in old age,
attached (typically decurrent at least by lines, but ranging to adnate or even adnexed);
close. STALK 5-20 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, tough, solid, equal or enlarged at the middle or
below (often with a narrowed base); white, discoloring slightly in age; base usually im-
bedded in a white mycelial mat; smooth or often scaly (especially in mid-portion). SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5.5-8.5 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, warty, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (often in large rings) in woods, mainly
under conifers; widely distributed. It is common in our area in the cool winter months,
particularly under redwood, but also with other trees, including eucalyptus. It is slow to
growandeven slower to decay.
EDIBILITY A tempting specimen, but I don't recommend it-even the non-bitterforms
are coarseanddifficult to digest. Thorough cooking would be necessary.
COMMENTS Several varieties of this widespread species have been described based on
differences in cap color, taste,andspore characters. The above description is based
primarily on the variety common in our area, var. paradoxus (=L. paradoxus). It has a
rather strong but not unpleasant odoranda distinctive but not usually bitter taste. It is
white when young, but usually becomes dingy yellowish, buff, or pale tan as it ages or
dries out. A white mycelial mat can usually be seen permeating the duff around the mush-
room or adhering to its base. However, its most outstanding attributes are the large size,
tenacious toughness,andresolute resistance to decay, as evidenced by the following two
"triedandtrue" methods for distinguishing it from C/iwcybe nebularisandother large
look-alikes:
1) Choose a firm (not waterlogged) specimenandthrow it against a wall, housemate's
head, or other dense, hard, thick object. If it (the mushroom) remains more or less intact,
it is probably L. albissimus; if it shatters, chances are it was a Cliwcybe.
2) Choose a firm (not waterlogged) specimenandleave it out on the porch, or hide it
in your housemate's closet. If after one week it (the mushroom) shows no visible signs of
decay, it is probably L. albissimus; if unchanged after one month it is definitely L. albis-
simus. If, on the other hand, it shows visible or smellable signs of decay (i.e., has begun
to rot or is reduced to a heap of writhing maggots), chances are, once again, that it was a
C/iwcybe. (Note: L. albissimus can behave like a C/iwcybe iftoo old or maggot-riddled.)
Other species: L. alb;ss;mus var. lentus is quite similar to var. paradoxus, but is usually
smaller (stalk only 0.8-1.5 cm thickandsmooth); var. p;ce;nus is similar in color, but has
a bitter taste; var. typ;cus also has a bitter taste but is pure white; L. laterar;us is a hard-
wood-loving species with a very bitter taste, pinkish-buff-tinged cap,andround spores; it
is particularly common in eastern North America.
Leucopaxillus amarus (Bitter Brown Leucopaxillus) Color Plate31
CAP 5-12 (15) cm broad, broadly convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming
plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, unpolished, smooth, dark brown to brown, pecan-
brown, or reddish-brown, evenly colored or paler at the margin, sometimes cracked or
faded in age; margin often obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick, firm, dry, white; odor mild or
pungent; taste very bitter. GILLS typically adnate but ranging from notched to slightly
decurrent by lines; close, white. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-2 (4) cm thick, equal or en-
larged below, smooth, dry, solid, white or sometimes discolored brownish below; base
imbedded in acopious white mycelial mat. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 3-5 microns,
nearly round, warted, amyloid. Cystidia numerous on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious (often in rings) under conifersandoaks; common and
widely distributed. In our area it is often abundant in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedible-it smells like "creepy crawlers"andtastes like a
mildewed army tent. If you're lost in the woodsandhave nothing to eat, you'd do better
to follow the example of Charlie Chaplinandstew your boots before venturing to make a
meal of this mushroom.
COMMENTS Also known as L. gent;aneus, this mundane mushroom can usually
be recognized by its dull, boring brown to reddish-brown cap, white gills, bitter taste,
absence of a veil,andmoldy-looking white mycelium that usually permeates the sur-
rounding humusandfrequently adheres to the stem when it is plucked. The latter feature
helps to distinguish it from brown-capped Tricholomas (e.g., T. imbricatum). Hygro-
phorus roseibrunneus can also be similar in color, but has softandwaxy gills. As with L.
albissimus, several varietiesandforms have been described. In addition to the color plate,
L. amarus is shown on p. 918.
M elanoleuca melaleuca group
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, broadly convex to plane to shallowly depressed, often with a low
broad umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid; dark brown to gray to grayish-
brown when moist, often fading to buffy-tan, gray, or even paler in sunlight (or as it dries).
Flesh thin, whitish, odor mild. GILLS narrow, close or crowded, white, usually notched
but varying to adnate or even very slightly decurrent. STALK 2-8 cm long, 3-6 (12) mm
thick, equal or with a slightly swollen base, rather slender. stiff, whitish or with darker
(brown) fibrils, apex sometimes minutely scaly or scurfy. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
6-8 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid. Harpoonlike cystidia typically
present on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in open places (lawns, pastures, etc.), under
trees, along roadsandtrails, in strawandwood chips,andalso in the woods; common and
widely distributed, but usually fruiting at lower elevations. Common in our area
throughout the mushrom season but most numerous in the winterandearly spring.
EDIBILITY Edible. The caps are delicious fried in butter, but since it is not an easy
mushroom to recognize, I hesitate to recommend it. Also, the edibility of closely related
species has not been adequately ascertained.
COMMENTS The above description will actually fit a number of closely related
Melanoleucas whose exact identities are best left to Melanoleuca-masters. As a group they
are characterized by a smooth, hygrophanous, dark brown to grayish ( or paler) cap, close
white gills, straight stalk,andstrongly amyloid, warted spores. Specimens growing in
the open are generally much paler than their counterparts growing in the shade. Related
species include: M. brevi pes, common on lawns, with a short brown to whitish stalk and
abundant cystidia on the gills;andM. polioleuca, with a hoary bloom on the cap when
fresh. There are also several species that fruit prolifically in the springandearly summer
in the coniferous forestsandalpine meadows of westernandnorthern North America. The
most common of these, M. graminicola, is similar to M. melaleuca in colorandstature,
but lacks cystidia on the gills. Another, M. evenosa, is largerandmore robust (seedescrip-
tion). Although probably harmless, none of these species should be eaten until better
known. M. vulgaris is a synonym for the tongue-twisting M. melaleuca.
Me/ano/euca cognata
CAP (5) 7-13 cm broad, broadly convex to plane, usually with a broad umbo, sometimes
becoming slightly depressed in age; surface smoothandsometimes shiny, dry or slightly
viscid, brown to ochre-brown, fading to pale tan in age, the center sometimes darker. Flesh
whitish; odor often slightly sweet, rancid, or "peculiar" (Smith). GILLS pallid becoming
tan, creamy-ochre, deep ochre, or pale pinkish-cinnamon; crowded, attached (usually
notched). STALK 6-12 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or with a swollen base, longitudinally
lined or twisted-striate, straight, colored more or less like cap or paler, the base some-
times brownish-stained. SPORE_PRINT creamy or yellowish; spores7-10 x4.5-6 microns,
elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid. Cystidia abundant on edgesandfaces of gills.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in mixed woodsandunder
conifers in the spring, summer,andearly fall; widely distributed but not common. It does
not occur in our area but is to be looked for in the Sierra Nevada. It is fairly frequent in the
spruce-fir-aspen forests of the southern Rocky MountainsandSouthwest.
EDIBILITY Edible. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS In contrast to many of its kin, this Melanoleuca is fairly easy to recognize.
The broad, frequently umbonate brown to ochre-tan cap, tall straight stem,andbrown to
tan or ochre mature gills are good fieldmarks.
Melanoleuca evenosa group (Robust Melanoleuca)
CAP 5-19 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or wavy; surface smooth, dry to slightly
viscid when moist, pallid to brown to grayish-brown or in age sometimes slightly ochre.
Flesh firm, thick, white; odor often rather pleasant. GILLS crowded, white (or in age
sometimes brownish-or ochre-stained); usually notched or adnexed. STALK 3-7 cm long,
(I) 1.5-3 (3.5) cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, very firm, stiff, solid; white with
brownish or cap-colored fibrils; apex or upper portion usually dandruffy or minutely
scaly (or sometimes dandruffy throughout). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 4-5
microns, elliptical, minutely warted, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, gregarious, or even clustered in duff under conifers
or in grassy clearings, at the edges of forests, etc.; fairly common in the mountains of
western North America during the springandearly summer.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Several Melanoleucas are edibleandthis one is fleshy enough
to warrant cautious experimentation, but be sure of your identification!
COMMENTS Anyone who regularly hunts the CascadesandSierra Nevada during the
springtime will come across this species or species "complex," which also goes under the
name M. subalpina. Because of its robust stature (see photo on p. 897) it is likely to be
mistaken for a Tricholoma. However, the crowded white gills, scurfy stalk, smooth
cap, amyloid spores,andspringtime growth under conifers should distinguish it from
most Tricholomas. Several other Melanoleucas grow under mountain conifers, but
are more slender (see comments under the M. melaleuca group). M. cognata can be
fairly large. but is usually tallerandslimmer with tan to ochre gills in age.
Laccar;a laccata
(Lackluster Laccaria)
CAP 1.5-6 cm broad, convex becoming plane to centrally depressed or sometimes even
with a hole in the center, the margin often uplifted in age; surface not viscid, often minutely
scaly; color variable: flesh-colored to orangish, brownish-cinnamon, reddish-tan,
or pinkish-brown when moist, much paler as it dries; margin often wavy or irregularly
lobed in age. Flesh thin, tinged cap color, odor mild or sometimes radishlike. GILLS thick,
well-spaced, somewhat waxy, pale pinkish to flesh-colored or reddish-tan, dusted white by
spores at maturity; attachment variable but typically adnate to slightly decurrent. STALK
2-10 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, more or less eq ual, toughandfibrous, elastic, often fibrillose,
often somewhat twisted orcompresed; same color as moist cap or darker (reddish-brown),
usually rather slender; downy mycelium at base white (if present). SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 7-10 x 6-9 microns, round or nearly round, spiny.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops in woods or near trees, especially in poor or
sandy soil or in boggy areas; very commonandwidely distributed. In our area it can be
found almost anywhere at anytime, but favors cool weatherandpine. L. proxima and
L. altaiea(see comments) are also common locally.
EDIBILITY Edibleandfairly good, especially if seasoned; the tough stems should be
discarded. Be certain of your identification, however-there are many similarly-colored
mushrooms!
COMMENTS This cosmopolitan mushroom has a knack of turning up in droves when
one is seeking more exotic or unusual species,andis thus spurnedandscorned as a
mushroom "weed." To be sure, it is as unostentatious as it is ubiquitous, without the lovely
color of the L. amethystina group, yet in its own unexciting way it is quite beautiful. Like
the honey mushroom, it is so vexingly variable in size, color,andshape that even veteran
collectors have trouble recognizing some forms! The telltale traits are the overall color
(pinkish to orangish or dull cinnamon), thick well-spaced gills, white spores,andtough
or fibrous stem. L. proxima is a very similar, widespread species. It tends to be slightly
larger with a more fibrillose stalkandscalier cap, but can only be told with certainty by
its broadly elliptical (rather than round) spores. There are also several similarly-colored
but smaller species (cap 0.54 cm broad) that usually grow in wet or boggy areasandhave
striate caps when moist. They include: L. ohiensis andL. a/taica(both of which have been
called L. striatu/a), with larger spores (8-13 microns), the latter especially common in
northern latitudes; andL. torti/is, a very small species with only a few( 10-15) gillsandeven
larger spores. See also L. hieolor( under L. amethystina group), which has violet mycelium.
Laccar;a amethyst;na group (Amethyst Laccaria) Color Plate 30
CAP (I) 24 (7) cm broad, convex becoming plane, centrally depressed (sometimes with a
hole in the middle), or withan uplifted margin in age; surface often minutely scurfy or scaly,
not viscid; purple to brownish-purple when freshandmoist, fading to brown, gray, buff, or
whitish (see comments!) as it loses moisture; often cracked in dry weather; margin often
wavy or lobed in age. Flesh thin, violet-tinged; odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, thick, some-
what waxy, deep or bright amethyst-purple when fresh. gradually fading to dull purple or
grayish-purpleandeventually dusted white by spores; attachment variable but usually
adnateto slightly decurrent. STALK 5-12 cm long, 0.3-1 (1.5) cm thick, moreorlessequal,
typically rather longandslender, often curved or twisted; toughandfibrous, elastic,
usually conspicuously fibrillose, colored more or less like moist cap or browner, fading as
it dries; base usually covered with downy purple or white mycelium. SPORE_PRINT
white or tinged lilac; spores 7-11 microns, round, spiny (but see comments!).
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground in forestsandat their edges; wide-
spreadandcommon. In our area this speciesandits look-alikes(see comments) are par-
ticularly abundant under coastal pines. They can fruit most any time but are partial to cold
weatherandare often abundant when other collectable delectables are scarce.
EDIBILITY Edible,anda good choice for beginners because of its distinctive color and
convenient availability. It has a nice texture but not much flavor, so try mixing it with
potatoesandseasoning it with garlic. The tough, hairy stems should be discarded.
COMMENTS The lovely amethyst-purple gills when fresh combine with the rather long
and tough, fibrous-hairy stem to set apart this cosmopolitan mushroomandits close rela-
tives. The color fades rather dramatically as the mushroom loses moisture, but the gills
usually retain their purple tint well into maturity. The common" Amethyst Laccaria" along
the west coast has recently been given a new name, L. amethysteo-oeeidenta/is, based on
its broadly elliptical (rather than round) sporesandthe tendency of its cap to fade to brown
rather than buff or gray as in the "true" L. amelhyslina (or L. amethystea). Our local
variety, however, sometimes fades to buff or even white, so that microscopic examination
is often necessary to distinguish it from L. amelhyslina (the latter may occur in our area,
but if so is uncommon). The specimens in the color plate are probably L. amelhysleo-
occidenta/is, but are labeled L. amelhyslina group beca use their spores were not examined.
To muddle matters even more,L. hie%r is also common in our area, especially under pine.
It has broadly elliptical spores, but has only a slight violet or vinaceous tinge (if any)
when fresh, except for the violet downy mycelium at the base ofthe stalk (which may,
however, fade to white in age, leading to confusion with L. laccala). Other purple-gilled
species: L. tru//isata has long( 16-22 microns) smooth sporesandgrows only in sand or sand
dunes (often buried!).L. oehropurpurea is a robust eastern species (see key to Laccaria).
Lyophyllum decastes group (Fried Chicken Mushroom)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or with slightly uplifted margin in age; surface
smooth, often with a soapy (lubricous) feel when moist, but not viscid; color variable: dark
brown to grayish-brown to yellowish-brown. watery tan, or paler; margin often lobed.
Flesh firm, white; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent or often notched,
close, white or pallid but sometimes becoming straw-colored in age. STALK 3-10 cm
long, 1-2.5 cm thick, solid, equal or tapering downward, often curved, smooth, dry, white,
sometimes discolored brownish in age, especially at base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
4-6 microns, round or nearly round, smooth. Basidia with siderophilous granules.
HABITAT Gregarious on the ground, usually in large compact clumpsandoften half-
hidden by leavesandgrass; fruiting mainly in disturbed areas-along roadsandbeaten
paths (sometimes even forcing its way up through asphalt), in waste places, around old
sawdust piles, or sometimes in the woods; widely distributed. It is common along the west
coast from Alaska to southern Californiaandfruits in our area from early fall through
spring or even summer. It was the single most abundant mushroom on the University of
California, Santa Cruz campus (a very "disturbed" place!) during the 1976-77 drought. A
couple hundred pounds could easily have been harvested.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite popular in some regions, but it hardly tastes like chicken as
its common name implies. I've found it to be crunchy, but bland. Its abundanceandhabit
of fruiting when other good edibles are scarce make experimentation worthwhile. Be
careful, however-this is a species" complex,"andsome mild cases of poisoning have been
attributed to it. These may simply have been "allergic" reactions, or may have resulted
from confusion with poisonous species (e.g., Clilocybe dUalala).
COMMENTS Also known as Clitocybe multicepsandTricholoma aggregatum, this
exceedingly common species "complex" is best recognized by its fondness for disturbed
placesandits growth in dense clusters which may contain a hundred or more individuals
and weigh as much as 15 pounds! Within the L. decasles group at least three species have
been recognized on the basis of cap color: L. conna/um has a white or whitish cap; L.lor;-
ca/um has a blackish-brown to dark brown cap when young, often with a hoary sheen or
metallic luster,anda thick cartilaginous cap cuticle; as it ages, however, it fades to paler
brown or tan,andis then indistinguishable from "typical" L. decastes. which has a brown
to grayish-brown to tan cap. L. /oricatum is the most common of the three in our area,
but L. decastes also occurs. A fourth, unidentified species is fairly common in our
live oak woodlands. It has a grayish capandgrayish gillsandits edibility is unknown.
S till another species grows under mountain conifers soon after the snow melts.
Though all of these species tend to grow in clusters, solitary individuals occasionally
occur,andthese are apt to baffle the beginner. Since the cap colorandgill attachment are
so variable, it is best only to eat those growing in large clumps in disturbed ground. Make
sure the spore deposits on the lower caps of mature clusters are white. Poisonous Ento-
lomas sometimes grow in clusters, but have deep pinkish spores. The Clitocybe sub-
connexa group also grows in clustersandhas pinkish spores, while C. dilalata is white-
spored with a whitish capanddisagreeable taste. Most other fleshy, clustered terrestrial
mushrooms have darker spores and/or a veil.
Lyophyllum montanum (Snowbank Lyophyllum)
CAP 2-6.5 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface not viscid, gray to
lead-colored beneath a hoary (whitish) bloom which may wear off; often becoming some-
what yellower (to dingy yellow-brown) in old age. Flesh thin, brownish to whitish, odor
mild. GILLS dark gray to gray, close, adnate to nearly free (usually adnexed). STALK 3-7
cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, hoaryandcolored more or less like cap
when fresh, or slightly browner; base often with white mycelial down. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 6.5-8 x 3.5-4 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Basidia with siderophilous
granules.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers (particularly
spruceandfir), usually near melting snow; fairly common in the springandearly summer
in the mountains of western North America.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS There are a number of nondescript grayish Lyophyllums that are very
difficult to identify. This one, however, can be told by its snowbank milieuandhoary cap
surface when young (see photo on p. 46). Other species: L. semita/e is one of more than 50
difficult-to-differentiate Lyophyllums that stain gray, black, or brown when bruised
( often slowly). Its capandgills are grayishandit is widespread under conifers or less com-
monly hardwoods. L. infumatum also blackens, but has whitish gills when young.
C alocybe carnea
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate; surface dry, more or less
smooth, usually pinkish to pinkish-brown, but varying to dark reddish or fading to pale
tan. Flesh thin, whitish. GILLS crowded, narrow, white, adnate to slightly decurrent or
notched. STALK 1.5-4 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal, colored more or less like cap,
smooth or finely fibrillose. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 2-3 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Basidia with siderophilous granules.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups in lawns, grassy clearings in woods,andother open
places; widely distributed but not common. I have found it only once, on a lawn in Santa
Cruz, California, during the seventh inning stretch of the fourth game of the 1978
World Series (I don't remember the date).
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It is said to be edible but is easily confused with
poisonous species.
COMMENTS Formerly known as C/itocybe socia/isandLyophy//um carneum, this
pretty little lawn-lover can be recognized by its pinkish cap, crowded white gills,andwhite
spores. It appears to have a wide distribution but nowhere does it seem to be common.
A similar but slightly larger species with a purple-red capandyellow-ochre gills, C.
onychina, occurs in the spruce-aspen forests ofthe Rocky Mountains in the summer.
Tricholoma sulphureum (The Stinker)
CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex to umbonate or sometimes plane; surface dry, smooth, yellow
or sometimes olive-yellow, or tinged brownish to grayish-brown at the center. Flesh rather
thin, yellow; odor usually strongandrepulsive, like coal tar gas. GILLS typically adnexed
or notched, broad, thick, well-spaced, yellow. STALK4-10 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, often
rather long in relation to cap; more or less equal, smooth, dry, yellow to olive-yellow or
with darker fibrils. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-12 x 5 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoodsandconifers,
widely distributed. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under conifersandalso
occurs in northern California in the late fallandwinter, but I have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Indisputably inedible because of the obnoxious odor; possibly poisonous.
COMMENTS While several Tricholomas have a distinctly disagreeable odor, this
species has a downright disgusting one. By this trait alone it can be distinguished from the
edible man on horseback, T. j7avovirens, which it rather resembles in color,andfrom
T. sejunctum as well. Other species: Another mushroom with the same odor is T. platy-
phyllum (=T. inamoenum?), a white to creamy species also found under conifers in the
Pacific Northwest.
Tricholomajlavovirens (Man On Horseback) Color Plate 33
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin uplifted in age; surface
viscid when moist, smooth, entirely yellow or brown to reddish-brown toward the center
and yellow at the margin, or sometimes olive-yellow; margin at first inrolled. Flesh thick,
firm, white; odor farinaceous or sometimes like coconut. GILLS close, broad, notched or
adnexed, yellow. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at either
end, dry, smooth, solid; white to pale yellow or sometimes with darker stains at base. VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious under pines (rarely other conifers), often
partially buried or visible only as "mushrumps" in the duff; widely distributed. Common in
our area in the late fallandwinter, usually in grassy, sandy, or shrubby areas with pine
present; however, a bright yellow form is found occasionally with madrone,andin the
Southwest it is quite common under aspen.
EDIBILITY Edibleandexcellent-one ofthe least appreciatedandmost flavorful of our
fleshy fungi, though a few people are adversely affected by it. The viscid cap should be
brushed clean in the field or the skin peeled off,andthe sand removed (if it is present).
COMMENTS Formerly known as T. equestTe, this delectable mushroom is as depen-
dably yellow as the blewit is purple. It lacks the blackish radial fibrils atthe center of the cap
characteristic of T. sejunctum,andit also lacks the veil characteristic of Armillaria albo-
lanaripesandvarious yellow Cortinarius species. T. sulphureum is similarly colored but
has a dry rather than viscid capandusually smells a wfu!' The yellow color plus the sticky
cap (when moist), absence of a veil, white spores,andhabit of hiding under pine needles
combine to make it one of the safest-as well as tastiest-of gilled mushrooms. N one of
which explains the misnomer "Man On H orseback"-it doesn't look anything like a horse,
and most of the horseback riders I see are women. . .
One local patch of T. j1avovirens produces crops that sometimes have a very strong
coconut odorandtaste,andat other times have the usual mealy(farinaceous) odor. A very
similar edible species, T. leucophyllum, is common under aspen in the Rocky Mountains
and Southwest,andmay actually mingle with T. j1avovirens. I tdiffers only in having white
rather than yellow gills.
Tricholoma sejunctum
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface slightly viscid or
tacky when moist, smooth, yellow or greenish-yellow with dark innate (flattened) fibrils
or streaks radiating from the blackish to brown center; sometimes with small scales in age.
Flesh white or tinged yellow; odor farinaceous, taste often bitter or nauseating, but in some
forms mild. GILLS fairly close, typically notched; at first whitish or creamy-white, but
often becoming yellow near the margin of the cap or occasionally yellowish throughout.
STALK 5-8 (12) cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, more or less equal or somewhat swollen below,
firm, smooth, whitish, but often developing yellowish tints. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 5-7 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical or elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups under both hardwoodsandconifers, fruiting mainly
in the fall; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest.andI have seen
luxuriant fruitings in California in mixed woodsandunder manzanita.
EDIBILITY Not recommended-it is insipid at bestandpoisonous at worst.
COMMENTS This species is likely to be mistaken for the edible Tricholomaj1avovirens
because of its yellowish cap color, but the radiating blackish or dark brown fibrils or
streaks at the center of the capandthe tendency of the gills to show yellow only near the cap
margin should distinguish it. Other species: T. cheilolamnium is very similar but has a
dry cap; it is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under conifers.
Tricholoma portentosum (Streaked Tricholoma)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex to obtusely umbonate or plane, or with uplifted margin in
age; surface viscid when moist, smooth but with a streaked or radially fibrillose
appearance, pale gray to dark gray, brownish-gray, or purplish-gray, the center sometimes
nearly blackandmargin often paler; yellow tints occasionally present also, especially in
age. Flesh white or tinged gray, fairly thick; odorandtaste mild to farinaceous. GILLS
adnexed or notched, at first white, becoming grayish or sometimes pale yellow in age;
fairly close. STALK 5-10 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, more or less equal, firm, smooth,
dry, white or sometimes tinged yellow. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores5-7 x 3-
5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed. In most
regions it occurs with conifers, particularly pine, but in our area it favors live oak and
tanoak. It fruits in the late fallandwinterandis one of the last Tricholomas to appear.
EDIBILITY Edibleandexcellent, with a strong hearty flavor-but be sure of your
identification before eating it!
COMMENTS The viscid cap separates this species from a multitude of grayish, dry-
capped Tricholomas, some of which are poisonous (see T. pardinumandT. virgatum).
The notched gills, fleshy white stalk, white spore print, absence of a veil,andgray to purple-
gray streaked cap are also important fieldmarks. T. sejunctum is somewhat similar, but
much yellower as a rule. Entoloma madidum is also similar, but has pinkish spores (and
mature gills)andusualy has a darker (cap-colored) stalk. T. niveipes is a very similar
edible pine-loving easterner; it never develops yellow tonesandhas narrower spores.
Trich%ma virgatum
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, conical to broadly conical to nearly plane with a pointed umbo;
surface dry, grayish to grayish-brown or grayish-purple (the center often darker, margin
paler), streaked with radiating fibrils or fibrillose scales. Flesh thin, white becoming
grayish; odor mild or earthy, taste usually sharp or acrid. GILLS adnexed or notched,
white to grayish, close. STALK 6-12 (15) cm long, (0.5) 1-2 cm thick, more or less equal,
solid, smooth or fibrillose, white or tinged gray. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 6-7.5 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious in mixed woodsandunder conifers, widely
distributed; occasionally found in our area in the winter.
EDIBILITY Not recommended-it may be poisonous,andit resembles T. pardinum,
which is definitely poisonous.
COMMENTS The dry, fibrillose-streaked grayish cap which is conical when young
affords a good means of recognizing this species, which is also known as T. subacutum. The
cap is never viscid as in T. portentosum,andthe fibrils and/or scales are radially arranged,
in contrast to the T. terreum group. Other species: T. atroviolaceum is a large (cap 5-18
cm), robust species with a convex to plane (not conical), densely fibrillose-scaly, blackish
to dark grayish-brown or violet-tinted cap. It has grayish or pinkish-tinged gills, a thick,
brownish, sometimes bulbous stalk,anda farinaceous odor; it is not uncommon in
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest under conifers. A similar robust, unidentified species
is common in our area under hard woods; it has a slightly paler( olive, dark gray ,or brown)
capandpaler stalk. T. acre, fairly common under hardwoods in eastern North America
and the Rocky Mountains, is also similar but slightly smaller (cap 3-9 cm), with a grayish
fibrillose cap. white to grayish gills,anda distinctly acrid taste.
Tricholoma terreum group (Mouse Tricholoma)
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, conical or convex-umbonate becoming more or less plane in age;
surface dry, hairy or felty from a dense layer of mouse-colored (gray to black) scales; scales
often sparserandcolor often paler (silvery-gray or even white) in age and/or toward
margin. Flesh thin, fragile, white to gray; odorandtaste mild to slightly farinaceous.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, fairly close, white to gray. STALK 2-5 (8) cm long,
0.5-1 cm thick, usually rather slender, equal or slightly thicker below, white or tinged
gray, smooth( but see comments), dry. VEIL absent or cobwebby and evanescent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 3.5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under conifers; widely distributed.
Fairly common in our area in the late fallandwinter under pineandDouglas-fir. The
largest fruiting I've seen was on a lawn under a huge pine.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. The flavor of our local variety is good, but this is a species
"complex"andis best avoided until better known. There is also the danger of confusing
larger specimens with T. pardinum or T. virgatum.
COMMENTS The small size (for a Tricholoma). fragile flesh,anddry, scaly or "furry"
mouse-colored cap characterize a complex of confusing, closely related species best left to
the specialists. It is probable that they are all edible, but we can't be sure until they are better
known. T he most common North American member of the club is said to be T. myomyces,
which has an evanescent cortina (cobwebby veil)andsmaller spores (the "true" T. terreum
lacks a cortina). Other species in the group include: T. squarrulosum, also very common in
our area, but with mouse-colored fibrils or scales on the stalk as well as the cap (see photo
below),andseveral slightly larger species, e.g., T. orirubens, with gills that redden in age;
T. argyraceum (=T. scalpturatum?), which favors hardwoodsandhas gills that yellow in
age,andT. acre (see comments under T. virgatum).
Tricholoma pardinum (Tiger Tricholoma)
CAP 5-16 (25) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, whitish with small pale gray to dark
gray fibrillose or spotlike scales, at least at center. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor farina-
ceous. GILLS notched or adnexed, close, white (rarely flushed pinkish), not stained or
spotted gray. STALK 4-15 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, white or
sometimes tinged gray, smooth, firm, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
7-10 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious cn ground in woods, widely distributed in
northern North America. I t is sometimes abundant under conifers in the Pacific N orth-
westandRocky Mountains, but in our area it grows with tanoakandmadrone in the
winter. It is sporadically common, i.e., abundant once every several years but otherwise
infrequent to rare.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! It causes severeandpersistent gastroenteritis that may require
hospitilization.
COMMENTS Anyone tempted to eat Tricholomas should learn to recognize this
poisonous species. It is largerandfleshier than other grayish Tricholomas (T. terreum,
T. virgatum, etc.),andoften paler. At times it is nearly white with a few very pale grayish
scales,andcould then be mistaken for one ofthe white Tricholomas (see T. resplendens).
The stalk is not pinkish-orange in the base as in T. saponaceum.
Tricholoma resplendens (White Tricholoma)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin uplifted; surface viscid when
moist, often shiny when dry; smooth, white or with yellowish center, often discoloring
slightly brownish in age, especially toward center. Flesh firm, white, odor mild. GILLS
notched or adnexed to occasionally adnate, white, close. STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-2.5 cm
thick, equal or narrowed at base, white, smooth, dry, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 5-7.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered or in small groups in woods, especially with oaks; of
questionable occurrence in California, but I have encountered a very similar species under
live oak in the winter. In eastern North America this species or one very similar is some-
times common.
EDIBILITY Not recommended-it is said to be edible, but is easily confused with poorly
known or poisonous species (see comments below).
COMMENTS This species is one of several white or whitish Tricholomas,andcan be
distinguished by the viscid cap when moist (however, see Melanoleuca lewisii in the key to
that genus, for it also has a viscid cap when moist, but tends to age yellowishandhas
amyloid spores). Tricholomas with a non-viscid, whitish cap include: T. sulphurescens,
which stains or discolors yellow quite readily; T. venenata, poisonousandcommon under
hardwoods in eastern North America, with cap, gills,andstalk that discolor brownish-
buff in age or where injured,anda bitter taste; T. album, taste also bitter or sharp, but not
discoloring so much; T. columbetta, edible, cap often spotted with blue, green, or pink
in age, gills crowded,andodor mild;andT. gambosum(=T. georg;;, Calocybe gambosa),
edible, largeandfleshy, with a white to creamy-buff cap, crowded gills,andstrongly
farinaceous odor, favoring grassy areasandopen woods. Whether any of these species
occur in California is uncertain, but they are to be expected. They might be confused with
certain Hygrocybe species (e.g., H. subaustralis, H.jornicata), but the latter have hollow
or stuffed stemsandslightly waxy gills,andare most common under redwood in our area.
Also see T. manzanitae(under the T. pessundatum group), which can be whitish in youth.
Tricholoma saponaceum (Soapy Tricholoma)
CAP 4-12 (18) cm broad. convex to plane or with uplifted. often wavy mar,lZin; surface dry
or moist but not viscid. smooth or cracking into scales in dry weather; color variable: olive
to greenish-gray. gray. yellowish-olive. brownish-olive. grayish-brown. coppery. or with
rusty tints. or sometimes dingy gray at centerandpallid toward the margin. Flesh thick,
white. but may stain slowly yellowish or pinkish when bruised; odorandtaste mild to
farinaceous, soapy. or "of wash rooms." GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, well-
spaced. rather thick. white or tinged olive or yellowish, sometimes stained reddish. STALK
5-12 (20) cm long. 1-3 cm thick. shape variable but often thickest in the middleandtapered
below to a somewhat rooting base; solid, smooth or with small scales. white or tinted
variously with the cap color; base usually with pale pinkish to pinkish-orange interior.
VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5 x 34 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, tufted, or in groups or troops under both hardwoods and
conifers, widely distributed. Common under conifers (especially spruce) throughout
much of the West, but in our area found under live oak, tanoak,andmadrone in the late
fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Inedible-it has an insipid or soapy tasteandmay actually be poisonous.
COMMENTS As evidenced by the lengthy description, this is a vexingly variable species
and is rather difficult to recognize when greenish shades are not evident on the cap. One
fairly infallible ( or less unreliable) feature, however, is the pinkish-orange color of the flesh
at or near the base of the stalk. This feature is normally visible in the majority of specimens
from any group,andserves to distinguish them from other Tricholomas. The gills are
rather softandwell-spaced, leadingto confusion with Hygrophorus. but the cap is not truly
viscid. The cap is most often some shade of grayish-olive or yellowish-green, but may
develop brown or coppery tones. especially in dry weather. It may crack into scales. but
lacks the fibrillose scales of T. virgatum. T. pardinum.andothers. I n the Pacific Northwest
and Rocky Mountains T. saponaceum is at times so overwhelmingly abundant that it has
been called a mushroom ..weed." In our area it is not quite so prevalentandits beauty
is more readily appreciated. One especially attractive form has a bluish-green cap.
Trich%ma pessundatum group
CAP 5-14 (18) cm broad, convex then plane or with slightly uplifted margin; surface viscid
when moist, entirely reddish-brown to reddish-tan, or often with a paler( or even whitish)
margin; smooth or sometimes finely scaly in age; margin often lobed, at first
inrolled, sometimes faintly ribbed. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor strongly farinaceous or
like linseed oil. GILLS white, but often developing sordid reddish or reddish-brown spots
and stains; typically notched or adnexed, but at times adnate or even free; close. STALK
4-10 (14) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or swollen or tapered below, solid, firm; whitish or
developing sordid reddish or brownish stains or fibrils, especially over lower portion. VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4 x 2.54 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in forests or under trees, widely distributed. It
is partial to conifers in most areas (including the Pacific Northwest), but is locally common
in the late fallandwinter with live oak,andless commonly pine.
EDIBILITY To be avoided, as evidenced by the following severely censored excerpt from
an erstwhile colleague's memoirs: "This common, viscid, red-brown Tricholoma is
delicious when stewed slowly with zucchiniandserved steaming hot on rice with chicken
chow meinandwhite wine. Suffering from an acute attack of overconfidence, M. Henis
and C. Cole tried it in this manner one winter evening in order to determine its edibility.
They subsequently staggered thrugh an all-night ordeal of nausea, vomiting,anddiarrhea,
in which not only the mushroom, but everything else, was expelled. . :'
It is probable, then, that this common, viscid, red-brown Tricholoma is poisonous,
although a violent allergic reaction on the part of M. HenisandC. Cole cannot be ruled out
entirely. It is suggested that those foolish enough to try it (or any other mushroom of
unknown edibility) should do so in extremely small amounts-without the rice, chicken
chow mein,andwhite wine,andby all means, regardless of one's nutritional needs, culinary
quirks, or dietary deficiencies, without the zucchini.
COMMENTS Several robust, viscid, reddish-brown Tricholomas with reddish-spotted
gills will more or less fit the above description,andIlea ve it to licensed tricholomatologists
to decide whether or not ours is the "true" T. pessundatum. Closely related species include:
T. albobrunneum, said to have a weaker odorandcap finely streaked with darker lines;
T. ustalo;des, with a transient cortina (hairy veil)andsharply defined white zone at the
stalk apex; T.Jlavobrunneum (= T.Julvum), with pale yellow gills when youngandyellow-
tinted flesh in the stem;andT. ustale, which lacks a farinaceous odor. (See also T. popu-
linum.) All ofthe above have viscid caps when moist,andnone have the belted scales on
the stalk or the veil characteristic of T. aurantiumandT. zelleri respectively. Other
species: T. manzan;tae is a manzanita-and madrone-loving Californian with pale yellow
granules or dandruffy scales at the stalk apexanda viscid cap that ranges from white( when
young) to pinkish, orangish, or brown (often with reddish stains). T. acerbum is also said
to have a yellow-dandruffy stalk, but has a strongly inrolled, ribbed cap margin (at least
until maturity)anda fragrant odor and/or sharp taste. N one of the above should be eaten.
Trich%ma popu/inum (The Sandy; Poplar Tricholoma)
CAP 5-16 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane or with uplifted
margin; surface viscid when moist, then dry, often radially streaked or with watery spots;
smooth, dull reddish-cinnamon to pale dingy reddish-brown, the margin usually paler or
whitish. Flesh firm, white, thick; odorandtaste strongly farinaceous. GILLS typically
adnexed or notched, close, white, developing reddish-brown spotsandstains, especially on
edges. STALK 2.5-7.5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, solid, firm, dull
whitish, developing dingy reddish-brown stains in age or after handling. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5 x 3.54 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious, frequently fruiting in large rings or dense
masses in sandy soil or along rivers, apparently always in association with poplar or
cottonwood. It fruits in cool weatherandis widely distributed in western North America.
I have found it only once in our area, in December, but it is commoner inland. It is said
to be abundant in the John Day country of eastern Oregon in the fallandearly winter, and
I have seen very old specimens (perhaps from the previous fall?) in the spring near Pecos,
New Mexico, while looking for morelsandwild asparagus.
EDIBILITY Edibleandpopular in the Pacific Northwest, but be absolutely sure it is
associated with cottonwood-the similar T. pessundatum group is poisonous!
COMMENTS The association with cottonwoodandsomewhat paler cap distinguish
this species from other viscid, red-brown Tricholomas (see the T. pessundatum group).
Its penchant for growing in densely-packed masses or long arcs is also distinctive.
Tricholoma vaccinum
CAP 4-7 (10) cm broad, broadly conical to convex, becoming umbonate or plane; surface
dry, covered with dark reddish-brown to rusty-cinnamon-brown to pale pinkish-brown,
tan, or flesh-colored fibrils or scales on a buff background; often darker at center; margin
with hairy veil remnants at least when young, often splitting in age. Flesh white or pallid;
odor usually farinaceous but sometimes mild. GILLS adnate becoming notched, close,
whitish or buff when young, but usually tinged flesh-color to pale cinnamon in age; some-
times also with darker stains. STALK 3-8 cm long, 0.8-1.5 cm thick, equal or thicker at
either end, dry, smooth or with brownish to reddish-brown fibrils or small scales, usually
hollow at least in age. VEIL woolly-fibrillose, not forming an annulus (ring) on stalk, but
usually leaving traces on cap margin. SPORE_PRINT white; spores (4) 6-7.5 x 4-5
microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in small tufts, groups, or large troops under conifers, especially
pineandspruce; commonandvery widely distributed, fruiting from late summer through
early winter. I have seen enormous fruitings under spruce in the Rocky Mountains
and under pine on the northern California coast.
EDIBILITY Listed as mildly poisonous by some authors. Like cheap coffeeandfrozen
French fries, it is best avoided.
COMMENTS One of the commonest Tricholomas of the coniferous forests of North
America, this species often fruits with T. imbricatum, but is apparently replaced by that
species in our local coastal pine forests. The two are quite similar, but T. vaccinum has a
scalier cap, frequently hollow stalk,andwoolly veil which normally leaves hairs on the
cap margin. Several color forms occur, ranging from dark reddish-brown to pale pinkish-
brown,andthe size is also variable. Usually it is smallerandmore slender than T. imbrica-
tum, but in northern CaliforniaandOregon a fairly robust, reddish-brown form occurs.
Trich%ma imbricatum
CAP 4-12 (20) cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin, becoming convex-umbonate
to plane or uplifted; surface dry, dark brown to brown or cinnamon-brown, with flattened
fibrils that may break up into scales in age, especially toward margin (which may be ob-
scurely ribbed). Flesh thick, firm, white; odor mild or faintly farinaceous. GILLS adnexed,
notched, or even adnate; close, white or tinged flesh-color, often discoloring brown in age,
especially on the edges. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, solid, firm, dry, equal or
swollen below with a tapered, sometimes rooting base; white or buffbecoming brownish in
age, especially over lower portion (apex usually pallid); fibrillose or minutely scaly in age.
VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious under conifers, particularly pine
and spruce ( often hidden by needles); widely distributed. Itisa prominentfungalfeature of
our coastal pine forests in the winterandearly spring.
EDIBILITY Reportedly edible, but not recommended because it is easily confused with
members of the poisonous T. pessundatum group. It is rather tough anyway.
COMMENTS This common Tricholoma can be told from other members ofthe genus by
its dry, dull brown cap, solid stem, absence of a veil,andgenerally coarse, robust
appearance, though slender individuals also occur. The species epithet, which means
"shingled," is somewhat misleading, since the cap is usually quite smooth in youthandonly
somewhat scaly in age (it is rarely truly"shingled"in the way that the tooth fungus Hydnum
imbricatum is). Its closest relative, T. vaccinum, has a scalier cap, evanescent veil, and
hollower stem, while the T. pessundatum group has a viscid cap (at least when moist). It
looks somewhat like a Russula, but has a tough, fibrous stem. Leucopaxi/lus amarus also
has a brown cap, but its gills remain whiteandit has a bitter tasteandamyloid spores.
Trich%ma aurantium
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming obtusely umbonate or plane; surface viscid when
moist, smooth or breaking into small scales (especially at center); color variable: yellow-
orange to tawny, bright rusty-orange, orange-brown, orange-tan, or even orange-red,
sometimes splashed with olive-green or in one form entirely deep olive-green when young;
margin at first inrolled, sometimes beaded with orange droplets when moist. Flesh thick,
white; odorandtaste strongly farinaceousanddisagreeable (like rancid oil or cucumber).
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, whitish, often developing rusty-brown or
reddish-brown spotsandstains. STALK 3-8 em long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or thicker at
either end, solid, firm, belted with rusty-orange scales or scurfy flakes up to a well-defined
line near apex, pallid above the line; in wet weather sometimes beaded with orange droplets
near the line. VEIL absent or very rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 3-5
microns, elliptical to nearly round. smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed.
Throughout most ofthe West it is common under conifers or sometimes aspen; in our area
it can be found under madrone in the winter, but is fairly rare.
EDIBILITY Indisputably unpalatable due to the obnoxious odorandtaste.
COMMENTS This species strongly resembles T. zelleri but lacks a membranous veil. Its
sharply defined line near the stalk apex, however, is suggestive of a veilandprobably
represents a rudimentary one. The viscid, orange to orange-brown or olive-splashed cap,
rusty-spotted gills,andstrong odor help distinguish it. Our local form (var. o/;vascenS!)
Tr;choloma zeller;
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface viscid when
moist, bright orange to yellow-orange, or orange-brown, or sometimes splashed with
olive-green; margin at first hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, slowly bruising
orange-brown; odorandtaste strongly rancid-farinaceous. GILLS white, developing
rusty-orange-brown stains, close, adnate or notched. STALK 4-13 cm long, 1-3 cm thick,
usually tapered downward, solid, dry, pallid above the ring, usually somewhat scaly or
with orange or brown stains below. VEIL white, membranous, forming a flaring or ragged,
median to superior ring on stalk which frequently collapses in age. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 4-5.5 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, northern North America.
Extremely abundant under conifers in the Pacific Northwest ( often in the same areas as the
matsutake, Armillaria ponderosa), but rather rare in our regionandfruiting mainly in
tanoak-madrone woods at higher elevations in the coastal mountains {like A. ponderosa),
in the late fallandearly winter. I have also seen it fruiting in large numbers withArmillaria
caligata under spruce in the southern Rockies.
EDIBILITY Not edible because of the unpleasant tasteandsmell; however, it is a good
matsutake-indicator!
COMMENTS This is essentially a veiled version of T. aurantium-same color, odor,
taste,andhabitat. It is better known as Armillaria zelleri, but because of the obvious
affinity with T. aurantium, it is now placed in Tricholoma. The sticky yellow-orange to
orange, brown, or greenish-splashed cap, plus the attached gills, presence of a mem branous
veil,andwhite spores are diagnostic. It might possibly be confused with Limacella glio-
derma, which has a redder cap, fibrillose veil,andfragile stem. Other species: T. robustum
and T. locale are very similar if not the same (they are said to be reddish-brown in color).
Armillaria ponderosa (White Matsutake; Matsutake) Color Plate 37
CAP 5-20 (35) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid when moist, at first
white, but in age developing pale cinnamon to pinkish-brown or yellow-brown stains or
with fibrils that become these colors; margin at first inrolledandcottony. Flesh thick, very
firm, white; odor distinctly spicy-aromatic (like cinnamon). GILLS white, discoloring
or spotted rusty-brownish to cinnamon in age; crowded, adnate to adnexed or notched.
STALK 4-15 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, solid, tough, hard, equal or with a narrowed base;
white above the ring, usually scaly or fibrillose belowandcolored more or less like cap.
VEIL thick, membranous, sheathing the stalk, at first white; forming a prominent cottony
ring which flares outward at first, then collapses against the stalk in age. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 5-7 x 4.5-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, not amyloid.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in forests, thickets,andpine
barrens; found throughout northern North America, but particularly abundant in the
Pacific Northwest, where it is harvested commercially. In the mountains of Idaho,
Washington,andOregon it is common under mixed conifersandsecond-growth Douglas-
fir, while on the coast it favors sandy pine forests. It also likes to lurk in thickets of
ericaceous shrubs (e.g., rhododendron, huckleberry, manzanita), which makes for very
difficult collecting. In coastal California, however, it prefers tanoak-madrone stands to
conifers, though it also fruits in sandy soil under manzanita with a pine canopy. In our
area "patches" are hard to find but fairly reliable, producing one crop each year, generally
in November or December.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly prized by Asian-Americans. In San FranciscoandSan
Jose it sells fresh for as much as $25 a piece! However, its tough, chewy texture does not
appeal to everyone. Special techniques are required to render it tender while highlighting
its unique flavor. (If you bring some to me, I will give you a free demonstration!)
COMMENTS The unique spicy odor-a provocative compromise between ""red hots"
and dirty socks-is the hallmark of this magnificent mushroom. Its robust stature, whitish
color (at least when young),andprominent veil are also distinctive. It might be mistaken
for a "JAR" (Just Another Russula) or an Amanita, but the veilandodor distinguish it.
Old cinnamon-stained specimens may be rather unattractive, but the young, firm, white,
cottony buttons are undeniably gorgeous. The only other mushrooms with the same odor
are the fragrant form of A. caligata, the matsutake of Japan, plus some specimens of
Lentinus ponderosus (which grows on wood),andlnocybe pyriodora (a small poisonous
species with brown spores). Hygrophorus suba/pinusandCatathe/asma species are
somewhat similar, but lack the odor. The white matsutake has recently been transferred to
Trich%maandgiven a new name, Trich%ma magnive/are.
Armillaria caligata
CAP 4-12 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or with uplifted margin; surface
dry, covered with flattened cinnamon-brown to chestnut or vinaceous-brown fibrils
which typically separateandcluster in age to form small scales or patches, revealing the
whitish to pinkish flesh beneath. Flesh thick, white; odor variable: distinctly spicy-fragrant
to fruity, mild, or unpleasant; taste mild to nutty, bitter, or disagreeable. GILLS close,
adnexed to adnate (rarely slightly decurrent); white, the edges developing brownish
stains. STALK 4-9 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, more or less equal, solid, firm, white or pallid
above the ring, fibrillose or scaly belowandcolored like cap. VEIL membranous, sheath-
ing the stalk, forming a distinct flaring ring which collapses in age; underside colored like
cap, upper surface white. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups on ground in woods, widely distributed.
In the West, it fruits mainly under mountain conifers in the summerandfall, but isn't com-
mono In eastern North America it occurS under oaksandericaceous shrubs. The largest
fruiting I've seen was under spruce in the Rocky Mountains. I haven't found it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible-the forms which do not have a disagreeable taste and/or odor are
said to be as good as A. ponderosa!
COMMENTS Also known as T,icholoma caligatum, this species is easily separated from
its cousin A. ponderosa by the cinnamon-brown to purple-brown fibrils on the cap and
stalk. It might be confused with Hygrophorus purpurascens. but the latter has a fibrillose,
evanescent veilanda redder (not as brown) cap, plus slightly waxy gills. The above
description encompasses several varietiesandforms of A. ca/igala. The western version
typically has dark fibrilsandthe spicy-cinnamon odor of A. ponderosa. Eastern material,
on the other hand, is apt to be more cinnamon-colored with a mild to fruity to pungent
or downright disgusting odor. Other species: The matsutake of Japan, A. (=Tricholoma)
matsutake, is very close to the fragrant western variety of A. cali galaandmay actually
be the same species. It is edible, of course,andhighly prized.
Armillaria olida (Cucumber Armillaria)
CAP 6-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane to broadly umbonate, or in age often de-
pressed or with an uplifted margin; surface dry to somewhat viscid, color variable: whitish
(when still under the dufO to gray to bluish-gray, purplish-gray, brown, or developing
olive, buff, or ochre tones; often overlaid with white cottony or fibrillose veil remnants
(these sometimes scattered but more often merged to form a central patch). Flesh thick,
firm, white; odor very distinctive: usually like cucumber, watermelon rind, rotting
potatoes, or freshly mowed grass, but sometimes like old fish. GILLS close, white or
tinged gray, typicallyadnexed or notched but sometimes adnate when very young and
free in old age. STALK 6-14 cm long, 1.84 cm thick, equal or swollen below (or even
with a bulb), solid, very firm, dry, white or at times pale buff, usually sheathed below the
ring by veil remnants which are often ochre-or cinnamon-tinged. VEIL cottony or fibril-
lose, usually forming a slight median to superior ring on the stalk, but sometimes disap-
pearing. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-12.5 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not
amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or in small clumps of 2-3 individuals in duff under
mountain conifers, often partially buried or forming ""mushrumps"; known only from the
West, fruiting during the spring or shortly after the snow melts. It is quite common in
the Sierra Nevadaandis sometimes a good morel-indicator. I have seen large fruitings
in Yosemite National Park in April.
EDIBILITY Unknown-or at least not commonly eaten. The taste is said to resemble
the odor, which is not particularly pleasing.
COMMENTS When the veil remnants are not obvious, this robust springtime Armillaria
is likely to be mistaken for a Trich%ma. In fact, as the definition of Armillaria is nar-
rowedandthat of Trich%ma is broadened to include more veiled species, it will probably
be transferred to that genus. Its distinctive cucumber or fishy odor, grayish cap, and
growth under mountain conifers in the spring plus the frequent presence of veil remnants
on the cap and/or stalk form a distinctive combination of characteristics. The cap color
can be reminiscent of T. portentosumandT. virgatum, but those species lack a veil and
are not so strongly scented.
Armillaria albolanaripes (Sheathed Armillaria) Color Plate 43
CAP 5-12 em broad, convex or slightly umbonate to plane; surface moist or slightly viscid,
yellow to golden-yellow or more often brown at the centerandyellow at the margin; with
flattened fibrils or scales which darken in age. Flesh white or tinged yellow; odor mild.
GILLS adnexed or notched, white to pale yellow, close. STALK 2-8 em long, 1-2.5 em
thick, equal or thicker below, dry, white above the ring, sheathed with soft cottony scales
below, the scales white at first, yellow-or brown-tipped in age. VEIL white, cottony,
fragile, leaving a ragged superior ring on stalk and/or remnants on cap margin. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in scattered groups in woodsandalong paths; widely distributed.
I t is common under conifers in the mountains of western North America in spring, summer,
and early fall, but I find it only rarely in our area, usually under oak.
EDIBILITY Edible but insipid-I have fried it. The closely related A. straminea (see
comments) is said to be a popular edible mushroom in Colorado.
COMMENTS This handsome mushroom is easily identified by its yellow-brown cap,
creamy to pale yellow gills,andsoft cottony scales on the stem. The veilcan be seen in young
specimens but does not always form a distinct ring. The scaly stem might be mistaken for
a volva, but there are no warts on the cap. Amanita aspera is similarly colored but has white
gillsanda warted cap. I n the montane aspen-conifer forests of the West, A. albolanaripes
has several close relatives, including: A. pitkinensis, with a grayer capandstalkandonly
slight yellow tints (but gills yellowish in old age); A.fusca, a grayish version with noyeUow
at all;andA. stTaminea (=A. luteoviTens), more widely distributedandcolored like A.
albolanaripes, but with conspicuous bright yellow scales on the cap (or at least the cap
margin) as well as on the stalk. In some regions, whitish or "albino" forms of A. straminea
and A. albolanaripes can also be found. All of the above species have amyloid spores
and are given their own genus, Floccularia. by some taxonomists (the same ones who
retain the honey mushrooms in Armillariaandtransfer the matsutakes to the genus
Tricholoma).
Catathelasma imperialis (Imperial Mushroom)
CAP 10-40 em broad, convex to plane; surface slightly viscid when moist but soon dry,
smooth, fibrillose-scaly, or cracked into scales or plaques( areolate); dark brown to brown,
dingy yellow-brown, or olive-brown. Flesh very thick( up to 15 em!)andhard, white; odor
and taste sharply farinaceous. GILLS decurrent, pallid or buff to yellowish or pale grayish-
olive (in age), close, many forked. STALK 12-18 em long, 3-8 em thick, tapered below to a
bluntly pointed base; dry, dingy brownish to pinkish-buff below the ring; solid, hard. VEIL
membranous, double-layered, its lower surface often areolate while still covering the gills;
typically forming a double ring, the upper one thick, striate above,andoften flaring; the
lower one sheathing the stalk as a thin membrane or gelatinous zone, or indistinct. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 10-15x 4-5.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers (mainly spruce
and fir), late summerandfall, northern North America. It is more common in the Rocky
Mountains than on the west coast. It does not occur in our area, but C. ventricosa (see
comments) is fairly common under Sitka spruce in northern California.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery tempting because of its size-but tough. Buttons are as
large as baseballs,andjust as hard!
COMMENTS This mountain of a mushroom may well qualify as the "Most Humongus
Gilled Fungus Among Us." Its often gargantuan size, hard flesh, dingy brownish cap,
growth on the ground, double veil,andwhite spores set it apart. The cap may be
smooth, areolate, or fibrillose-scaly. The buttons are smaller, of course, but still distinct
by virtue of their hardness. Lent in us ponderosus is also gigantic, but grows from stumps
and lacks a veil. A slightly "smaller" sister species, C. ventr;cosa, also occurs under nor-
thern conifers. Its stalk may be quite long but its non-viscid cap averages "only" 7-35 em
acrossandis dingy whitish to grayish. It looks something like the white matsutake( Armil-
laria ponderosa) but lacks the spicy odor of that species. It is said to be a good edible in
spite of its hard, unpleasant-tasting raw flesh. Other species: C. singer; of the Rocky
Mountains looks like a Hygrophorus with its dingy yellowish viscid cap, but has amyloid
spores; C. macrospora has broad spores. All of these species growanddecay slowly.
A rmillariella mellea group (Honey Mushroom) Color Plates 39,42
CAP 3-15 cm broad or more, convex becoming plane or sometimes broadly umbonate or
in age uplifted; surface viscid or dry, usually with scattered minute dark brown to blackish
fibrillose scales or erect hairs, especially toward the center; color variable: yellow, yellow-
brown, tawny, tan, pinkish-brown, reddish-brown, etc. Flesh thickandwhite when young,
sometimes discolored in age; odor mild, taste usually latently bitter. GILLS adnate to
slightly decurrent or sometimes notched; white to yellowish or sordid flesh-color, often
spotted darker in age. STALK 5-20 cm long, 0.5-3 (5) cm thick, toughandfibrous with a
stringy pith inside; usually tapered below if growing in large clusters, or enlarged below if
unclusteredandon the ground; dry, whitish above the ring, soon yellowish to reddish-
brown belowandoften cottony-scaly when very young. VEIL cottony-membranous,
white to yellowish, forming a superior ring on stalk or occasionally disappearing. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In small or massive clusters on stumps, logs,andliving trees, or scattered to
gregarious (occasionally solitary) on ground-but growing from roots or buried wood;
common on a wide variety of treesandshrubs,andpractically worldwide in distribution.
In our area it occurs year-round, but is most common in the fallandearly winter. I have
seen truly stupendous fruitings on oak as. well as walnut (in an orchard)andother trees.
It is a virulent parasite of timber, fruit,andgarden trees, but can also be a harmless
saprophyte on dead trees or on the dead wood (heartwood) ofliving trees. It is called "oak
root fungus" in California because of its insatiable appetite for oaks,and..shoe string root
rot" because of the stringy black mycelial strands (rhizomorphs) by which the mycelium
spreads. These ..runners" may extend up the host's trunk or infect neighboring trees by
traversing great distances through the soil. On oak trees the mycelium can frequently be
seen as whitish fanlike growths between the barkandwood. It generally feeds on the roots
and lower trunk of its host, reducing it to a pathetic white, spongy pulp. The mycelium is
also thought to be the culprit responsible for the ..aborted" fruiting bodies of Entoloma
abortivum. Actively growing mycelium may phosphoresce at night, giving the wood an
eerie luminous aura called ..foxfire." Inhabitants of subarctic regions are said to mark their
trails with bits of glowing wood infected by A. mellea.
EDIBILITY Eminently edible. Use only firm capsanddiscard the tough stalks. It is an
abundant food source, crunchy in texture,anda very passable substitute for the shiitake
(Lentinus edodes) in stir-fried dishes. The bitter taste cooks out, but some forms are better
than others,andsome (e.g., those that grow on buckeye or hemlock) can cause digestive
upsets. The common name, incidentally, is a reference to its color (which, like honey, is
extremely variable), not its taste (which isn't the least bit sweet).
COMMENTS There is very little that can or cannot be said about the honey mushroom.
Also known as Armillaria mellea. it is among the most variableandcosmopolitan of the
fleshy fungi,andin its innumerable guises will confound you timeandtime again. Espe-
cially variable are its color, shape, viscidity,andmanner of growth, but there are several
key, relatively constant features that distinguish it: (1) the presence of a veil (2) the
tough, fibrous stalk (3) frequent presence of small dark hairs oncap(4) the bitter taste when
raw (some people, however, are unable to detect it) (5) the growth on wood (though
it may be buried) (6) the white or faintly yellowish spores(in any mature cluster the lower
caps will be covered with white spore dust).
There are at least two distinct, widespread variants (one study recognized 14 different
..species" in the A. mellea complex). One has a yellow to yellow-brown cap that is viscid or
dry but becomes slimy in wet weather. It also has a yellow-tinged veilandtapered
stalk,andusually grows in clusters. The second variety, on the other hand, has a hairier
pinkish-brown to reddish-brown Or dingy brown cap with a white cottony veil and
frequently enlarged stem base. It grows scattered or in small tufts, often on the ground.
This form, which is close to A. bulbosa (a European species), is especially confounding
to beginners. Intermediate forms abound also. In view of the extreme variability, be-
ginners should eat only those clearly growing in clusters on wood.andbe certain that the
spores are whitish. The poisonous Galerina autumnalis grows on woodandhas a ring on
the stalk, but is smallerandmore fragile, with a smoother capandbrown spores. Pho/iota
species also have brown spores, while Gymnopilus has rusty-orange spores. In the eastern
and southern United States you may encounter A. tabescens, a very similar, clustered,
wood-inhabiting, white-spored mushroom that lacks a veil (and annulus)andhas a dry
cap. It is also edible.
Squaman;ta odorata
CAP 1-4.5 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped or convex, expanding somewhat in age but
usually retaining a broad umbo; surface dry, denselyandcoarsely scaly or fibrillose-scaly,
the scales often erect; usually more fibrillose toward margin; brownish-purple to purplish-
gray or lilac-gray, often darker in age. Flesh colored like cap; odor stronglyandpersistently
fruity-fragrant (like grape soda or grape juice). GILLS adnate or notched, fairly well-
spaced, colored more or less like cap. STALK 1-3.5 cmlong,(2)3-10(15)mmthick,arising
from a swollen, sometimes hollow,juglike underground ""tuber" 1-2.5 cm highandup to
2 cm thick; colored more or less like capandcovered with conspicuous scales like those on
the cap, except for the smooth, sometimes silky apexandyellowish to buff-colored
"tuber"; hollow or partially hollow in age. VEIL not forming a distinct ring on stalk.
SPORE_PRINT pinkish; spores 6.5-9 x 4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Usually in groups or clumps on ground in woods; widely distributed but
apparently very rare. I have examined specimens collected under conifers in Washington.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Although too rare to be of value, the odor is certainly intriguing.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Coo/ia odorata, this little mushroom is as bizarre as
it is rare. The coarsely scaly purplish capandstalk, similarly colored gills, yellowish-buff
""tuber,"andstrong grapelike odor make a most distinctive set offeatures. Other species:
S. paradoxum(=Dissoderma paradoxum) is gray to lilac-or purplish-tinted inage beneath
an ochre-brown granulose coating. It also occurs in the Pacific Northwest, but is rare.
Cystoderma folia x
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex to plane or frequently with an umbo; surface dry, with con-
spicuous mealy granules which are erect at first but flattenedandmore powdery in age( or
often wear away completely); cinnamon-brown to rusty-orange to tawny-ochre; margin
often hung with remnants from the veil. Flesh thin, whitish or tinged cap color. GILLS
adnexed to adnate, close, white to pale pinkish-buff or tinged yellow. STALK3-7 cm long,
3-5 (7) mm thick, equal or enlarged below, smoothandpallid above the ring, sheathed with
cinnamon-brown to rusty-ochre granules or flaky scales below. VEIL forming a large,
delicate but persistent, often flaring ring on the stalk; ring median to superior, smooth and
pallid on upper side, colored like the cap underneath. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
3.5-5.5 x 34 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups or tufts on ground under conifers or in
mixed woods, sometimes also on rotting wood; widely distributedandcommon in the
summerandfall in the Pacific NorthwestandRocky Mountains. Fruiting in the fall and
early winter in our area, but rather rare.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS One of the most attractiveanddelicately adorned of our woodland fungi,
this Cystoderma is easily identified by its rusty-orange to cinnamon color, prominent ring
on the stalk, whitish gills which are attached to the stem,andgranulose coating on the cap
and stem (rain may wash the granules off the cap, but not the stem). The illustration does
not do it justice, but since when is justice usually done?
Cystoderma amianthinum
CAP 2-5 cm broad, bell-shaped or somewhat conical becoming convex or umbonate to
nearly plane; surface dry, prominently wrinkled (radially) in one form; covered with mealy
or powdery granules which may wear off in age, tawny-ochre to ochre-brown, ochre-buff,
or yellowish; margin often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, odor mild or strongly
pungent. GILLS adnexed to adnate, crowded, white or creamy or tinged yellow-orange.
STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 3-8 mm thick, equal or slightly enlarged below, smoothandwhitish
above the veil, sheathed with granules or granulose scales belowandcolored like the cap.
VEIL fragile, forming a slight ring on stalk or often disappearing. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 4-7 x 34 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid. Cap cuticle staining rusty-brown
to reddish-brown in KOH (potassium hydroxide).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under or near conifers, especially in moss;
widely distributed in northern regionsandprobably the most common member of the
genus. I have seen it in late summer, fall,andearly winter in northern Californiaandthe
Pacific Northwest, but it does not seem to occur south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some sources list it as edible, but it doesn't have much
substanceandcan be confused with poisonous species (e.g., Lepiota castanea).
COMMENTS This petite mushroom is quite attractive when growing amongst colorful
lichens or in beds of bright green moss. It is best recognized by its granulose capandstalk,
ochre color,andfragile veil which disappears or forms only a slight ring on the stalk (rather
than a prominent one, as in C.fallax). It is easily mistaken for a small Lepiota, but the gills
are usually attached to the stem rather than free. In one variety the cap is conspicuously
wrinkled, in another it is not. Other species: C. granulosum is similar, but has a reddish-
brown to tawny, non-wrinkled capandnon-amyloid spores; C. gruberianum is a small
species that grows on rotten wood; C. c;nnabar;num is a larger, farflung species with a
rusty-orange to beautiful cinnabar-red or vermillion capandstalk. Whitish-capped
forms of C. amianthinumandC. granulosum also occur, but are rare.
A sterophora Iycoperdoides
CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, nearly round; surface dry, whitish becoming brownandpowdery
from spores. Flesh thin, odor farinaceous. GILLS often malformed or barely present;
well-spaced, thick, whitish. STALK 1-3 cm long, 3-8 mm thick, more or less equal, white
becoming brownish. SPORE_PRINT white when obtainable; spores 5-6 x 3.54 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Chlamydospores 12-18 microns, round, bumpy or spiny, thick-walled,
brownish.
HABITAT In colonies on old mushrooms, particularly species in the Russula densifolia
group. Widely distributed but not common; very rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This oddball might be mistaken for a puffball because of its poorly formed
gillsandpowdered round cap. However, no puffballs are known to be parasitic on gilled
mushrooms! A. parasilica is also widely distributed, but even rarer than A.lycoperdoides.
It has thick, well-spaced, decurrent gillsanda white to grayish, brownish, or lilac-tinged
cap, plus smoothandelliptical chlamydospores.
M arasm;ellus cand;dus
CAP 0.6-2.5 cm broad, convex to plane or with slightly depressed center; surface dry,
shining white or translucent white, but often stained deep pinkish or reddish in old age;
often striate or grooved at maturity. Flesh very thin, pliant, soft, odor mild. GILLS few and
far between, usually interspersed with smaller gills or veins; adnexed or adnate to slightly
decurrent, white like the cap but often pinkish-or reddish-stained in old age. STALK 0.5-3
cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal or slightly tapered at either end, often rather short, central or
off-center but not lateral, tough, smooth, often curved, white or with gray to pinkish-gray
base, darkening gradually to brownish-black from the base upward as it ages. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 10-15 x 3.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elongated tear-shaped,
smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In groups or rows on dead sticks, branches, berry canes, etc.; widely distri-
buted but most abundant along the Pacific Coast. It fruits in wet weather, mainly in the
fallandearly winter in our area. It is especially abundant along creeks overgrown with
brambles,andon rotting oak, eucalyptus, bay laurel, cedar, etc.
EDIBILITY Utterly inconsequential.
COMMENTS Also known asM arasmius candidus, M. magnisporus,andMarasmie//us
a/buscorticis, this dainty mushroom is reminiscent of a small shell. Although small, its
shining white cap stands out vividly in the forest gloom. The exceedingly well-spaced (dis-
tant) gills are its outstanding feature. The stem, which may be off-center, is toughanddark-
ens at maturity. The entire fruiting body may develop pinkish or sordid vinaceous tonesas
it ages, leading one to falsely (but reasonably) assume that the spores are pink. In eastern
North America it is largely replaced by the equally beautiful "pinwheel Marasmius,"
M arasmius rotu/a. This little gem has a longer (1.5-8 cm), central black stem that is 1-2 mm
thickanda white cap(I-2 cm broad) with darker center. It grows on decaying hardwoods.
usually in large groups. Other whitish-capped eastern species include: Marasmius
de/ectans, growing on leaves, stalk pallid to yellowish aboveanddark brown below; and
Marasmie//us nigripes, stalk black beneath a coating of minute white hairsandspores
triangular or jack-shaped. Another whitish-capped easterner, Marasmius epiphy//us,
grows on sticksandleavesandhas widely spaced, veined gillsanda relatively long, hairlike
stem; it also occurs in the West, as does its oak-leaf-inhabiting look-alike, M. querco-
phy//us. All of the above species are too small to be of culinary value.
Marasm;us sp. (unidentified) (Pine Needle Pinwheel)
CAP 1.5-4.5 cm broad, broadly convex to plane or umbilicate; surface not viscid, smooth
or wrinkled, translucent-striate when moist, pure white or with a grayish to olive-gray
tinge, sometimes becoming slightly yellowish in age; margin often wavy. Flesh very thin,
fragile, soft; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, widely spaced, usually with
veins in between, white. STALK 3-7 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapered below or
with a swollen base; often flattened, smooth, colored like cap or slightly yellower, the base
often with brownish stains; hollow, usually with hairs at the base. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 10-12 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Cap cuticle cellular.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or in troops on pine needles, often abundant
in our coastal pine forests in the late fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too miniscule to be of value.
COMMENTS The widely spaced, adnate to decurrent giIls, pale color, small size, fre-
quently umbilicate cap, white spores,andgrowth under pine distinguish this pretty little
mushroom. It looks like a pint-sized Clitocybe or an Omphalina or Camarophyllus, and
is keyed out under those genera. Actually, the term" unidentified" is not quite appropriate
because it has been "identified" by Dennis Desjardin, Rolf Singer, Howard Bigelow,
and other mycologists as an undescribed species. It is not as tough as most Marasmius
speciesanddoes not revive when moistened, but is assigned here to Marasmius for lack
of a better alternative. According to Desjardin, it may be the prototype for a ""new" genus.
M arasmius copelandi (Garlic Mushroom)
CAPO.5-2 (2.5) cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth or often
wrinkled or striate, light brown to buff or flesh-colored, sometimes fading to whitish as it
dries; not viscid. Flesh thin, whitish; odor distinctly garlic-or onionlike; taste garlicky to
slightly acrid. GILLS pallid to flesh-colored or colored like the cap, attached (usually
adnate or notched, sometimes seceding), often somewhat crisped. STALK 2-7 cm long,
1-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end, tough, hollow, minutely hairy; dark
purple-brown to reddish-brown with a paler apex, the base often blackish-brown (but
the hairs may appear whitish when dry). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 12.5-16 x 34
microns, more or less narrowly pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on fallen leaves; common along the west coast. In our
area it is often abundant on tan oak leavesandchinquapin burrs in the fallandwinter. A
large-spored variant occurs farther north on the leaves of salalandother shrubs.
EDIBILITY Edible. It can be used as a seasoning or garlic substitute, but should be
cooked only slightly if at all. It makes up for its small size by fruiting in large numbers.
COMMENTS True to its name, this speciesandits close relatives smellandtaste
like garlic. In fact, they are often smelled before they are seen. Aside from the odor,
there is little else to separate them from other" LBM's." The mycelium must also smell like
garlic, because in wet weather our tan oak humus will often have a distinct garlic odor-
even when no fruiting bodies are present! There are several very similar "garlic mush-
rooms," including: M. o/;dus, found on oak leaves in eastern North America, with slightly
shorter spores; M. pras;osmus, a European species with whitish gillsandeven smaller
spores (of uncertain occurrence in North America); M. scorodon;us, widespread, with a
reddish-brown to pallid capandsmooth (hairless) stem, found on needles, twigs, grass
stems, etc.; M. a//;aceus. a European species with a long black, minutely hairy stalk; and
M. thujinus, with a minute (]-3 mm broad) capandgarlic odor if crushed, found under
northern conifers. Several of these names have been applied to our local garlic mushroom,
but marasmiologist Dennis Desjardin says that M. copeland; is the correct name.
Marasmius androsaceus (Horsehair Fungus)
CAP 2-10 (20) mm broad, convex to plane, the center often depressed; surface dry, soon
radially wrinkled or striate, reddish-brown to pale brown or flesh-colored, fading in age.
Flesh very thin, pliant, reviving when moistened; odor mild. GILLS narrow, well-spaced,
pallid becoming flesh-colored or brownish, usually adnexed to adnate. STALK 2-7 cm
long, less than 1 mm thick, equal, hairlike, tough, stiff, entirely black or black with a brown
to reddish-brown apex; black horsehair-like"rhizomorphs usually emanating from base or
visible in surroundings. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-9x 2.5-4.5 microns, elliptical or
pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. Cystidia present on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered or in troops on needles, twigs, or leaves; widespread. In our area
it is fairly common, along with similar species (see below) in wet weather.
EDIBILITY Unknown-hardly worth the trouble to find out.
COMMENTS Several dainty marasmioid fungi will more orless fitthe above description.
They are barely visible when shrivelled up, but rain revives them. They differ from the more
numerous Mycenas in their dark, hairlike stemandtougher texture. M. androsaceusand
M. pa//idocepha/us (very similar, but partial to conifer needlesandlackingcystidia on the
gill edges) usually possess black rhizomorphs,andsometimes form stems with no caps.
Micrompha/e sequoiae is similar but grows only on redwood needles, has a brown stalk,
and lacks thick rhizomorphs; likewiseMicrompha/eperforans, which grows on spruce and
fir needles. Micrompha/e arbutico/a, found in swarms at the bases of madrones, is a minute
brownish bark-inhabitor with a slight garlic-onion odor; Marasmius capi//aris, partial to
dead leaves in eastern North America, has a black stalkandminute brownish cap with a
white center. See also M. epiphyl/usandM. quercophyl/us under Marasmiel/us candidus.
Marasmius oreades (Fairy Ring Mushroom) Color Plates 38, 47
CAP 1-5 (6) cm broad but usually2-4 cm; at first bell-shaped or umbonate with an incurved
margin, then convex or plane but often retaining an obtuse umbo, the margin often uplifted
in old age; surface smooth, dry, color variable: reddish-tan to light brown, tan, buff, oreven
white; margin faintly striate when moist. Flesh tough, pliant, pallid, reviving when
moistened; odor agreeable. GILLS ad nate, adnexed, or free, fairly well-spaced, broad,
white to pale tan, sometimes discoloring brownish in old age. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5
mm thick, equal or tapering downward, toughandpliant, smooth, colored like the cap or
paler (whitish). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical to somewhat
irregular, apiculate, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Gregarious in grass, usually in arcs or rings; widely distributedandvery
common in lawns, parks, cemeteries, etc.; also common in pastures in the Pacific North-
west, but rarely straying far from suburbia in our area. Found year-round except during
cold spells, but most abundant in California in late spring, summer (on watered lawns),
and fall. Several crops are prod uced each year, but its presence can be detected even when it
isn't fruiting-just look for "fairy rings" (patches of brown grass rimmed by a lush zone of
darker green grass). The living mycelium on the periphery ofthe ring stimulates the grass to
grow, while the dried-up mycelial matter within the circle inhibits growth.
EDIBILITY Delectably delicious-one of the few "LBM's" worth learning. What it
lacks in substance it makes up for in abundance. Discard the tough stemsanduse the caps
whole. They're superb is just about anything-omelets, soups, sauces, stir-fried dishes,
even cookies. Or simply saute in butterandserve on toast! What's more, they dry easily,
don't decay quickly,andare usually free of maggots. Don't pass up shrivelled, sun-dried
specimens-they are easily resurrected or can be stored in an airtight jar for later use.
COMMENTS At first glance this seems like yet another Boring Ubiquitous Mushroom
("BUM"). However, a closer look reveals that it is really quite attractive, withalean,clean,
subtle symmetry all its own. Many "BUM's"and"LBM's" grow on lawns, but the fairy
ring mushroom can be distinguished by the following features: (I) cap obtusely umbonate
in many specimens (2) white spores (the grass beneath mature caps is often dusted with
white spore powder) (3) broad (deep) white to buff gills which are fairly well-spaced and
nol decurrent (4) thin, tough stem (5) growth in grass (6) the ability of dried specimens to
revive dramatically when moistened. Be especially careful not to confuse it with the
poisonous Clitocybe dealbata. which is white-sporedandgrows in grass (often with M.
oreades), but has thin, crowded, adnate to decurrent gillsanda convex to plane( not umbo-
nate) cap. The growth in rings is not agood means of distinguishing it, as many mushrooms
are capable of growing in circles, including C. dealbata. Other species: M. albogriseus is
fairly common in centralandsouthern California under trees, shrubs,andchaparral or
even in grass. It tends to have a grayer or browner or yellower cap than M. oreades. at least
at the center,anda hollow stem (the stalk of M. oreades is usually stuffed with a white pith),
but is otherwise quite similar. M. (=Collybia) strictipes of eastern North America is also
somewhat similar but grows in the woodsandhas closer gillsanda yellowish cap. Another
woodland easterner, M. nigrodiscus, is larger (cap up to II cm broad)andoften has a
striate stalk, but is similar in color to M. albogriseus. Collybia luxurians sometimes grows
ingrass but has close gillsanda reddish-brown cap. Finally, there is an unidentified Mycena
that often grows in grass. However, it is smaller than M. oreades, its stalk is not as tough,
it is usually reddish-or vinaceous-tinged,andits cap is convex to plane (not umbonate).
MaTasmius plicatulus (Pleated Marasmius) Color Plate 45
CAP 14 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical to bell-shaped, often expanding to convex or plane
or with uplifted margin in age; surface dry, with a velvety orfrosted appearance when fresh,
furrowed or wrinkled in age or upon drying; bay-brown to reddish-brown, brown, wine-
red, or maroon. Flesh thin, pliant; odor mild. GILLS adnate to nearly free, well-spaced,
broad, white to buff to pinkish or tinged cap color. STALK 5-13 cm long, 1.5-3 mm
thick, equal, tough but brittle, usually longandthin, smooth, polished, reddish-black to
deep chestnut below, often paler (pinkish or sometimes pallid) above; base often with
whitish mycelium. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 11-15 x 5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth,
not amyloid.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in humus under treesandshrubs; apparently
endemic to the west coast. Common in ourareain the late fallandwinter(atleastone month
after the rainy season begins) under eucalyptus, oak, conifers, in brambles, etc.
EDIBILITY Like myself, too toughandthin to be edible.
COMMENTS One of the most exquisite of all mushrooms-the frosted wine-red to
brown cap, widely spaced (distant) pallid gills,andlong, shining reddish-black stalk are
distinctive. The stalk is so brittle that the mushroom must be dug up (rather than plucked)
to keep it intact. The conical cap may lead to confusion with Mycena, but the tough.
polished stem is characteristic of Marasmius. There are several similarandequally
exquisite species with distant gills, including: M. bellipes, with smaller sporesanda small
cap (up to 15 mm broad)andshort stalk; M. borealis, whose cap is not pleated or striate;
M. siccus andM.JulvoJerrugineus of eastern North America, with even more distant gills,
a shorter (2-7 cm) stalk, an orange-brown to ochre-tawny to rusty-brown, deeply ribbed
or pleated cap (like a miniature umbrella)andspores 15-21 microns long (I have Seen the
oranger of the two, M. siccus, preserved nicely in plastic cubes); andM. haematocephalus
(see photo above), a gorgeous tropicalleaf-inhabitor with a dark red cap.
Crinipellis piceae
CAP 3-7 (10) mm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane, the center sometimes
slightly depressed; surface whitish to buff or tinged tawny except for the dark (tawny-
brown to brown or blackish) center, which is often surrounded by a dark circle; covered
with coarse tawny to brownish hairsandsometimes minute scales, not viscid; margin often
ciliate (fringed with projecting hairs). Flesh very thin, white. GILLS white, close, adnexed
or free. STALK 2-6 cm or more long, up to I mm thick. more or less equal, very thin and
tough, brown to blackish-brown beneath a coating of minute hairs. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 7-10 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth, not amyloid. Hairs on cap dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups on twigs, needles,anddebris of
conifers, especially spruce; known only from the west coast (and Asia). It fruits practically
year-round in damp weatherandis, according to Dennis Desjardin, the most numerous
"marasmioid" fungus of the coastal forests of northern California. It does not seem to
occur in our area, but neither does spruce.
EDIBILITY Much too miniscule to merit attention.
COMMENTS This minute M arasmius-like mushroom is easily told by the coarse dex-
trinoid hairs on the cap, frequently ciliate ca p margin.andthin, dark stalk. Other species:
C. campanella is a slightly larger northern species with a rusty-orange to chestnut-brown
hairy capandstemanda tendency to grow on conifer twigs (especially cedar) that are
still on the tree. C. zonata of eastern North America is a "large" (cap 1-2.5 cm) species
with coarse tawny hairs; it grows on dead wood. C. stipitaria has a minute central nipple
on the cap. N one of these are worth eating.
Callistosporium luteo-olivaceum
CAP 1.5-6.5 cm broad, convex or slightly umbonate becoming plane or shallowly
depressed; surface not viscid, often minutely scurfy at first but becoming smooth; dark
olive to olive-brown or olive-yellow, often becoming yellower (yellow-brown to oney-
colored) in ageanddeveloping dark reddish-brown tones when dried. Flesh thin, pallid
or yellow or tinged cap color; odor mild to pungent or slightly fruity; taste mild or slightly
bitter. GILLS yellow to golden-yellow, tending to redden when dried; close, notched or
adnexed or at times adnate. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker
at either end, often flattened, smooth to fibrillose or scurfy (especially over the lower
portion), sometimes streaked in age; colored like cap or slightly darker, tending to turn
deep reddish-brown from the base upward as it dries. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
4.5-6.5 x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, apiculate, smooth, not amyloid but
many ofthem staining vinaceous in KOH (potassium hydroxide).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups or tufts on rotten wood (often buried!)
under conifers; widely distributed but not common. I have found it in our coastal pine
forests in the winter. It is said to occur on hardwoods also, particularly in the tropics.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This distinctive mushroom has the stature of a Collybiaandwas originally
placed in that genus. However, the oliveandyellow coloration plus the tendency to grow
on rotten wood (sometimes very decomposed!) distinguish it. C. graminicolor is a similar
but smaller (cap up to 2 cm broad) northwestern species with larger spores.
Strobilurus trullisatus
CAP 0.5-1.5 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, often striate or
wrinkled, minutely granular, white to pinkish-buff or brownish. Flesh very thin. GILLS
typically adnate to adnexed, close, white or tinged pinkish-buff. STALK 2-5 cm long,
1-1.5 mm thick, equal, dry, minutely granular; apex white, lower portion yellowish to
brownish or tawny; base with yellow to tawny-orange hairsandmycelial threads. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 1.5-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In colonies (usually 4-10) on old Douglas-fir cones or rarely cones of other
conifers; common throughout the range of Douglas-fir. In our area it usually fruits after
the first fall rains.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares?
COMMENTS Also known as S. kemptonaeandCol/ybia trul/isata, this little mushroom
is one of several species that grow only on rotting cones. (Some wood-inhabiting mush-
rooms, such as Mycena purpureofusca, may grow on cones but are not restricted to them.)
Other Strobilurus species include: S. conigenoides, a whitish species that grows only on
the fallen seed pods (""cones") of magnolias in eastern North America; S. occidenta/is,
which occurs on the cones of Sitka spruce; S. albipilatus (=Collybia albipilata), with a
pinkish-buff to brown or dark brown cap, common in the Sierra Nevadaandother western
mountains on pine conesandother coniferous debris;andS. lignitilis, which tends grow
on buried decaying woodandhas a grayish-brown cap. Finally, there is Baeospora
myosura (=Collybia conigenaj, which is slightly larger than S. trullisatusandhas asmooth,
buff or tan to pinkish-brown cap, very crowded gills, a coarsely hairy stem base, and
amyloid spores. It grows on the cones of various conifers but favors Douglas-fir, at least
in California.
Collybia tuberosa
CAP 3-10 mm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth, dry, whitish
to buff, sometimes with a darker (yellowish to brownish or pinkish-buff) center. Flesh very
thin, white. GILLS white or rarely tinged pinkish, adnate to adnexed, close or crowded.
STALK 1-3 cm long, up to I mm thick, equal, dry, minutely downy, white or tinged brown,
often arising from a small orange-brown to reddish-brown to blackish, appleseed-like
body or ""tuber" (sclerotium). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 2-3 microns, elliptical,
smooth,. not amyloid.
HABITAT In colonies on the blackened remains of old mushrooms, particularly larger
RussulaandLactarius species (e.g., R. albonigra), occasionally in humus; widely distri-
buted. I have found it only once in our area, in December, but the very similar C. cookei
and C. cirrhata (see comments) are fairly common.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inconsequential.
COMMENTS This dainty little Collybia is one of four widespread species that colonize
decayed mushrooms. The host may be so deteriorated, however, that it is not recognizable
as a mushroom. The other three species are: C. cookei, practically identical but with
rounder, more prominent, tan to yellow or yellow-orange sclerotia (and occasionally
found on rotten wood or in humus); C. cirrhata, also very similar but with white mycelial
threads instead of sclerotia, found in humus as well as on old mushrooms(and particularly
common in the Sierra Nevada);andC. racemosa, which has stubby lateral branches on the
stem (see description). All of these are placed in Microcollybia by some taxonomists.
Collybia racemosa (Branched Collybia)
CAP 3-10 mm broad, bluntly conical to convex becoming umbonate to nearly plane;
surface smooth, not viscid, dark gray to gray or brownish-gray, the margin often paler.
Flesh very thin. GILLS typically adnexed, close, gray or brownish-gray. STALK 3-8 cm
long, 0.5-3 mm thick, with numerous short lateral side-branches, especially over the lower
half or two-thirds; gray to brownish-gray, often entirely buriedandsometimes originating
from a small blackish bead like body (sclerotium). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-5.5 x
2-3 microns, oblong to elliptical, smooth, not amyloid. Asexual spores (conidia) often
produced on the swollen tips of the side-branches.
HABITAT In small groups or colonies on old decayed or blackened mushrooms (e.g.,
Russula albonigra) or occasionally in coniferous duff; widely distributed but seldom
encountered, perhaps because it is so easily overlooked. I have found it only once in our
area, in December, but it is said to be fairly common in the Sierra Nevada.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too punyandrare to be of value.
COMMENTS This curious Collybia is the only one with side-branches on the stem (see
photo on p. 212). The stalk may meander somewhat through its substrate, branching
along the way,andthe sclerotium from which it originates is not always evident. Stems
without caps are sometimes found, implying that the formation of asexual spores on the
side-branches can be enough to "satisfy" the mycelium's reproductive urges.
Collybia confluens (Tufted Collybia)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate, the margin sometimes uplifted
or wavy in age but incurved at first; surface smooth, hygrophanous: reddish-brown to
pinkish-cinnamon or flesh-colored when moist ( often darker at centerandpallid at mar-
gin), fading to pinkish-buff, grayish-pink, or whitish as it dries. Flesh thin, white. GILLS
crowded, narrow, adnate soon becoming adnexed or even free, whitish to flesh-colored.
STALK 3-10 cmlong,2-5 mm thick, equal, hollow, pliant, sometimes flattened or grooved,
tough, usually darker than cap (reddish-brown), but covered with a minute white pubes-
cence (downy hairs); base often with white mycelial mat attached. SPORE_PRINT white
or tinged yellow; spores 7-9x 34 microns, narrowly elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Gregarious, often in tufts or clusters, on ground in woods; widely distributed.
In the Pacific Northwest it is quite common under conifers, but in eastern North America it
favors hardwoods. I have not seen it in our area, but similar species (see comments) occur.
EDIBILITY Edible with caution; it is toughandsimilar species have not been tested.
COMMENTS The fine white pubescence on the stalk (use hand lens!)andcrowded gills
help to separate this species from C. dryophilaandC. butyracea. It shrivels up in dry
weatherandrevives somewhat when moistened,andas a result was originally placed in
Marasmius. A similar, unidentified species whose gills are adnate to adnexedandnot so
crowdedandwhose stalk lacks the litter-binding mycelial mat is quite common in our area
in the fallandwinter; it sometimes rivals C. dryophila for abundance but appears later in
the season and, like C. confluens. it has a minutely downy stem. Another local, downy-
stemmed species appears to be undescribed. It resembles the C.fuscopurpurea group, but
has whitish gillsanda pallid to brownish-tan cap. It differs from C. confluens in having
attached gills which are fairly well-spaced,andit usually grows in tufts or clusters on
decaying wood, wood chips, or in lignin-rich humus. A third species, C. polyphylla, has a
garlicky to slightly unpleasant odorandtaste, while a fourth, C. peronata(=Marasmius
urens) has an acrid (burning) taste. The latter two species are widely distributed but do
not seem to occur in California.
Col/ybia fuscopurpurea group
CAP 1-4 cm broad or slightly larger, convex becoming plane, slightly depressed, or with
the margin uplifted in age; surface dark reddish-brown to brown, purple-brown, or
chocolate-brown when fresh, usually paler (near tan) when dry, usually radially wrinkled
or finely striate. Flesh whitish or colored like cap, thin, reviving somewhat when moistened;
odor mild. GILLS attached (usually notched or adnexed), fairly ell-spaced, pallid or pale
pinkish-tan becoming more or less cap color, then dusted whitish by spores. STALK
2-10 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, equal or tapered downward, dry, rather toughandpliant,
brown with the apex usually paler; clothed with minute grayish to brownish hairs (unless
very wet) throughout or over the lower two-thirds; often curved near the litter-binding
base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-8 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Densely gregarious (often in clusters) among leaf litter, humus,andwoody
debris in woods, under trees (especially oak), or in wood chips or landscaped areas; widely
distributed. Common year-round in our area but particularly abundant in the early fall.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Marasmius Juscopurpureus, this common species
"complex" often forms dense swarms in leaf litterandwoody debris, especially where the
ground has been recently disturbed. Like most "LBM's," it blends in well with its sur-
roundings. It can be recognized by the reddish-brown to dar k brown fruiting body, convex
to plane cap (never bell-shaped as in Mycena!), white spores, pubescent (finely hairy)
stem,andgregarious disposition. However, separating the numerous species within the
"complex" is a job for specialists. One such specialist, Dennis Desjardin, says that
several of California's representatives in this "complex" (including the most common
one) appear to be undescribed. There are a number of other difficult-to-identify Collybia
and Marasmius species with a pubescent stalkandlitter-binding mycelium. Several of
these (e.g., M. cohaerens) are described in the key to MarasmiusandCollybia; others
are discussed under C. confluens.
C ollybia acervata
(Clustered Collybia)
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, convex with an incurved margin, becoming broadly convex in age;
surface smooth, hygrophanous, not viscid; dark reddish-brown when freshandmoist,
fading to pale reddish-brown, pinkish-buff, or paler (sometimes with darkerandlighter
zones) as it dries. Flesh thin, pallid. GILLS close or crowded, narrow, typically adnexed or
notched or free, white to dingy pinkish or vinaceous-buff. STALK 4-12 cm long, 2-6 mm
thick, more or less equal, dry, hollow, pliant but brittle, smooth above, with fine whitish
hairs over lower half or at base; reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown or sometimes paler in
age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT In compact bundles or clusters on rotting conifers (but often appearing
terrestrial); widely distributed. It is common in the summerandfall in the Sierra Nevada
and Rocky Mountainsandin the Pacific Northwest, but apparently absent in coastal
California south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Inedible. It is said to have a bitter taste when cookedandis apparently
slightly poisonous to some people.
COMMENTS The bundled growth habit (see color plate!), white spores,andreddish-
brown stem make this an easy mushroom to recognize. It always grows on wood, but may
appear terrestrial if its host is buried or in a very advanced stage of decay. The cap varies
in color according to the amount of moisture present, but is never translucent-striate as
in Mycena. Other species: C. marasmioides (=c. erythropus, C. bresadolae) tends to grow
in tufts or clusters on the ground, but has a pale tan to creamy-buff capandbeautiful
dark red (paler at apex) stem. A mushroom meeting this description occurs in our area
but is rare. Clitocybula (=Collybia)familia has the aspect of C. acervata (densely clustered
growth habit on rotting conifers-see photo on p. 898), but it has a watery white to smoky-
gray to somewhat brownish or tan (never reddish-brown) cap, white to grayish stem,
and round, amyloid spores. It is edibleandwidely distributed, but in California it
seems to be restricted to the Sierra Nevada. Clitocybula (=Collybia) abundans resembles
C./amilia. but has a smaller fibrillose capandelliptical, amyloid spores.
Collybia dryophila (Common Collybia; Oak-Loving Collybia)
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, broadly convex with an incurved margin, becoming plane or with
with an uplifted, often wavy margin in age, sometimes also slightly umbonate; surface
smooth, hygrophanous: chestnut-brown to reddish-brown, yellow-brown, tawny, or
ochre when youngandmoist, but fading to tan, pinkish-tan, yellowish-tan, or buff as it
dries. Flesh thin, white. GILLS crowded, usually notched oradnexed, white to pale yellow.
STALK 2-8 cm long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or with a swollen base, slender, smooth, hollow,
rather toughandcartilaginous; pale cream or colored like cap (but often paler); white
mycelium often visible at base or in surrounding humus. SPORE_PRINT white or pale
cream; spores 5-7 x 2-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, neither amyloid nor dextrinoid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small tufts in woods or near trees, often forming
arcs or rings; widely distributed. It is abundant in our area shortly after the first fall rains,
but is less common thereafter. As its name implies (dryophila=oak-Ioving), it is fond of
oak, but is also common under pineandother conifers, as well as around the edges of old
sawdust piles. At higher elevations it often fruits in the spring as well as in the summer
and fall.
EDIBILITY Edible, but some people are apparently sensitive to it. Only the caps are
tender enough to eat. It is a proficient concentrator of mercury, but occasional con-
sumption should pose no threat as mercury is a cumulative poison.
COMMENTS The appearance of this species in large fairy rings under oaks is a sure sign
that the coastal California mushroom season is under way. The hygrophanous reddish-
brown to tawny, rusty, or tan cap, more or less adnexed gills, growth on the ground, and
smooth (hairless) stalk distinguish it from all but C. butyracea, which has a greasier
(buttery) cap, buff-colored spores,andragged gill edges. Both species are reminiscent of the
fairy ring mushroom (M arasmius oreades), but grow under treesandhave crowded gills;
neither grows in the tight bundles characteristic of C. acervata,andneither hasdowny hairs
on the stem like C. confluens. In some regions C. dryophila is frequently covered by lumps
or masses of somewhat jelly-or tumorlike tissue, caused by the fungus Christiansenia
mycetophila. However, I have not observed this phenomenon in California. The yellow-
gilled form of C. dryophila is sometimes listed as a separate species, C. subsulphurea.
Collybia butyracea (Buttery Collybia)
CAP 3-8 (12) em broad, convex becoming plane or uplifted, often with a broad umbo;
surface smooth, greasy or slippery when moist but not truly viscid; dark reddish-brown to
chesnut-brown to dull brown (or grayish-brown in one form), fading as it dries or ages to
tan, grayish-tan, reddish-tan, or ochre-buff; margin at first incurved. Flesh thin, soft,
whitish or watery. GILLS close or crowded, free or adnexed, white, the edges usually
uneven, eroded, or finely scalloped at ma\urity. STALK 2-10 cm long, 4-10 mm thick,
equal or more often thicker below and/or pmched at the base; often longitudinally striate
or twisted; rather toughandcartilaginous, hollow at least in age, smooth; colored like cap
in age but often buff when young; base usually with white mycelial down. SPORE_PRINT
creamy to yellowish, buff, or pinkish-buff; spores 6-8 x 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth,
many of them dextrinoid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or tufted in humus under conifers (especially pine)
or occasionally hardwoods; widely distributed. It is sometimes common in our coastal
pine forests in the late fall, winter,andearly spring.
EDIBILITY Edible; about like C. dryophila. Care must be taken to identify it correctly!
COMMENTS Also known as Rhodocollybia butyracea, this handsomeandwidespread
species is often confused with C. dryophila. However, its cap is apt to be greasier when
moist, the gills are more apt to be finely scalloped or eroded,andthe spores are slightly
more colored in depositandat least somewhat dextrinoid. A grayish-brown version of the
species Uorm asema) also occurs in North America, especially on the west coast. Other
species: C. badiialbaandC. distorta are two closely related species with round or nearly
round spores, a reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown cap,andwhite gills that mayor may
not develop reddish stains in age. Both favor conifersandgrow in humus or on rotten
wood. The former occurs in coastal Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest while the latter
is more common in eastern North America. Another species with a vinaceous-brown cap,
e. extubeTans, has elliptical sporesandis widely distributed.
Collybia maculata (Spotted Collybia)
CAP (2.5) 4-12 cm broad, convex with an incurved margin at first, becoming broadly
umbonate to plane or undulating; surface dry or lubricous but not truly viscid, smooth,
typically white to buff, pale tan, or pinkish-tinged, often darker or redder in age, especially
at the centerandoften developing rusty or reddish spotsandstains. Flesh thick, white; odor
mild or somewhat fragrant; taste usually bitter (but mild in var. occidentalis). GILLS
white to pale pinkish-buff, often developing rusty or reddish stains (like the cap) in age;
adnate to adnexed or notched to nearly free, crowded. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.5-2 (3) cm
thick, often tapered below to form a more or less rooting base; solid (at least when young),
firm, smooth or fibrillose, often striate or groovedandeasily splitting longitudinally;
white to pale buff, usually developing rusty or reddish stains below. SPORE_PRINT
creamy to pale peach or pinkish-buff; spores 5-11 x 4-6 microns, round or nearly round
in the typical variety, elliptical in var. occidental is; smooth, at least a few dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts on decaying wood or lignin-rich
humus under conifers; widely distributed. I have not seen it in our area, but it is quite
common in the Pacific NorthwestandSierra Nevada in the late spring, summer,andfall.
EDIBILITY Inedible because of the frequently bitter taste.
COMMENTS Also known as R hodocol/ybia maculata, this rather large species is closely
related to C. oregonensisandhas the same stature, but typically has a paler capandmild
odor. The pinkish to rusty-reddish spotsandstainsandtendency to grow on rotten wood
are good field marks. It could conceivably be mistaken for a Tricholoma, but the stalk is
longer than in most Tricholomasandit splits more easily. It is a variable species,anda
number of varieties have been designated based on differences in color, taste,andspore
shape. The above description embraces several such varieties. Others include: var.
SCOTzoneTea, a large version with yellowish gillsanda frequently yellowish-tinged stalk
and/or cap;andtwo small varieties from the Pacific Northwest with a vinaceous-brown
to blackish cap.
Collybia oregonensis (Fragrant Collybia)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, broadly convex to plane; surface smooth, slightly viscid when moist
but soon dry; deep chestnut-brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown at the center,
often paler or pinker or redder toward the margin,andgradually fading overall in age.
Flesh thin, white or reddish-stained; odor heavyandsweet (like benzaldehyde), taste
somewhat bitter. GILLS crowded, creamy or pale yellow to buff, often reddish-stained in
age; adnexed, notched, or seceding; edges sometimes overlapping each otheranderoded in
age. STALK 6-20 (30) cm long, (0.5) 0.-2 cm thick, usually quite longanddeeply rooted;
equal above or swollen slightly near ground level, tapered gradually below to a point; dry,
whitish, but usually developing reddish to reddish-brown stains especially over the lower
portion; solid or hollow in age. SPORE_PRINT whitish to buff; spores 6-8 x 3.5-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth, at least some of them dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups around old stumpsandin lignin-rich humus;
apparently endemic to the Pacific Coast, not common. I've seen it in the Sierra Nevada,
and in one local spot (in mixed woods) where it fruits every year, usually in the fall.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Despite its sweet odor it has a somewhat bitter taste.
COMMENTS The strong, heavy benzaldehyde or almond extract odorandvinaceous-
brown cap are distinctive. The fragrance is reminiscent of Russulafragrantissima, but
without the fetid component of that species. The stalk often roots deeply but does not form
a true pseudorhiza ("tap root") as in Caulorhiza umbonata. The gills are not waxyasinthe
almond-smelling Hygrophorus species (e.g., H. bakerensis)andthe odor is usually thicker
and more pronounced. C. subsulcatipes, known only from Washington, has a similar but
weaker odor, a brown to dark vinaceous-brown stalk with a "tap root," a brown to vina-
ceo us-buff cap,anddull vinaceous gills in age. Both of these species are placed in a separate
genus, Rhodocollybia, by some collybiologists.
Caulorhiza umbonata (Redwood Rooter)
CAP 3-15 cm broad, at first conical or umbonate, then expanding but usually retaining
the umbo; surface smooth, dry, chestnut-brown to warm tan or yellow-brown; margin at
first incurved. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild. GILLS notched or adnexed to nearly free,
close, broad, white to yellowish or tinged cap color. STALK 6-50 cm long or more, 0.4-1.5
(2) cm thick, most of it underground in the form of a long, tapered "tap root"; smooth,
twisted-striate, buff to tan or colored like cap but paler; rather toughandcartilaginous.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups near or under redwood (rarely elsewhere);
restricted to the range of coastal redwood (Sequoia sempervirens). It is very common in
our area in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Like myself, not firmly established. However, if it were poisonous we would
probably know by now. I've sampled small quantities without ill effects.
COMMENTS Anchored by its long "tap root:' this distinctive species, like a dandelion,
resists being uprooted. The "tap root," pallid gills, umbonate cap,andwhite spore print,
plus the association with redwood distinguish it. The "tap root" is brittle, however, and
will break offandstay behind in the ground unless it is dug up very carefully. Collybia
umbonata is a synonym. Collybia subsulcatipes (see comments under C. oregonensis) is
somewhat similar but has a sweet odor. Caulorhiza hygrophoroides is a closely related
hardwood-lover with a smaller (up to 5 cm) cap. None of these have the grayish-brown
colorsandexceptionally broad gills of Oudemansiella radicataandits relatives.
Oudemansiella radicata (Beech Rooter)
CAP 2.5-12 cm broad, bell-shaped becoming broadly convex to plane or with a broad
umbo, the margin sometimes uplifted in old age; surface smooth or radially wrinkled, often
viscid or tacky when moist, usually dark brown to grayish-brown, but in some variants
grayishandin others whitish, blackish, or olive-to yellowish-brown; margin at first in-
curved. Flesh thin, whitish; taste mild. GILLS broad, fairly well-spaced, thickish, usually
adnexed or notched; white. STALK 5-25 cm long, 0.3-1 (1.5)cm thick, usually thickest at
or near ground level, with a tapered underground portion or "tap root"; whitish at apex
or in upper portion, colored more or less like the cap below, dry, rather stiffandbrittle,
longitudinally lined or twisted-striate; smooth or in one form scurfy. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 12-18 x 9-12 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on or near hardwood stumpsandroots
(often appearing terrestrial) in woods, grassy clearings, etc.; fairly common in eastern
North America, spring through fall (especially on beech), apparently absent in the West.
EDIBILITY Edible but not choice-or so I am told. Only the caps are worth eating.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Col/ybia radicata, this common eastern mushroom
can be told by its broad white, well-separated gills (see photo on p. 218)androoting stalk.
The latter snaps easily, however, so that if it is not dug up carefully the telltale "tap root"
will remain behind in the ground. The color of the cap is quite variable, but is usually in
the dark brown to grayish-brown range. The viscidity of the cap is not always evident.
Tricholomopsis platyphylla is somewhat similar but does not normally have a "tap root,"
while Melanoleuca species are terrestrialandhave narrower, crowded gills. Other species:
O. longipes is a similarly colored but slightly smaller species with a dry capandmuch
smaller spores; it occurs in the Rocky Mountains on hardwoods such as aspen.
Flammulina velutipes (Velvet Foot; Velvet Stern) Color Plate 26
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface smooth, slimy or
viscid when moist, reddish-brown to yellow-brown, yellow-orange, orange-brown, or
tawny, the margin often paler (yellower); fading in dry weather; margin at first incurved.
Flesh thin, white or yellowish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, white to pale yellow,
close. STALK 2-11 cm long, 3-5 (12) mm thick, equal or thicker below, slender, tough, of-
ten curved, sometimes slightly off-center; smoothandpallid to yellowish to orange-brown
when young, but developing a rusty-brown to blackish-brown velvety pubescence (tiny
hairs) from the base upward as it matures. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6.5-9 x 3-5
microns, elliptical to pip-shaped, smooth, not amyloid. Gills with cystidia.
HABITAT In tufts or clusters on or near stumps, logs,androots of hardwoods (but some-
times appearing terrestrial); very widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area from
fall through spring on poplarandwillow,andin coastal sand dunes on bush lupine. In the
Rocky Mountains it is abundant in the late summer on aspen; in eastern North America it
fruits from the late fall through early spring on elmandother hardwoods.
EDIBILITY Edible, but the sticky skin should be removed before cooking. In colder
regions it is an important edibleandis called the 'winter mushroom" because it fruits very
late in the season (even during winter thaws) when other fungi are not available. In our
balmy climate, however, its season coincides with that of other, more flavorful mushrooms,
so it is not often gathered. A cultivated form of it called the "snow-puff mushroom" or
enokitake can be bought in many markets. It looks something like a pure white bean sprout
with its long, smooth (not velvety!) stemandnegligible cap.
COMMENTS The smooth, sticky, yellow-orange to brownish capandstalk which is dark
brownandvelvety (at least below) at maturity plus the white spores, absence of a veil,
and clustered growth habit on dead hardwoods typify this hardy mushroom. It was origi-
nally placed in Collybia, but is now given a genus of its own due to its viscid capandthe
prominent sterile cells (cystidia) on the gills. In arid climates, however, the cap may appear
dry rather than viscid. The fruiting bodies can apparently survive freezing,andafter
thawing out will continue to produce spores!
X eromphalina cauticinalis
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, convex becoming plane or with a small central depression; surface
smooth, not viscid, reddish-brown to tawny or ochraceous-tawny, fading to yellowish.
Flesh very thin, pliant; taste mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, yellow, with veins between.
STALK 2-8 cm long, 1-2.5 mm thick, equal or more often with a small bulb at the base;
pJiant, tough, tawny or yellowish above, dark brown below; base with tawny mycelium.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5.5-7x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on conifer needlesanddebris; common in
western North America. In our area it appears (along with X. fulvipes-see comments) in
the late fallandwinter under redwoodandother conifers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several terrestrialXeromphalinas. The decurrent yellow gills
distinguish it from Mycena,andthe stalk is much tougher than in Hygrocybe. Other
species: X.fulvipes is similar but has a bitter taste, adnate gills,andminute orange hairs on
the stem. I have found it under redwood several times, but it is not as common as X.
cauticinalis; X. picta is a minute terrestrial species with a greatly swollen stalk apex.
Xeromphalina campanella
CAP 0.3-2.5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex with a depressed center; surface
smooth, not viscid, yellow-brown to tawny to orange-brown or cinnamon-brown; margin
striate when moist. Flesh thin, pliant, yellowish. GILLS yellowish to dull orange, fairly
well-spaced, decurrent with veins in between. STALK 1-5 cm long, 0.5-3 mm thick, equal
or enlarged at base, pliant, tough, smooth, horny, often polished; yellowish above, brown
to reddish-brown below; usually curved; base with bright tawny hairs. SPORE_PRINT
white to pale buff; spores 5-8 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT In groups or dense clusters on rotting conifers; widely distributed. It is
common throughout the West, fruiting in our area in the fall, winter,andearly spring.
EDIBILITY A miniscule morsel that is hardly worth eating.
COMMENTS The yellow to orange, decurrent gills plus the thin polished stemandsmall
size typify this dainty mushroom. Its occurrence on conifers is so dependable that its pre-
sence can be taken as "proof' that its host is some type of conifer. It might be mistaken
for a Mycena. but the shape of the mature cap is quite different. Galerina autumnalis
is also somewhat similar, but has a veilandbrown spores. The cluster pictured in the color
plate is darker (browner) than normal, but shows the shapeandgrowth habit quite well.
Other species: X. kauffman;; is very similar but occurs with hardwoods in eastern North
America;X. oT;ck;ana has a dark reddish-brown cap, grayish to brownish gills,andgrows
grows on red wood.
Omphalina ericetorum (Lichen Agaric)
CAP 0.5-2.5 (3.5) cm broad, at first plane with an incurved margin, becoming deeply
depressed or funnel-shaped in age; surface smooth, not viscid, d ullcinnamon to brownish,
fading to yellowish or stra w color or paler as it ages; margin striate, often wavy. Flesh very
thin, pliant. GILLS decurrent, well-spaced, sometimes veined, pale yellowish. STALK
1-3 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal or enlarged at base, often curved, smooth, pliant, pale
reddish-brown above, yellow-brown to pale brown below; often pale yellowish in age.
SPORE_PRINT white to yellow; spores 7-9 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Usually in groups on old lichen-laden conifer logs or scum-covered soil,
always associated with the lichen Botrydina vulgaris; widely distributed in the cool tem-
perate zone, but rare in our area. It is one of the commonest mushrooms of the Arctic.
EDIBILITY Much too puny to be of value.
COMMENTS The small size, depressed cap, thin stem, decurrent gills,anddistinctive
habitat are the principal fieldmarks. The gills may appear somewhat waxy as in Hygrocybe
and Camarophyllus. but the latter don't normally grow with lichens. O. umbellifeTa is a
synonym. There are several similar species, including: O. hudson;ana, similarly colored
but associated with the lichen C oriscium viride; O. post;;, with a pinkish-red to orange cap,
found in moss; O. pyx;data(see photo below), fairly common in our area in grassy or open
places, with pinkish-or vinaceous-tinged gills that fade to yellowish or creamy in age; and
O. luteicoloT (COLOR PLATE 24), a beautiful waxy-gilled orange to salmon-colored
species that fades with ageandis common in the Pacific Northwest, northern California,
and the Sierra Nevada on rotting conifers, usually in groups or clusters.
Mycena capillaris (Miniscule Mycena)
CAP 2-6 (8) mm broad, bluntly conical or bell-shaped to convex, sometimes plane in age;
surface smooth, gray, soonfadingto white, translucent-striate when moist. Flesh very thin,
odor mild. GILLS adnate to nearly free, well-spaced, grayish then white. STALK 3-7 cm
long, about 1 mm thick, threadlike, equal, very fragile, smooth, dark gray when young
becoming whitish in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical,
smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small grou ps on fallen oak (and beech) leaves; widely distributed.
Fairly common in our area in wet weather, but difficult to distinguish from similar species.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inconsequential.
COMMENTS The mycelium of this miniscule whitish Mycena is usually confined to a
single leaf, so that you can pick up the leafandcarry it home, mushroomandmycelium
intact. There are multitudes of other minute white to grayish or brownish Mycenas. They
are especially abundant after long periods of wet weather, but are extremely difficult to
separate (Iet alone see!) without a microscope. Their ranks include: M. tenerrima andM.
osmundicola, even smaller, with well-spaced, nearly free gills, growing on bark, twigs, and
wood y debris ( the former with a very short, usually curved stem);M. delicatella, with close
gills, gregarious on needlesandtwigs under conifers; M. albidula, with well-spaced,
decurrent gillsanda convex cap, on leavesandbark of hardwoods; M. stylobates, with a
flat circular disc at base of stalk; M. paucilamellata, cap only 1-2 mm broadandgills very
fewandfoldlike to practically absent; M. ignobilis, growing in mud;andM. juncicola,
vinaceous-tinged, growing on the culms (stems) of sedges. These Mycenas are among the
tiniest of all gilled mushrooms. M arasmius species can also be very tiny but tend to have a
convex to plane capanddark, wiry or hairlike stem. See also the M. clavularis group.
Mycena clavularis group
(Bark Mycena)
CAP 4-7 mm broad, rounded to convex or somewhat bell-shaped; surface smooth, striate
and often grooved or fluted toward margin; white or translucent, the centerandstriations
frequently grayish or grayish-brown. Flesh very thin, pallid. GILLS fewandwidely
spaced, white or tinged gray, attached to the stalk or separating to form a collar around
it. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-2 mm thick, equal except for a small basal bulb or disc;
white or translucent, smooth, fragile; base often with long white hairs, inserted in bark.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-10.5 microns, round or nearly round to broadly ellip-
tical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on mossy bark oftrees(both livinganddead); widely
distributed but not often noticed. In our area it is common in wet weather, especially on the
lower trunks of living oakandmadrone trees.
EDIBILITY Academic-a tremendous number would be needed for a meal!
COMMENTS The above description will apply to a number of small Mycenas that
typically grow in groups or troops (but not clusters) on the bark oftrees( see photograph on
p. 229). Whether the common form in our area is the "true" M. clavularis or a very similar
species is for the Mycena-experts (of which there are few) to decide. There are several
species with a similar growth habit, including: M. tenerrima, a minute (cap up to 4 mm
broad) whitish species; M. madronicola, a brownish to vinaceous-buff or grayish species
with adnate to slightly decurrent gills;andM. corticola, which has a dark purplish to
vinaceous-brown cap that finally fades to pale grayish-brown,andgrows abundantly on
the bark of both hardwoodsandconifers in eastern North America, often by the hundreds.
Mycena acicula
CAP 3-7 (10) mm broad, convex or bell-shaped, but sometimes expanding in age; surface
not viscid, coral-red when young, soon fading( often from margin inward) to bright orange-
yellow or yellow. Flesh very thin, yellow, odor mild. GILLS attached ( usuallyadnate), pale
orange to yellow or whitish. STALK 1-7 cm long, less than I mm thick, threadlike, equal,
brittle, orange-yellow to yellow, smooth except for hairy base. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 9-11 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elongated-elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, orin small groups on leavesanddebris in woods,especially
along streamsandin other wet places; widely distributed. Common throughout the
mushroom season in our area, but easily overlooked. I have seen it in large numbers in a
thicket of oak saplingsandblackberries along a stream.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but a great many would be needed for a mouthful!
COMMENTS This minute Mycena is a delight to behold, its coral-red to yellow cap
contrasting vividly with the dim backdrop of decaying leavesandhumus. One usually has
to get down on handsandknees to find it! M. oregonensis is a similar miniature species
whose cap is yellow to yellow-orange from infancy; it grows on needle carpets as well as oak
leaves. For larger brightly colored Mycenas, see M. strobilinoides.
Mycena strobilinoides (Flame Mycena)
CAP 1-2 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped; surface smooth, not viscid, striate when moist;
red, soon fading to scarlet, then slowly to orangeandfinally yellow or even whitish; margin
often scalloped. Flesh thin, yellowish; odor mild. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, well-
spaced, yellow to pale pinkish-orange, the edges scarlet (at least when young). STALK
3-6 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, thin, fragile, orange to yellow; base with orange hairs.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in needle beds underconifers( especially pine);
widely distributed, but most abundant in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest and
northern California. It fruits in mild, moist weather. I have not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This little mushroom is likely to attract attention because of its beautiful
color. The scarlet to yellow capandstalk, scarlet-edged gills,andorange hairs at the stem
base make a most distinctive combination of characters such that even beginners should
have no trouble identifying it. It is one of the more prominent Mycenas in the Pacific
Northwest, sometimes forming colorful "carpets" so thick that it is difficult to examine
them closely without stepping on some. M. aurantiomarginata is a closely related species
with an olive-brown to orange-tinted cap, brilliant orange gill edges,andyellow-orange
hairs at the stalk base. It is commoner at lower elevations in the Pacific NorthwestandI
find it fairly frequently in our area as well. Brilliantly colored Mycenas without differently
colored gills edges include: M. montico/a, cap coral-red to pink, stalk coral-pink when
fresh; M. amabi/issima, cap bright pinkish-red fading to whitishandstalk soon fading to
whitish;andM. adonis, with a smaller (5-12 mm broad), scarlet cap that becomes orange
or yellow-orangeandthen fades to orange-buff, plus a pale yellow to whitish stalk. All
three of these occur mainly on needle carpets under conifers. M. /uteopa//ens, on the other
hand, grows on old walnutsandhickory nuts in eastern North America. It is bright orange
to yellow before fading. All ofthe above have stalks which are typically at least 1 mmthick.
For minute, brightly colored species with thinner or threadlike stalks, see M. acicu/a.
Mycena capillaripes
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, oval becoming bell-shaped or conical, often with a blunt umbo,
sometimes nearly plane in age; surface smooth, not viscid, usually some shade of vina-
reous-gray or gray, the center often browner; translucent-striate when moist, usually
wrinkled or furrowed when dry. Flesh thin; odor typically nitrous or bleachlike( especially
when crushed), but sometimes radishlike. GILLS attached (usually adnate), well-spaced,
typically pallid or vinaceous-gray, at least the longer ones with pale pink or rosy edges ( use
hand lens!). STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at either end,
hollow, smooth, fragile, colored more or less like cap or paler above, sometimes slightly
yellower in age; base with coarse white hairs. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-12 x 4
microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on conifer duff (but occasionally also under
hardwoods); widely distributed. In our area it often occurs in droves under Monterey pine
in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Inconsequential.
COMMENTS This is one of several Mycenas that carpet our pine forests with a miniature
"fungal jungle" of petite parasols. The faint reddish or vinaceous tints on the cap plus
the pink-margined gills are distinctive. M. rose/fa is a widely distributed pink to grayish-
rose species with pale to bright rosy gills that have darker (pale to dark reddish) edges. It
is uncommon in our area but often abundant under pineandother conifers farther north.
Other terrestrial species with colored gill margins include: M. citrinomarginata, with pale
yellow to yellow-brown gill edgesandspores 8-11 microns 10ng;M. o/ivaceobrunnea, with
smaller spores, a smaller cap,andyellowish gill edges; andM. e/egans, with pale greenish-
yellow gill edges. In these species the cap is typically some shade or mixture of olive-brown,
gray, and/or yellow.
Mycena purpureofusca
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad or occasionally larger, obtusely conical with a slightly incurved
margin, becoming broadly conical or bell-shaped or sometimes expanding to nearly plane
in old age; surface smooth, not viscid, dark purplish witha paler(lilac) margin when young,
fading to purplish-gray orvinaceous-Iavender; translucent-striate when moistandmature.
Flesh thin, pliant, odor mild. GILLS attached (usually adnate), fairly close, pallid to
grayish with dark grayish-purple edges. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, eq ual, hollow,
cartilaginous, colored more or less like cap or paler above; base with white hairsandSome-
times rooting. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-14 x 6-8.5 microns, broadly elliptical,
smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups or tufts on conifer woodanddebris; widely
distributedandfrequent in our area in the fallandwinter. I find it often on old pine cones.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike myself, likely to remain so.
COMMENTS The purplish conical cap, dark purplish gill edges,andgrowth on wood
or cones typify this species. The stalk does not exude a red latex like M. haematvpus. The
colorandstature are reminiscent of Marasmius plicatulus. which has a very tough, brittle
stalkandpallid gill edgesandgrows on the ground. Collybiafuscopurpurea has a similar
name but has a convex to plane capandis also terrestrial. Other species: Mycena elegantula
is closely related, but has a vinaceous-brown to pinkish capandpale pink to vinaceous gill
edges; it also grows on coniferous woodanddebris, including cones. M. rubromarginata
grows on spruceandfirandhas a browner capandreddish-brown gill edges.
Mycena pura
(Lilac Mycena)
CAP 2-5 (6.5) cm broad, obtusely umbonate orconvex becoming broadly convex or plane,
sometimes with an uplifted margin; surface smooth, hygrophanous, color variable: various
shades or mixtures ofIilac, pink, gray,andblue-gray, but varying also to blue-green with a
yellowish center, or sometimes even whitish tinged purple or blue at the center; translucent-
striate when moist, otherwise opaque. Flesh thin, soft; odorandtaste radishlike. GILLS
adnate or adnexed, usually tinged cap color (lilac, etc.), but sometimes grayish or white;
edges pallid. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-7 mm thick, equal or thicker below, hollow,
smooth, pallid or colored like the cap or paler. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-9 x 3-4
microns, elliptical to cylindrical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or small tufts on ground in woods, widely distributed.
Common in our area from fall through early spring, but rarely in large numbers. I find it
most often with oak, Douglas-fir,andpine.
EDIBILITY Edible according to some sources, but one study revealed traces ofthe toxin
muscarine. Definitely not recommended-it is too small to be of value anyway.
COMMENTS This is one of the larger Mycenas as well as one of the more beautiful. The
color is exceedingly variable, but there is usually a trace ofIilac somewhere on the fruiting
body, especially the stem. The convex rather than conical cap is atypical for a Mycena,
and for this reason it is keyed out under Collybia. The radishlike odor is another important
fieldmark. The gill edges are not purple or pink as in M. capillaripesandM. purpureofusca,
and it is strictly terrestrial. It never grows in huge clustersanddoes not normally fruit in
dense troops either. I have seen fairly robust specimens which could ha ve been mistaken for
blewits (Clitocybe nuda). lnocybe lilacina is similarly colored, but has brown spores.
M. pelianthinaandM. TutilantijoTmis are two very similar species with a radishlike odor.
They differ in having dark reddish to purple gill edges,andthe latter typically shows yellow
at the apex of the stalk. They are not as highly colored as M. puraandboth grow on the
ground under hardwoods. M. amicta is a western species whose capandstalk are blue to
blue-green or tinged those colors. It grows on coniferous debris, while M. subcaeTulea is
its eastern, deciduous-woodland counterpart.
Mycena haematopus
(Bleeding Mycena)
CAP 1-3.5 (5) cm broad, oval to bell-shaped when young, with the margin often extending
beyond the gills; in age sometimes convex or plane with an umboanduplifted margin;
surface smooth, not viscid, reddish to vinaceous-brown to reddish-brown or pinkish-
brown, margin often paler (vinaceous-gray); striate at maturity when moist; margin often
scalloped in age. Flesh thin, exuding a dark red juice when cut. GILLS attached (usually
adnate or adnexed), fairly close, pallid, often developing reddish stains; edges white or in
one form reddish. STALK 3-8 (14) cm long, 1-3 mm thick, equal, dull reddish or reddish-
brown, or sometimes pallid; smooth, fragile; base with coarse hairs, exuding a dark red
juice when cut or squeezed. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptical,
smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or more commonly tufted or in groups on decaying logsandstumps
(mostly hardwoods). Very widely distributedandcommon, fruiting in our area from fall
through spring.
EDIBILITY Edible according to some sources, but too small to be of value.
COMMENTS One of the most distinctiveandcommon Mycenas, this species resembles
several others in color, but if the base of the stalk is squeezed a dark red blood like fluid will
emerge. Its growth on wood separates it from other "bleeding" Mycenas(see M. sanguino-
lema). Also distinctive is the frequent presence of a sterile band of tissue around the cap
margin of young specimens. It is suggestive of a veil but breaks up in age or forms a
scalloped rim around the cap.
Mycena sanguinolenta (Terrestrial Bleeding Mycena)
CAP 0.3-1.5 (2.5) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or sometimes convex in age; surface
smooth, not viscid, color variable: some shade of pale reddish-brown to bright reddish-
brown to orange-brown, etc; margin often vinaceousandfurrowed at maturity. Flesh thin,
reddish, exuding a dark red juice when cut; odor mild. GILLS attached (typically adnate),
well-spaced, pallid or tinged flesh-color or reddish, edges dark reddish-brown. STALK 2-
7.5 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile, colored more or less like cap, smooth; base
with white hairsandexuding a dark red juice when broken or squeezed. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 8-11 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, weakly amyloid. Cystidia present on
gill facesandedges.
HABITAT Solitary or widely scattered to gregarious or tufted on leaf moldandneedles
in woods or at their edges; widely distributed. Common in our area in fallandwinter,
usually scattered under oak. In northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest it sometimes
fruits in large numbers under conifers, especially spruce.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike most of us, destined to remain so.
COMMENTS True to their names, this speciesandits close cousin, M. haematopus,
"bleed" when broken. As such they are the easiest Mycenas to recognizeandamong the
most common as well. M. sanguinolenta is easily distinguished from M. haematopus byits
growth on the ground, absence of a sterile band of marginal tissue on the cap,andsome-
what different color. The striate or furrowed cap is reminiscent of Marasmius plicalulus,
but that species has a tough, polished stemanddoes not "bleed." Other species: M. subsan-
guinolenta is closely related but has dark red to orange juice, is slightly yellower overall,
and lacks cystidia on the 'gill faces. It often fruits in large numbers under conifers in
northern California.
Mycena galopus (Milky Mycena)
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or umbonate, the margin sometimes curling
up in age; surface smooth, not viscid, at first grayish-black (at least at center), but soon
fading to gray or grayish-brown, then pale gray or even whitish; translucent-striate when
moist. Flesh thin, soft, odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, attached (usually adnate), white
to grayish. STALK 4-8 (12) cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, dark
grayish-brown to gray below, paler above; base with white hairs, exuding a droplet of milky
juice when squeezed. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth, not amyloid or sometimes weakly amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on groundandhumus in woods, widely distributed.
Common in our area during wet weather, especially under redwoodandpine, but tending
to fruit widely scattered over a large area rather than in dense troops or"carpets" like some
of our other pine-loving species (e.g., M. murina. M. capillaripes).
EDIBILITY Who knows?
COMMENTS This ubiquitous Mycena will be encountered by anyone who takes their
"LBM's" seriously. At first glance there is little to distinguish it from the myriad of other
anonymous brown or grayish Mycenas. However, if you break the very base ofthe stalk
and squeeze gently, a drop of milky or cloudy fluid will emerge. This is best observed in
the field, while the fruiting body is fresh. A similar species, M. atroalho;des, exudes liquid
that is clear rather than milky,andoften has reddish spots on the gills in old age. It is not
common in our area but is often abundant farther north under conifers.
Mycena scabripes (Rough-Stemmed Mycena)
CAP 1.5-3 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical becoming convex, umbonate, or plane; surface
not viscid, blackish-brown or dark brown at the center, olive-brown toward the margin,
but fading somewhat in age to olive-gray or gray; not distinctly striate. Flesh thin,
brownish-gray, odor mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free in age, pallid or tinged cap
color, sometimes spotted reddish-brown in age. STALK 3-9 cm long, 2-4 mm thick, equal,
hollow, grayish or colored like cap, with a thin but distinct coating of silky white to grayish
fibrilsandparticles. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth,
amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small tufts in humusanddebris in woods; widely
distributed but not common, or at least seldom noticed. I have found it in our area in the
fallandwinter under redwoodandoak.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares?
COMMENTS The distinguishing feature of this undistinguished Mycena is the presence
of silky white fibrilsandparticles on the stem. The olive-brown, more or less umbonate
cap is also distinctive.
Mycena subcana (Neutral Gray Mycena)
CAP 0.5-2.5 (3) cm broad, oval or obtusely conical to bell-shaped, becoming convex in
age; surface smooth or with a hoary sheen, grayish to pale gray, usually darker at the center,
sometimes fading to whitish; not viscid, translucent-striate nearly to center when moist.
Flesh thin, grayish, odor mild. GILLS attached (usually adnate), well-spaced, whitish to
pale gray. STALK 1.5 cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick, equal or enlarged at base, smooth, same
color as cap or paler, with downy white hairs at base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
8-10 x 5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups (not large clusters!) on dead sticksandbranches,
sometimes on living trees; fairly common on the west coast. In our area it fruits in the fall
and winter on conifers (especially redwood); I have also found it on tan oak.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares? I don't.
COMMENTS This grayish species is representative of a multitude of indifferent grayish,
wood-inhabiting "YAM's." The salient macroscopic features of M. subcana are its
color, its translucent-striate cap,andits preference for dead sticksandbranches
rather than stumps or logs (a completely different niche!). Unlike many of its kin, it does
not grow in clusters, but instead fruits alone or in attractive rows of solitary or sometimes
paired specimens. Typifying those that grow in clusters on stumps or logs isM. occiden-
talis, a grayish species found throughout the West on conifers. Also clustered on conifers
is M. laevigata, a whitish species with grayish-black to bluish-gray tints on capandstalk
when very youngandyellowish discolorations in age;andM. overholtsii, a large grayish
species found in clumps near melting snow in the spring. Another species,M. parabolica,
has a growth habit in between that of M. subcanaandM. occidentalis-it grows in groups
or small clusters on rotting woodandhas a sooty black cap that fades to gray in age.
Mycena alcalina (Alkaline Mycena)
CAP 14 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped or convex-umbonate, expanding somewhat in
age; surface smooth, dark brownish-black to grayish-black when very young, soon fading
to gray, grayish-brown, or yellow-brown; striate when moist. Flesh thin, fragile, odor
faintly to strongly alkaline (like bleach). GILLS rather close, adnate to slightly decurrent,
whitish to grayish, sometimes stained reddish-brown in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1.5-3
mm thick, equal, pallid to grayish or often sordid yellowish-brown in age; fragile, hollow.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT In groups or tufts on decaying conifer logs, or sometimes densely gregarious
on needles under conifers; commonandwidespread throughout North America. In some
regions it is most abundant in the spring, but in our area it fruits in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you?
COMMENTS The sharp, bleachlike odor is usually quite distinct in this species, and
helps distinguish it from the throngs of other grayish Mycenas that grow on wood. The
odor is best detected by crushing the cap. Another common species with an alkaline odor,
M. leptocephala, is terrestrial, growing on sticks, needles, or even in grass. It is only rarely
umbonate,andslightly smaller than M. a/calina. Other species: M. metata is terrestrial,
with a slightly browner capandfaint but sharp odor;M. iodiolens has an antiseptic odor.
For similar species without a distinctive odor, see M. subcanaandthe M. murina group.
Mycena murina group (Yet Another Mycena) Color Plate 48
CAP 0.7-3 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped, striate nearly to the center when moist; surface
smooth, not viscid, dark gray to gray when moist, paler (gray to whitish) when faded,
darker when young. Flesh thin, odor mild. GILLS grayish with pallid edges, attached,
fairly well-spaced. STALK 3-8 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal, fragile, smooth, pale to dark
gray with pallid apex; base with white hairs. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 5-7
microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious by the hundreds on needle duff under conifers,
widely distributed. This speciesandits look-alikes are often abundant in our coastal pine
forests in the late fallandearly winter. They also appear under hardwoods, in grass, even
in planter boxesandflower pots-i.e., wherever there is organic matter to nourish them.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you? Do you care if I do?
COMMENTS This species, which has passed under the nameM. stannea, is one of a slew
of nondescript, odorless, gray to brownish, terrestrial Mycenas that are very prevalent
under conifers. They are differentiated from each other largely on the basis of microscopic
characteristics such as the sizeandshape of sporesandsterile cells (cystidia). The one pic-
tured in the color photograph is not quite as gray as typical M. murinaandmay well be a
distinct species, but to the average mushroom hunter it is a "YAM" ("Yet Another My-
cena"),andthus hardly worth the timeandtrouble to distinguish. Other"Y AM's" include
M./atifo/;a,M.f;/opes,M. abrams;;,M.pseudotenax,M. atroa/bo;des, ad infinitum. For
those species with a sharp or bleachlike odor, see comments under M. alcalina,andfor
those with colored gill margins, see M. capillaripes.
Mycena maculata (Reddish-Spotted Mycena)
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped expanding to broadly convex or plane with a
broad umbo, the margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface smooth, blackish-brown soon
fading to brown or brownish-gray, but usually spotted with reddish-brownandsometimes
entirely watery gray; striate when moist. Flesh thin, firm, grayish, slowly bruising reddish-
brown. GILLS adnate to adnexed, whitish to pale gray, soon stained with reddish spots,
sometimes entirely sordid reddish in old age; edges pallid. STALK 4-8 (12) cm long, 2-5
mm thick, nearly equal, smooth, hollow, cartilaginous, pallid above, colored like cap or
paler below; base with dense white hairsandsoon stained reddish-brown, sometimes
rooting. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT In small tufts or large clusters on logsandstumps, especially of conifers; widely
distributed. It is common in our area in cool, wet weather on redwood, Douglas-fir, etc.,
occasionally also on hardwoods. "The most abundant Mycena on conifer wood in the
Pacific Northwest," says Alexander Smith, author of a monograph on the genus.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares? I don't. Do you? Do you care if I do? I won't if
you don't.
COMMENTS This rather unattractive species can be recognized by the sordid reddish
stains that develop in ageandits growth in clusters on rotten wood. The stalk sometimes
has a "tap root" as in M. galericulata. It doesn't "bleed" like M. haematopus,andthe gill
edges aren't purple as in M. purpureofusca. M. occidenralis(see comments under M. sub-
cana) is also common in clusters on conifers, but does not develop reddish stains. Another
reddish-staining species, M. rugu/os;ceps, has larger sporesandgrows on hardwoods
(alder, rhododendron, etc.) as well as on conifers. M. ;ncl;nata is a closely related species
that is especially common in eastern North America. I t often develops reddish or pinkish
tones as it ages but favors hardwoodsandhas fibrillose flecks on the lower half ofthe stalk.
See top of next page for a photograph of M. maculata.
Mycena galericulata
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, conical when young becoming broadly bell-shaped to umbonate
to plane or with an uplifted margin in age; surface moist but not viscid, often radially
wrinkled nearly to center; buffy-brown to grayish, dingy tan, cinnamon-brown, or grayish-
brown. Flesh watery gray; odor faintly to distinctly farinaceous or radishlike. GILLS
adnate to adnexed, often with cross-veins between, white to grayish or in age flushed pale
pinkish, but not spotted or stained. STALK 5-10 (14) cm long, 24 (6) mm thick, equal,
cartilaginous, hollow, smooth, often rooting; grayish-white or colored more or less like
cap, often darker below. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 5.5-7 microns, elliptical,
smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered, gregarious, or in small clusters on decaying hardwood
stumps, logs,andde bris; widely distributedandnot uncommon in our area in the fall and
winter. One form-possibly a distinct species-grows on manzanita burls.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended-it is one of the few Mycenas large enough
to eat, but many of its difficult-to-distinguish relatives have not been tested.
COMMENTS This widespread species can be mistaken for a Collybia because the cap
is convex to plane in age. The telltale traits are its pale color, frequently long, rooting stem,
and penchant for growing scattered or in small, loose clusters. The gills are often tinged
pinkish in age, but do not become reddish-spotted as in M. macula/a. Other species:
M. viti/is has a long stem that often has a rooting base that is covered with white hairs
below the ground. It grows in humus under hardwoods, especially alder.
Mycena lilacijolia
CAP 0.8-2.5 cm broad, convex to helmet-shaped, the center slightly depressed in age;
surface viscid to slimyandtranslucent-striate when moist, smooth, lilac when very young,
but soon bright to pale yellow. Flesh thin; odor mild. GILLS well-spaced, usually
decurrent, pale lilac becoming whitish to pale yellow or pinkish. STALK 14 cm long, 1-2
mm thick, equal or enlarged at the base, smooth, slimy-viscid when moist, same color as
gills but soon yellow; base often with lilac mycelium. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
6-7 x 3-3.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on rotting conifers, widely distributed.
It usually fruits in cool weatherandis fairly common in our coastal pine forests.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too slippery to be of value.
COMMENTS This species is best distinguished from other viscid Mycenas by its yellow
colorandgrowth on conifers. The gills will sometimes retain their lilac tint longer than
the capandstalk, but I have found specimens which showed absolutely no trace of their
original lilac color. It might be looked for in Omphalina because of the decurrent gills
(see photo on p. 237), but the slimy stemandcap distinguish it. Viscid, brightly colored
wood-inhabiting species with non-decurrent gills include: M. /eaiana, bright orange to
yellow, growing in clusters on hard woods in eastern North America,andcertain varieties
of M. epipterygia(see description on next page), which grow on conifers.
Mycena epipterygia (Yellow-Stemmed Mycena)
CAP 0.8-2 (2.5) cm broad, oval becoming umbonate, bell-shaped, or convex; surface
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, color variable: mostly yellow with olive or grayish
tones, sometimes fading in age. Flesh thin, yellowish; .odor mild or faintly fragrant.
GILLS attached, whitish or tinged yellow, fairly well-spaced. STALK 5-9 cm long,
1-2 mm thick, equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, yellow, but some-
timeS' fading to whitish in old age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-10 x 5-6 microns,
elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in needle duff under conifers, widely distributed. It
is partial to cold weather, fruiting in northern regions in the late fall until frosts set in,andin
the winter in our coastal pine forests. One variety with a rank odor occurs on decaying
conifers. The related M. griseoviridis (see comments) frequently fruits nearly melting
snow in the springandsummer.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several attractive Mycenas with a viscid capandviscid,
yellow to greenish-gray stem. The viscid layers may dry out in age, but the colors are dis-
tinctive. Similar terrestrial species include: M. viscosa, with a strong rancid odorandtaste;
M. epipterygioides, with a dark olive-gray cap that does not fade to white; andM. griseo-
viridis, with a deep olive to olive-brown to blackish cap, a yellow stem that becomes brown
or deep vinaceous-brown from the base upward, a cucumberlike odor,andthorny cystidia
on the gill edges. The latter species is often common under mountain conifers soon after
the snow melts, but is not restricted to that habitat. Any of these species can be mistaken
for a waxy cap (e.g., Hygrocybe psittacina), but their gills are not noticeably waxy.
Mycena rorida (Slippery Mycena)
CAP (2) 5-10 (15) mm broad, at first rounded or bell-shaped, then expanding to plane or
nearly so; surface dry, pale brown or brownish-gray to tan, fading to white or yellowish-
white. Flesh thin, odor mild. GILLS adnate to decurrent, well-spaced, white. STALK 2-3
(5) cm long, about 1 mm thick, equal, whitish, covered with a sheath of slime when fresh and
moist. SPORE_PRINT. white; spores 8-12x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious on groundanddebris under conifersandin
mixed woods; widely distributed, but not common in our area. I have found it under
redwood in November.
EDIBILITY Too smallandslippery to be of value.
COMMENTS This little mushroom is easily identified by its pale color, dry cap, and
sheath of slime on the stem. Plucking it can be a difficult proposition if you try to grasp it by
the stalk. Other Mycenas with a pallid to grayish, viscid stem include: M. telUJx, with a
gray-brown to pale gray capandstrong disagreeable odor; M. vulgaris, similar but with an
extremely viscid capandslight odor;andM. clavicularis, with a dry grayish capandmild
odor. All of these occur in groups or troops under conifers.
Clitopilus prunulus (Sweetbread Mushroom)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry and
slightly felty or in one form slightly viscid when moist, smooth, white to gray; margin often
lobed or wavy. Flesh rather thin, white; odor strongly but pleasantly farinaceous (like
sweetbread). GILLS decurrent or occasionally adnate, fairly close, narrow, whitish to
gray, then dusted pinkish by spores. STALK 2-8 cm long, O.4-1.2cm thick, central or off-
center, solid, equal or tapering downward, white or grayish. SPORE_PRINT flesh-colored
or salmon; spores 9-12 x 5-7 microns, elliptical, longitudinally ridged, angular only in end
view.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups on ground in open woodsandgrassy
places near trees; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter,
usually under oak or pine.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, but not recommended. It is rated highly in Europe but is
easily confused with poisonous mushrooms such as Clitocybe dealbata.
COMMENTS The pinkish spores, decurrent gills, white to grayish cap,andstrong odor
of meal are the fallible field marks of this unremarkable fungus. The poisonous Clitocybe
dealbata closely mimics it but is somewhat smallerandhas white spores. Clitocybe sub-
connexaandits close relatives have pinkish spores, but grow in clustersandare more
robust. The name Clitcopilus orcellus has been given to forms of C. prunulus with a white,
slightly sticky cap, but it is no longer regarded as a distinct species by most mycologists.
R hodocybe nuciolens
CAP 2-7 (11) cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane or slightly depressed or some-
times slightly umbonate; surface smooth, not viscid, dull pinkish to pinkish-brown,
pinkish-tan, or sometimes cinnamon-brown to brick-colored, fading as it dries( especially
toward margin), sometimes with watery spots or bands. Flesh white or pale ochre; odor
usually rather spicy. GILLS whitish becoming pinkish as spores mature; close, adnate or
notched or sometimes slightly decurrent. STALK 2-8 (15) cm long, 0.4-1.5 (4) cm thick,
equal or occasionally thicker at base, whitish or colored like cap (but usually paler).
SPORE_PRINT rosy-buff; spores 5.5-7.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, ellipticalandwarty in side
view, angular in end view.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in humus or on rotten wood; common
in centralandsouthern California in the fallandwinter, but more widely distributed. It
occurs under both hardwoodsandconifers; I find it most often with redwood.
EDIBILITY Uncertain. Greg Wright of Los Angeles says it has an excellent flavor, but
that one collection caused sweating, chills.andother symptoms of muscarine poisoning.
COMMENTS The dull pinkish to brick-colored capandpinkish spores are the distin-
guishing features of this eminently undistinguished fungus. The gill attachment is quite
variable, leading to confusion with Clitocybe inversa (which has white or buff spores),
candy caps (Lactarius fragilisandL. rufulus>.,andvarious Collybias, but the pinkish
sporesandpinkish gills at maturity are distinctive. There are several other Rhodocybes
that are difficult to key to genus without examining the spores. These include: R. nitellina,
cap up to 5 cm broadandorange-brown to reddish-brown to pinkish-cinnamon or ochre
with a translucent-striate margin when moist;R. roseiavellanea, one of several uncommon
wood-inhabiting species with a more or less tan cap; R. mundula, cap 3-7 cm broad,
grayish,andbitter-tasting; R. caelata, with a small( 1-3 cm) grayish ca panddecurrent gills;
andR. aureicystidiata, also small, but with a darker ca p that bruises dark or dingy reddish.
Entoloma madidum
(Midnight Blue Entoloma)
Color Plate 51
CAP (3.5) 5-15 (20) cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane or remaining broadly
umbonate, the margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface viscid to slightly lubricous when
moist, smooth or wrinkled, often with a fibrillose or streaked appearance; blue-gray to
nearly black to violet-gray or steel-gray, sometimes fading inage to fuscous or occasionally
with ochraceous stains or paler areas. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor usually farinaceous.
GILLS notched or adnexed or at times appearing free, close, white or tinged cap color,
becoming pinkish or flesh-colored as the spores ripen. STALK4-13 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm
thick, solid, firm, fleshy, fibrillose, equal or with a tapered base or often thicker in middle;
upper portion blue-gray or colored like cap, base whitish to slightly yellowish (but occa-
sionally white throughout). SPORE_PRINT flesh-color to pinkish-cinnamon; spores 6.5-
8.5 (10) x 6-8 microns, nearly round to broadly elliptical but angular (5-6 sided).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed but
especially common along the west coast in the fallandwinter. In our area two slightly
different forms occur-one with conifers (especially redwood), the other with hardwoods
such as tanoakandmadrone. The European version is said to grow in grass!
EDIBILITY Edible, with meaty fleshanda good flavor. However, many fleshy
Entolomas are toxic, so be certain of your identification!
COMMENTS One of the few Entolomas that can be recognized easily in the field-
the black to bluish-gray or violet-tinged cap, pinkish spores, notched or adnexed gills that
are whitish when young,andfirm, fleshy stem render it distinct. It has the aspect of a
Russula, but is not as brittleanddoes not have white or yellow spores. It is much larger and
fleshier than the small bluish-black Leptonias (L. parva, etc.)andis not nearly as purple
as the blewit (Clitocybe nuda}. The viscid or lubricous cap (when moist) separates it from
E. nitidumandLeptonia carnea, which are also more vividly colored. Tricholoma porten-
tosum is quite similar, but has white sporesanda white stem.
Entoloma rhodopolium group
CAP 3-12 (15) cm broad, convex or broadly umbonate becoming plane or slightly de-
pressed; surface smooth, not viscid or only slightly so, gray to grayish-brown to yellowish-
gray, usually paler as it dries; margin often wavy or splitting in age. Flesh firm, white; odor
mild to slightly farinaceous, but not bleachlike. GILLS adnate or notched, whitish or
tinged cap color, becoming pinkish as the spores ripen; fairly close to rather well-spaced.
STALK 4-13 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, fleshy, equal or tapered below, dry, white or
tinged gray. SPORE_PRINT pinkish-salmon to deep flesh-color; spores 8-11 x 7-9
microns, nearly round but angular.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters on ground in woods, mainly under
hardwoods; widely distributed. In' California it is quite common in the fallandwinter
under alder, but has many look-alikes that occur with oak, tanoak,andmadrone.
EDIBILITY Poisonous-causing vomiting, diarrhea,andabdominal cramps that may
require hospitalization! All fleshy Entolomas should be strictly avoided, although some
are said to be edible-they are difficult to differentiateandnot well known.
COMMENTS The above description will fit a number of medium-sized to large, showy
woodland Entolomas with a smooth, grayish to yellowish or tan cap, fleshy stem, attached
(usually notched) gills,andpinkish spores. They are the most commonandconspicuous
of our Entolomas (along with the E. nidorosum group) as well as the most dangerous. As
a group they can be recognized by their colorandTrich%ma-like stature (i.e., they are
never as slender as the similarly-colored Nolaneas). Distinguishing between the various
Entolomas within the group (as loosely defined here) is strictly a matter for specialists.
The largestandmost infamous of the lot, E. lividum, (also called E. sinuatum), has a tan
to grayish or pallid cap that is 6-20 cm broad or more, pale yellowish gills when young, and
a thick (1-3 cm) stalk; it is common in eastern North America, but has not yet been reported
from California. Other species include: E. grayanum, a common fleshy eastern species;
E. clypeatum, whose cap is grayish-brown to olive-buffandstreaked with darker fibrils;
E. prunuloides, with a large white viscid cap;andE. speculum, slender, with a dry white
or whitish, often umbonate cap. The latter species occurs in California, but the others
may not. (According to Ent%ma-expert David Largent, many of California's large,
fleshy Entolomas are undescribedandprobably endemic.)
Entoloma nidorosum group (Nitrous Entoloma)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or depressed or occasionally broadly umbo-
nate; surface smooth, not viscid or slightly so when moist; olive-brown to brownish to
grayish-brown or pale yellowish-brown when moist (but see comments), paler (grayish to
grayish-yellow or even whitish) as it dries; margin often wavy in age. Flesh pallid; o<l;or
distinctly nitrous (bleachlike) when fresh, but fading after sitting awhile; taste rather
rancid-oily. GILLS white or pallid, becoming pinkish as the spores mature; usually
adnexed or notched, sometimes adnate; fairly well-spaced to fairly close. STALK 4-12
cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, more or less equal or narrowed at base, whitish or faintly yellow,
fibrillose-striate, firm, fleshy, solid. SPORE_PRINT pinkish-salmon to deep flesh-color;
spores 7-9x 6-8 microns, nearly round but angular.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious (sometimes tufted) on ground in woods,
widely distributed. Common in our area under hardwoods in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. The very similar E.ferruginans(see comments) is apparently
edible, as it has been mistaken inexplicably (but harmlessly) for the blewit (Clitocybe
nuda), in spite of its unpleasant tasteandunpurple color. Several similar Entolomas are
quite poisonous, however (see the E. rhodopolium group).
COMMENTS The bleachlike odor of fresh specimens is usually quite pronounced, and
serves to separate this species complex from other gray to brown, fleshy Entolomas. The
stature of E. nidorosum is typically rather erectandslender, but the stalk is distinctly
fleshy, in contrast to species of No/anea. Other Entolomas with a bleachlike odor include:
E. pernitrosum, with a persistem odor (i.e., one that doesn't fade);andE. ferrug;nans,
which is one of the commonest gilled mushrooms in the live oak woodlands of southern
California,andthe most common Em%ma there(it also occurs in our areaandprobably
throughout the state). It differs from E. nidorosum in its more variable cap color (hazel
to buff, pale yellow, olive-brown, dark brown, or nearly black), thicker stalk (up to 2.5 or
even 3 cm thick) which is often tinged with the cap color,andslightly larger spores. Whether
it is indeed a distinct species endemic to California, or merely a robust version of E. nido-
rosum, is for the Em%ma-experts to decide.
Nolanea str;cta (Strict Nolanea)
CAP 2.5-7 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped expanding to broadly convex or even plane,
but usually with a distinct, sometimes pointed umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous,
watery cinnamon to grayish-brown when moist, palerandoften somewhat streaked when
dry. Flesh thin, fragile, odor mild. GILLS broad, adnate to deeply notched, adnexed, or
free; pallid becoming flesh-colored in age, fairly close. STALK 5-15 cm long, 2-5 (10) mm
thick, typically longandstraight (strict), hollow, fragile, splitting easily, equal or tapered
slightly upward, longitudinally striate; whitish or colored like cap (but usually paler); base
whitishandoften downy. SPORE_PRINT salmon-pink or pinkish-cinnamon; spores
9-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical but angular. Cystidia absent on gill edges.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or very rotten wood, under
both hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributed. I have found it-or a very similar
species-in our area in the late fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown-to be avoided.
COMMENTS Also known as R hodophy//us str;ct;orandEnt%ma str;ct;us, this is one
of a number of attractive but difficult-to-identify, pinkish-spored, woodland mushrooms
with a long, straight ("strict"), slender stalk that splits or breaks easily,anda gray to brown
cap. Similar species include: N. h;rt;pes, with a grayish-brown cap, farinaceous odor, and
cystidia on the gill edges;andLepton;ajubata, with a convex to plane or uplifted, minutely
hairy or velvety cap. For smaller species with a conical or "nippled" cap, see comments
under N. verna.
Nolanea ser;cea (Silky Nolanea)
CAP 2-4 (6.5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with a slight umbo; surface smooth
but not viscid, hygrophanous: dark brown (umber) to dark olive-brown to grayish-brown
or hazel-brown when moist, paler or grayer with a silky, often streaked appearance when
dry. Flesh thin, watery; odor usually farinaceous, at least when crushed. GILLS adnate to
adnexed, notched, or nearly free, pallid to grayish or tinged cap color, then dusted pinkish
with spores. STALK 2.5-5 (10) cm long, (2) 3-8 mm thick, equal or with a slightly enlarged
base, often short, fragile, longitudinally fibrillose-striateandsilky when dry; grayish-
brown or colored like cap, the base whitish. SPORE_PRINT deep salmon-pinkish or
cinnamon-pinkish; spores 8-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical but angular-nodulose. Cystidia
absent on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in pastures, on lawns or hillsides, in waste places,
sometimes also in woods or under willows; widely distributedandcommon in our area
from the fall through early spring. Unlike many mushrooms, it tends to fruit during rainy
spells rather than following them.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Only when this species is found in grassy places can the beginner hope to
distinguish it from the throngs of other brown to grayish Nolaneas, Entolomas, and
Leptonias. Be sure to look for the characteristic silky sheen that develops indry weather or
as the cap loses moisture. The cap is not normally conical or bell-shaped as in many N ola-
neas (see N. verna), but may have a slight umbo (the very similar N. hirtipes has a more
prominent umbo or "nipple"andfeatures cystidia on the gill edges). The pinkish spores and
gray-brown to brown color help separate N. sericea from our other common grass-
inhabiting mushrooms. Other species: N. edulis is a very similar but smaller species that is
common in open places in southern California; N. staurospora grows in grassy as well as
shaded or wooded areasandhas a conical to bell..:-shaped cap that may become convex or
umbonate as it matures,andranges in color from dark brown to date-brown,
grayish-cinnamon, or grayish-brown, but fades as it dries to tan or paler. Furthermore, it
has "cruciate-nodulose" spores (shaped like stars orjacks). I mention this feature because it
is impossible to appreciate the relief they (the spores) provide unless you've spent many
long, tedious hours scrutinizing the round to elliptical spores sported by the overwhelming
majority of fleshy fungi. Apart from the spores, however, it is just another "LBM" that is
easily confused with dozens of other "LBM's." Enough said.
N olanea verna group (S pringtime N olanea)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, often with a pointed umbo or "nipple," or
expanding sometimes to convex or plane (but often retaining the umbo); surface dry,
usually smooth, finely fibrilloseandoften silky or glossy; color variable: dark to light
brown, yellow-brown, olive-brown, tan, grayish, or yellowish. Flesh thin, odor mild.
GILLS fairly close, adnate to adnexed but often seceding, pale grayish or buff or colored
like cap, becoming salmon or reddish as spores mature. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-7 (10)
mm thick, equal, straight, often flattened or twisted-striate, hollow, fragileandeasily
splitting; pallid or more often colored like the ca p ( or paler). SPORE_PRINT rosy-salmon
to flesh-colored; spores 8-11 x 7-8 microns, elliptical but angular.
HABITAT Widely scattered or in groups on ground in woods, mainly under conifers;
widely distributedandvery common in the springandearly summer shortly after the snow
melts (about the same time as morels!). I have seen large fruitings in the Cascades and
Sierra Nevada, but have not yet found it in our area.
EDIBILITY Said to be poisonous, causing moderate to severe gastrointestinal distress.
COMMENTS Also known as Entoloma vernum, this species or species "complex" has
many look-alikes in the genus Nolanea; but fruits almost exclusively in the spring.
The pinkish spores distinguish it from Myeena,andthe slender, cartilaginous stem
separates it from Enroloma. The yellowish form that is common in the Sierra Nevada may
actually beN. cuneata(according to David Largent). Similar Nolaneas include: N. holo-
coniota, also common in western mountains, with a brown to yellow-brown ca pandpale
yellow to pale orangish stalk that is minutely powdered above; theN. mammosa-N. papil-
lata group, with a small (1-4 cm) nippled, bell-shaped to conical capandlong thin stalk,
usually fruiting in the late summer, fall, or winter; andN. staurospora, with star-shaped
spores (see comments under N. serieea). Also worth mentioning are two small species that
smell like a candy store or "tooty-fruity gum" (Largent): N.fructufragrans, with a more
or less grayish-brown capandstalk; andN. icterina, with a yellowish to olive-yellow cap
and stalkandadnexed to slightly decurrent gills. None of these are worth eating.
Lepton;a earnea (Indigo Leptonia) Color Plate 52
CAP 2.5-7 em broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, the margin sometimes
uplifted in old age; surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, deep indigo-blue, at
times almost iridescent, scarcely fading. Flesh yellowish or whitish, but tinged violet under
the cuticle; odor typically farinaceous. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, pallid or
bluish-gray, slowly becoming pinkish as spores mature. STALK 5-10 em long, 0.5-1 (1.5)
em thick, equal or thicker below, dry, densely fibrillose or minutely scaly, deep indigo-blue,
the apex sometimes violet-tinted; base often whitish, or in age yellow-orange within.
SPORE_PRINT pinkish; spores 9-13 x 6.5-10.5 microns, elliptical but angular.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woods; known only from California,andap-
parently rare. I have found it several times near or under redwood in late fallandwinter,
during otherwise uneventful mushroom hunts. Its deep color camouflages it well.
EDIBILITY Undetermined, but too rare to be of value.
COMMENTS The stunning indigo-blue colorandfibrillose-scaly capandstem render
this breathtakingly beautiful mushroom distinct (the color plate does not do it justice). Its
rareness makes it all the more pleasurable to find. Its only rival for intensity of color is
Cortinarius vio/aceus, which has rust-brown sporesandis deep violet. The stem is thicker
than that ofthe numerous blue-black or violet-black Leptonias(see L. parvaandL. nigro-
vio/acea), but thinner than that of Ent%ma madidum. The gills are not purple as in the
blewit (C/itocybe nuda)andthe stalkandcap are much scalier. There are several similarly
colored species, including: Ento!oma nitidum, with a smoother (less scaly) capandstalk
and smaller spores (7-9 microns long), not common; Entoloma traehysporum var.
purpureoviolaeeum, with a smooth dark brownish capandmetallic blue stalk; L.
oeeidentalis var. metalliea, smaller, with an iridescent or metallic blue, densely scaly-
fibrillose stalk (up to 5 mm thick at apex), mild to slightly fragrant odor,andwhite to blue-
gray flesh, also not common;andthree rare wood-inhabiting species with fibrillose-scaly
stalks: L. eyaneonita, bluish-black, with an iridescent stalk;andL. eyaneaandL.
violaeeonigra, both violet-tinted, the former with pallid gillsandthe latter with bluish-or
violet-tinged gills when young.
Lepton;a n;grov;olaeea (Violet-Black Leptonia)
CAP 1-3.5 em broad, convex or obscurely umbonate becoming plane to slightly umbili-
cate; surface dry, fibrillose, usually with small scales at least at the center; entirely violet-
black or deep violet, or sometimes bluish-black or fading to violet-gray. Flesh thin, whitish
or tinged violet. GILLS fairly well-spaced, white or pale buff or sometimes tinged gray,
becoming pinkish in age as spores mature; attachment variable but usually adnexed to
adnate. STALK 3-8 em long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or tapered slightly, smooth or fibrillose,
often with a few small scales, violet-black to violet-gray, the extreme apex usually pallid;
hollow; usually with white mycelial down at base. SPORE_PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores
9.5-11.5 (13) x 7-8.5 microns, elliptical but angular. Cystidia absent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts on ground in woods; widely dis-
tributed. In our area it is fairly common in the late fallandwinter under redwood, but is
not restricted to that habitat.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several dainty, violet-tinged Leptonias. They are not as
numerous as the blue-black models (see L. parva), but are just as attractive. L. occidenta/is
var. metal/ica (see L. carnea) is similar but has a more iridescent. densely fibrillose-scaly
stalk. Other species which characteristically exhibit violet tints include: L. eonvexa, whose
cap has erect scales on a bluish-gray, reddish-brown, or grayish-brown background;
L. zanthophylla. with pale yellow gills when young; andL. d;veTsa. whose cap is frequently
umbilicate in ageandhas purple-blue scales on a paler background,andwhose gills are
often tinged bluish-gray. For violet-tinted, wood-inhabiting species, see comments under
L. carnea.
Lepton;a parva (Blue-Black Leptonia)
CAP 0.7-4 cm broad, broadly convex becoming plane to shallowly depressed or umbili-
cate; surface dry, finely fibrillose when young, often breaking up into small scales in age;
blue-black to black when fresh, often somewhat paler or grayer in age; margin often finely
striate or fibrillose-striate. Flesh thin, white or tinged cap color. GILLS very slightly
decurrent to adnate or adnexed, but sometimes seceding; whitish or with a slight tinge of
blue-gray, becoming pinkish in old age from spores. STALK 1.5-8 cm long, 2-4 (7) mm
thick, more or less equal, smooth or in one form with minute bluish-black scales over
upper half; blackish-blue to bluish-gray, often becoming paler gray in age; base often with
whitish mycelial down. SPORE_PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores 8-12 x 6-8 microns, elliptical
but angular. Cystidia typically absent on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups in forest .humus, widely distributed. This species
and its numerous look-alikes (see below) are especially common in coastal California in
redwood duff (often under ferns),andin the Pacific Northwest under western red cedar.
They occur throughout the mushroom season in our area, but are easily overlooked
because of their dark color.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too small to be of value.
COMMENTS There are a number of petite blue to black or violet-tinted Leptonias that
will more or less fit the above description (David Largent recognizes over 100 Leptonia
species in his monograph). They are quite diffiCult to distinguish in the field, but you
needn't know their exact identities to appreciate their bea uty. Ent%ma madidum. E. niti-
dum.andLeptonia carnea are similar in color but are largerandhave thicker, fleshier
stems. L. parva is characterized by its whitish gills in youthandnearly smooth cap that
becomes minutely scaly (especially toward the center) in age. Some of its more common or
distinctive cousins include: L. decolorans, very similarandcommon, gills often bluish-
gray with cystidia on their edges; L. corv;na. also similarandcommon, but with a cap that
fades to brown in age, except at the center; L. rectangula, with a black cap that is nearly
rectangular in profile when younganddeeply depressed (but not umbilicate) in age, and
gray gills; L. nigra, a beautiful species with evenly blue-gray gillsandminutely hairy blue-
black cap that is convex to plane but never umbilicate, fairly common; L. seTTulata, gills
white to gray with dark blue to blue-black, minutely serrated edges (see above photo-
graph), commonandwidely distributed;andL. cupressa, cap blackish but gills and
stalk brownish-gray, found mainly under <;ypress, not common. All of these are typically
terrestrial. For similar wood-inhabiting species or those with iridescent, fibrillose-scaly
stalks, see comments under L. carnea,andfor small terrestrial species with a distinct violet
tinge, see L. nigroviolacea.
Lepton;a grac;lipes
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex becoming plane to shallowly depressed or umbilicate; sur-
face dry, minutely scaly toward the center, the margin finely fibrillose or smooth; dark
yellow-brown to grayish-brown or dark brown, often fading in age to paler brown or even
orange-brown, the center usually darker. Flesh thin, fragile, grayish-or olive-tinted.
GILLS adnexed to adnate or with a slight decurrent tooth, white or pallid when young,
becoming pinkish in age from maturing spores, or sometimes brownish. STALK 2-8 cm
long, 1-5 mm thick, equal, often flattened or grooved, smooth, dark blue-gray fading to
blue-gray or gray in age. SPORE_PRINT rosy-pinkish; spores 8-12 x 6.5-8 microns,
elliptical-angular
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups in humus under ferns, alder,andconifers; widely
distributed. I have found it several times in our area under redwood, in the fallandwinter,
when few other mushrooms were outandabout.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The slender blue-gray stalkandyellow-brown to grayish-brown cap
characterize this rather forgettable species. Its stature is similar to that of L. parva, but the
cap is never bluish-black. Other species: L. asprella is similar, but has grayer gillsanda
grayer cap; L. vinaceobrunnea has a blue-gray stalkandreddish-brown to vinaceous-
brown cap; L.Juligineo-marginata has a violet-brown to dark reddish-brown to grayish-
brown capandstalk, but its gills are white with dark reddish-brown to grayish-brown
edges; L. undulatella is brown to yellow-brown with a striate cap;andL. exalbida has an
umbilicate, dark yellow-brown capandwhite stalk.
A lbolepton;a ser;cella (Little White Leptonia)
CAP 1-3 (5) cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface smooth,
dry, often silky or finely fibrillose; pure white to translucent white or tinged yellow (espe-
cially in age), or sometimes even pinkish. Flesh very thin, whitish, fragile. GILLSadnate
to slightly decurrent or notched, well-spaced, white, becoming rosy-pinkish in age.
STALK 1.5-5 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, equal, smooth, fragile, white or discoloring like the
cap. SPORE_PRINT bright flesh-color; spores 9-13 x 6-8 microns, elliptical but angular
(nodulose).
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in damp soil in woods, thickets, along trails, etc.;
widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as Lepton;a ser;cellaandR hodophyllus ser;cellus, this is the
only common small white mushroom with pinkish spores, a thin stem,andattached gills.
Its fragility makes it difficult to get specimens home in one piece. Camarophyllus species
and Inocybe geophylla are somewhat similar, but have whiteandbrown spores,
respectively. Other species: A. adnatifolia is pure white with slightly smaller spores; A.
ochracea ages or bruises ochraceous.
Pluteus petasatus
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex, or becoming broadly umbonate to plane in age; surface
usually not viscid, whitish with a brownish to grayish center or with darker (brown to
grayish-brown) fibrils or scales; margin usually whitish. Flesh fairly thickandfirm, white;
odor mild or radishlike. GILLS crowded, broad, free at least in age, whitish for a long time,
then eventually pinkish. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.7-3 cm thick, equal or swollen above orin
the middle; firm, whitish or discoloring below in age; sometimes streaked with fibrils.
SPORE_PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
Cystidia on faces of gills with long necksand"horns."
HABITAT Gregarious or clustered on sawdust or wood chips in gardens, along roads,
etc. (often appearing terrestrial); widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area
during the mushroom seasonandsometimes even fruits in the summer.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery good-the best ofthe genus for the table. It is much firmer
and meatier than the better known P. cervinus.
COMMENTS The robust stature, pale cap with darker fibrils or scales (or a darker
center),andtendency to grow in clusters distinguish this species from P. cervinus. Because
the gills remain white for so long it is liable to be mistaken for a white-spored mushroom,
but the free crowded gillsandabsence of a veil point to Pluteus. P. magnus (see P. cer-
vinus) can also be robust, but has a dark brown to nearly black cap.
Pluteus cerv;nus (Deer Mushroom; Fawn Mushroom)
CAP 3-12(15) cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly convex to broadly umbonate
or plane; surface smooth or radially streaked with fibrils, slightly viscid when moist and
often somewhat wrinkled when young; dark brown to pale brown to grayish-brown or
dingy fawn, the margin sometimes paler. Flesh soft, white; odor usually radishlike. GILLS
close or crowded, broad, soft, white becoming pinkish, finally dingy reddish or flesh-
colored; free at maturity. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2 (2.5) cm thick, equal or thicker at
base, dry, white or with grayish to brownish longitudinal fibrils. SPORE_PRINT flesh-
colored to pinkish-brown; spores 5-8 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on faces of
gills with long necksand2-4 "horns."
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on decaying wood, debris, sawdust piles, or humus rich
in lignin; widely distributedandcommon. In our area it usually appears with Pleurotus
oSlreatus after the very first fall rains, then continues to fruit sporadically through the
remainder of the mushroom season. It is partial to (but not restricted to) hardwoods,
but P. alromarginatus (see comments) is Cbmmon in our area on conifers.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good when freshandfirm, but the flaccid or waterlogged
specimens one usually finds are apt to be insipid.
COMMENTS Also known as P. atricapi//us, the deer mushroom is our most common
and conspicuous Pluteus. It is rather nondescript, but can be safely identified by its brown
cap, pinkish spores, close free gills, absence of a veil,andgrowth on wood. The cap color
is quite variable, but typically some shade of brown. Special care should be taken not to
confuse it with poisonous Emoloma species, which typically have attached ( often notched)
gillsandgrow on the ground. P. cervinus, however, may appear terrestrialandhave gills
which are slightly attached when young, so it's a good precaution to eat only those that
are clearly growing on wood. There are several similar Pluteus species, all apparently
edible, including: P. magnus, more robust (stalk 1-3 cm thick)andwith a dark, frequently
wrinkled cap, often growing in clusters on sawdust piles, etc.;P. atromarginatus, common
throughout much of the West on woodanddebris of conifers, with a brown to dark brown
capanddark brown to black gill edges (see photograph!);andP. pe//itus, which has a
white cap (sometimes brown at center)andgrows on dead hardwoods. The latter looks
like a destroying angel (Amanita ocreala, A. virosa, etc.) from a distance, but lacks a volva
and has pinkish gills in age (and pinkish spores). It occurs in our area, but is rare.
Pluteus lutescens
(Yellow-Stemmed Pluteus)
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface sometimes
wrinkled at the center, not viscid, dark brown to olive-brown to yellowish-brown or
yellowish-olive. Flesh thin, white or pale yellow; odor mild. GILLS free at maturity, fairly
close, broad, whitish to pale yellow, but finally pinkish from ripening spores. STALK 2-7
cm long, 2-6 mm thick, more or less equal, straight or curved, fragile; pale yellow, the base
usually brighter yellow. SPORE_PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7 x 5
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on faces of gills club-shaped to flask-shaped.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on rotting hardwood logs, sticks,anddebris;
widely distributed. Occasional in our area in the late fallandwinter, especially on dead oak.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but too smallandinfrequent to bother with.
COMMENTS A fragile but beautiful Pluteus, easily identified by its yellow stem and
brownish to olive cap plus the free gillsandpinkishspores.P. nanusvar.lutescensisa passe
pseudonym. Other colorful species include: P. admirabilis, very similar but with a yellow to
ochre capandyellow stalk, especially common in eastern North America; P. leoninus,
similar to P. admirabilis, but with a white stalk when young;andP. aurantiorugosus
(=P. coccineus), a beautiful but rare species with a bright red to orange-red cap that fades
to bright yellow as it ages, plus a white to yellow or orange-yellow stalk.
Pluteus longistriatus (Pleated Pluteus)
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, convex to plane or with a slightly depressed center; surface sometimes
minutely scaly or granulose, at least at the center, not viscid; gray to brownish-gray,
conspicuously striate in age. Flesh very thin, soft, pallid; odor mild. GILLS close, soft,
whitish becoming pinkish in age; free at maturity. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick,
finely fibrillose-striate, pallid or tinged cap color, equal or with an enlarged base, straight
or curved, hollow. SPORE_PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7.5 x 5-5.5
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on gills club-shaped or flask-shaped.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on decaying branchesandsticks of
hardwoods; widely distributed but not common. I have found it several times in our area
on oak debris,andalso on wet wood in a bathroom!
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of many small, nondescript P/uteus species that are unlikely
to catch the eye of the average mushroom hunter except when they are sharing a log with
more spectacular fare (such as P/eurotus ostreatus). The conspicuously striate cap is the
principal field mark of this species. Others include: P. ca/iforn;cus, cap hazel to hazel-
brown or greenish-gray, with a striate margin when moistanda reddish-brown spore
print; P. set;ceps, with a brown striate cap; P. cyanopus, with a chestnut-to cinnamon-
brown, faintly striate capandhazel to grayish-olive stalk; andP. sa/;dnus, with a grayish-
brown to greenish-or bluish-gray, non-striate capandwhitish stalk that stains blue at the
base. N one of these are worth eating. P. chrysophaeus should also be mentioned.
Pluteus flavofuligineus
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or broadly convex to plane;
surface not viscid, appearing velvety to minutely granulose; dark brown or olive-brown
when young, developing yellow tones in age from the margin inward (eventually often
entirely yellow or ochre-yellow or yellowish with a brownish center). Flesh thin, pallid;
odor mild. GILLS free but sometimes appearing adnexed; close, whitish or tinged yellow
when young, becoming pinkish as spores mature. STALK 4-11 cm long, 4-6 (8) mm
thick, equal or tapering upward, smooth; whitish or pinkish when young, usually becoming
yellowish in old age. SPORE_PRINT pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6-7 x 4.5-6
microns, nearly round, smooth. Cystidia on gills flask-shaped.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on rotting hardwood logs, branches, etc.; widely
distributed, but not common in the West. I find it every winter in our oak woodlands.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The velvety to granulose, brown or yellow cap combined with the free gills,
pinkish spores,andgrowth on dead wood are good field marks. The stalk is oftenrathertall
for a P/uteus-as much as three times as long as the diameter of the cap! P. /utescens is
somewhat similar, but has a clear yellow stalk even when young,anddoes not have a velvety
cap. Other species: P. granu/ar;s is also similar, but has a velvety brown capandstem.
V olvariella speciosa (Common Volvariella) Color Plate 68
CAP 5-15 cm broad, at first oval, then convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface
smooth or occasionally with patches of universal veil tissue, viscid when moist; dull white to
gray or grayish-brown (rarely fulvous), or often whitish with a darker center; often with a
metallic luster when dry; margin sometimes striate. Flesh soft, white. GILLS crowded,
broad, free, white becoming flesh-coloredandfinally sordid reddish. STALK 5-20 cm long,
1-2.5 cm thick, equal or thicker at base, dry, whitish, more or less smooth. UNIVERSAL
VEIL membranous, forming a white to pale grayish saclike volva at base of stalk; volva
often buried in soil, sometimes inconspicuous. SPORE_PRINT deep flesh-color to
pinkish-brown; spores 11.5-21 x 7-12 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in cultivated soil-gardens, vacant lots,
roadsides, manure, compost, straw heaps, fallowandplanted fields, etc.-occasionally
also in the woods; widely distributed. It occurs year-round in our area, but is especially
common in the spring; I've seen enormous fruitings in Brussels sprouts fields. In the San
Joaquin Valley I've seen fallow fields littered with thousands of V olvariellas.
EDIBILITY Edible, but mediocre. It was once thought to be poisonous, perhaps due to
confusion with Amanita. Should you try it, be sure to take a spore print-some
Amanitas can have pinkish gills in old age!
COMMENTS This mushroom can cause quite a stir when it appears, boldanduninvited,
in the middle of your cabbage patch. It is our only common V o/variel/a,andis recognized
as such by its saclike volva, absence of a ring (annulus),anddeep pinkish spores. It is quite
attractive when it first emerges, but quickly becomes flaccidandwaterlogged. V. speciosa
var. glo;cephala is said to differ from the typical variety in its darker (pearl-gray to fulvous)
pileus (ca p) wi th a striate margin,andsmaller spores. One dismal day of illegal trespassing
in a smelly old Brussels sprouts field yielded the following: twenty soggy specimens with
pale pileusandnon-striate margin; six soggy specimens with dark pileusandstriate
margin; five soggy specimens with dark pileusandnon-striate margin;andeleven soggy
specimens with pale pileusandstriate margin. If you can detect a meaningful mycelial
thread running through all of this, then you are a better mycologist than I . . . *
V olvariella hypopithys (Petite White V olvariella)
CAP 2-6 cm broad, at first somewhat bell-shaped, then convex to nearly plane; surface
dry, fibrillose (with fine silky hairs that sometimes form small scales), pure white or tinged
yellowish at the center, but sometimes discoloring overall in old age; margin usually
fringed with long, silky white hairs ad not striate or only faintly so. Flesh thin, soft, white.
GILLS fairly close, free (at least at maturity), white becoming dingy pinkish or flesh-
colored. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, fragile, white
or pallid; densely pubescent (clothed with short or long silky hairs) at least over the middle
and upper portion. UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, forming a small, often incon-
spicuous or barely visible volva at base of stalk; volva white, saclike, usually lobed.
SPORE_PRINT pinkish or flesh-colored; spores 6-8.5 (10) x 3.5-6 microns, broadly
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woodland humus; widely distributed but rare.
I have found it only once in our area, under live oak, in February.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but much too small to be worth eating.
COMMENTS This rareandbeautiful V o/variella is easily recognized by its petite
dimensions, white color, silky-fibrillose cap,andwhite pubescent stalk. The inconspi-
cuous white volvaandslender stature (see photograph) are also distinctive,andhelp to
separate it from V. smithii. which is slightly stockierandhas a more prominent, brownish-
stained volva. Another widely distributed but rare white species, V. pus;//a (= V. parvu/a),
is even more petite than V. hypopithys. It has a slightly larger white or grayish volva, a
non-pubescent stalk,anda striate cap margin in age,andis more frequent in gardens,
greenhouses, lawns,androadsides than in the woods. See also the species under V. smith;;.
V o/varie//a smithii
(Smith's V olvariella)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, broadly conical to convex or plane; surface not viscid, usually some-
what fibrillose at the margin; white, but often tinged buff to pinkish-buff at center. Flesh
rather soft, white. GILLS white becoming pinkish, broad, close, free (at least in age).
STALK 3-5 cm long, 3-7 mmthick, equal or enlarged at base, white, covered with fine white
hairs (pubescent). UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, forming a large, prominent, saclike
volva at base of stalk; volva brownish to ochre or ochre-stained, usually lobed. SPORE
PRINT pinkish to sordid flesh-color; spores 4.5-7 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in soil or humus in woods; known only from the
west coast, rare. The specimens in the photograph were growing under pine at New
Brighton Beach State Park near Aptos, California, in February.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too smallandtoo rare for anyone to care.
COMMENTS This is one of several small, uncommon, white to grayish V olvariellas. It is
also one of several mushrooms to be named after Alexander Smith, the foremost authority
on North American mushrooms. The brownish to ochraceous-stained volva, whitish cap,
and small size distinguish it. Other small species include: V. tay/or;, widely distributed but
rare, with a gray to pinkish-gray capanda brown to grayish volva;andV. v;//osavo/va
of eastern North America, with a gray to grayish-brown capanda white volva that has
long mycelial hairs. For small, pure white Volvariellas, see V. hypopithys.
V o/varie//a bombycina (Silky V olvariella)
CAP 5-20 cm broad, oval becoming pell-shaped or convexandin old age sometimes
nearly plane; surface dryandcovered with long silky fibrils (usually more coarsely fibril-
lose at margin), white to yellowish (often palest at margin). Flesh thinandrather soft or
flaccid, white. GILLS crowded, free, broad, white when young becoming flesh-colored or
pinkish as the spores mature. STALK 6-20 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually tapered upward
or enlarged below, often curved, smooth, white, firm. UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous,
often areolate or scaly, forming a thick, long (deep), saclike volva which sheathes the base
of the stalk; volva white to yellowish or dingy brown, often lobed. SPORE_PRINT
pinkish to deep flesh-color; spores 6.5-10 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods or fruiting from wounds in
living trees; rare but conspicuous, found mostly in warm weather. It is widely distributed
east of the Mississippiandhas also been found in riparian woodlands in New Mexico and
southern California. Elmandmaple are among its favorite hosts; it also grows on beech,
oak, magnolia,andvarious other hardwoods. Our rainy season is apparently too cold for it.
EDIBILITY Edible,andaccording to reports, choice. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS It is easier to identify this striking mushroom than to find it. The silky
cap, pale color, deep saclike volva,andgrowth on wood make it unmistakable. The latter
feature plus the pinkish spores (and mature gills) separate it from Amanita, which also has
a volva. A yellow-capped variety has been found in Florida. Other species: V. volvacea,
the edible "Paddy Straw Mushroom," sometimes turns up in greenhouses or straw and
compost in warmer climates,andis fairly common outdoors along the Gulf Coast. It
has a brown or partly brown volvaanda gray to dark brown or blackish, often streaked
cap. V. surrecta is a rare but distinctive northern species that grows parasitically on
other mushrooms, particularly Clitocybe nebu/aris. It is small to medium-sized, with
a white to grayish capandan ample volva that is usually lobed. Since its favorite host is
common in California, it may occur there rarely.
Amanita phalloides
(Death Cap)
Color Plate 50
CAP 4-16 cm broad, at first nearly oval, then convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid or
tacky when moist, often shiny when dry or with a metallic luster; color variable: green to
brownish-olive, yellow-green, yellowish, or sometimes white, often darker toward center
and paler at margin,andoften fading in age (to grayish-green, light brown, olive-buff,
dull yellowish, etc.); sometimes with one or more patches of thin, silky, white universal veil
tissue; margin typically not striate. Flesh white; odor at first mild, but later quite pungent
or nauseating (like raw potatoes or chlorine). GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white
or tinged faintly greenish. STALK 5-18 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, tapering upward or equal
with an enlarged base; white or tinged cap color, smooth or with minute scalesandfibrils;
solid or hollow. PARTIAL_VEIL membranous, white or tinged yellow-green, forming a
persistent but fragile, superior, skirtlike ring which may disappear in age. UNIVERSAL
VEIL membranous, white, forming a saclike volva that sheathes base of stalk; volva thin
and rather fragile, usually buried in groundandsometimes disintegrating. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 7-12x 6-9 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops in woods or on lawns near trees;
widely distributed. In our area it is very common under live oak in the fallandearly winter
and may even turn up in the summer if moisture is sufficient. In the late winterandspring,
however, it is largely supplanted by A. ocreata. Perhaps an adventitious (but hardly
advantageous!) introduction from Europe, it has taken a fancy to our native oaks and
spread like the plague, so that it is now the most abundant Amanita of our live oak
woodlands. Heavy fall rains often elicit a stupendous crop-I have counted as many as one
hundred specimens under a single oak! I've never seen it growing without live oak in the
vicinity, but in southern Oregon it grows with other oaksandin eastern North America it
has turned up in numerous localities under conifers as well as hard woods. Apparently it can
form mycorrhiza with a wide range of hosts!
EDIBILITY DEADLY POISONOUS! Learn to recognize this species before eating any
mushroom with gills! It is particularly dangerous because the symptoms are delayed, not
appearing for from 6 to 24 hours after ingestion, by which time there is relatively little
modern medicine can do except to treat the victim symptomatically. In the last decade
there have been one or two deaths in California every time a bumper crop has appeared.
However, none of the victims were knowledgeable fungophiles, let alone "mushroom
experts" (as they are often called by the press). The flavor, incidentally, is described by
survivors as excellent-despite the awful odor which develops in old specimens. For an
account of symptomsandtreatment, see pp. 892-893.
COMMENTS There is no rational reason why anyone should mistake the death cap for
an edible mushroom-but since when were human beings completely rational? The telltale
signs are: (I) white gills (2) white spores (3) partial veil covering the gills, then breaking to
form a skirtlike ring or annulus near the top of the stalk (4) mem branous white sack (volva)
at the base of the stalk (5) margin of the cap not striate (however, I have seen mature
specimens with small striations on the margin where the cap tissue had apparently
collapsed against the gills!). The ring is sometimes obliteratedandthe volva can be
carelessly overlooked, so just to be safe,-don't eat mushrooms with any two of these
characteristics unless you are absolutely sure what they are. Your life is at stake! The
cap color-usually greenish, but extremely variable-and the pungent odor in age (it
reeks of death) plus the association with live oak (in our area) are good secondary field-
marks. In eastern North America, A. phalloides can be confused with A. cUrinaandA.
brunnescens (see the key to Amanitaandcomments under A. porphyria).
Amanita ocreata (Destroying Angel; Death Angel)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, nearly round or oval becoming convexandfinally plane; surface
viscid when moist but soon dry, smooth, white when young but in age often discoloring
pinkish, buff, yellowish, or brownish, especially toward the center; sometimes with a very
thin white patch of universal veil tissue; margin usually (but not always!) not striate. Flesh
thick, firm when young, white; odor mild, becoming disagreeable in old age. GILLS at first
adnate or adnexed, sometimes free in age, close, white. STALK 6-20 cm long, 1-3 cm
thick, tapered upward or equal with an enlarged base, white, often finely powdered or scaly
at apex or occasionally throughout; hollow or solid. PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, white,
forming a very fragile superior or apical skirtlike ring or shredding into pieces or
disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, white, forming a saclike volva
that sheathes the base of the stalk; volva often largeandample, but sometimes thin. SPO RE
PRINT white; spores 9-14 x 7-10 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth,
amyloid. Flesh turning bright yellow in KOH (potassium hydroxide).
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground under oaks, known
from Marin County in California east to the Sierra Nevada foothillsandsouth to Arizona
and Texas. In our area it is associated with live oakandis common in the winterandspring,
usually after A. phalloides has finished fruiting. It is quite numerous, but doesn't normally
produce the huge crops typical of the latter species. Related "destroying angels" are abun-
dant under hardwoodsandconifers in eastern North America,andto a lesser extent, the
Pacific Northwest (see comments).
EDIBILITY DEADLY POISONOUS! It doesn't enjoy the same notoriety as A. phal-
loides, but is just as dangerous,andin some regions (such as southern California), it is the
more common of the two. It recently caused several deaths near San Diego. The victims
were apparently starving illegal aliens who ate the mushrooms out of desperation.
COMMENTS This elegant, pristine-pure, lethal-looking Amanita is our only white
mushroom with both an annulus (ring), a true sack (volva) at the base of the stalk,anda
non-striate (or only rarely striate) cap margin. The species epithet ocreata means
"sheathed," a reference to the voluminous volva which may extend as much as halfway up
the stalk, though it is often much smaller. The partial veil is quite fragile, however, and
often turns to shreds rather than forming a distinct ring (annulus). The sinister name
"destroying anger' also embraces three closely related, deadly poisonous, pristine-white
"veiled threats"-A. virosa(COLOR PLATE 53),A. verna, andA. bisporigera. All three
are common in eastern North America-especially under hardwoods-and have been
reported from the Pacific Northwest, but not from California. They closely resemble A.
ocreata, but are often more slenderanddo not discolor as much in age; also, A. verna
supposedly doesn't yellow in KOH. A. virosa is distinguished by its round sporesandscalier
stalk, while A. verna has elliptical sporesandA. bisporigera has 2-spored basidia and
round spores. A. albaandthe pale (white to creamy) form of A. calyptrata are easily con-
fused with these species, but always have a striate cap marginandnon-amyloid spores. Be
very careful-A. ocreata sometimes has a striate cap margin (see photo on p. 286)! Other
species: A. mutabilis is an eastern species with a white or pinkish-tinged cap. It has a sac-
like volvaandamyloid spores, stains pinkish when bruised,andoften smells like anise.
Amanita silvicola (Western Woodland Amanita)
CAP 5-12 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry or slightly viscid when moist, white (but
occasionally discolored in age), covered with flattened cottony or fluffy-powdery universal
veil tissue; margin often hung with veil remnantsandextending beyond the gills, not
striate. Flesh white; odor mild or slightly soapy. GILLS white, close, adnate toadnexed or
free, edges finely powdered or cottony. STALK 5-12 cm long, 1.5-2.5 cm thick, usually
rather stout, terminating in a basal bulb which is up to 5 cm broad; white (or sometimes
brownish-stained), usually powdery or with cottony scales. PARTIAL_VEIL white,
delicate, forming a slight ring or fibrillose zone or disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL
VEIL cottony, white, forming a scaly or indistinct volva consisting of cottony white zones
or patches at base of stalk which often disintegrate or remain in the ground. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 8-12x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in mixed woodsandunder conifers (e.g., Douglas-
fir); known only from the Pacific Northwest (where it is fairly common in the fall, parti-
cularly in campgrounds)andCalifornia. I have found it only once in our area, in December.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS This attractive Amanita can be told at a glance by its cottony white cap,
rather stout stature(for an Amanita),andenlarged stem base( see photo on next page). The
cap lacks the prominent warts characteristic of A. magniverrucata, A. cokeri, etc.,andthe
volva is not saclike as in the destroying angels (A. ocreata, A. virosa, et al). Also, the stalk
lacks the tapered, pointed, rooting base so characteristic of A. baccata. The attached gills
and indistinct volva suggest Armillaria, but it has that ineffable Amanita "aura." Also
see A. smithiana (under A. magniverrucata), a larger version of A. silvicola.
Amanita baccata (Sand Amanita) Color Plate 54
CAP 4-10 (12) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry or slightly tacky, white (but
often dirtyandsometimes discolored buff in age), with obscure mealy to powdery warts or
flattened universal veil remnants which may disappear in age; margin often hung with
veil remnants, not striate. Flesh white, soft, fragile; odor mild or slightly pungent. GILLS
close or crowded, white, becoming dingy yellowish in age, usually adnate or adnexed, but
sometimes free. STALK 5-18 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, with a long, tapered, often
pointed rooting base below a slight to distinct bulb; dry, white, sometimes with yellowish or
buff stains; usually somewhat fibrillose or with delicate ragged or powdery scales;
apex often striate. PARTIAL_VEIL white, cottony, very fragile; disappearing or forming
a thin, poorly defined superior ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, white, forming
.
.1.. .'
...
. '1',_ .
r;'or ".. '+
.....' . f.;,-...!.r' .1..
..61 t 4.;"
...
,...
.
.
i
==
,
;. :.(
,
.1.
o '>J',
. .
;0 "t.-;.
it
'-
. r
...:
\
Left: Amanita si/vico/a lacks the saclike volva of A. ocreataandthe tapered rooting base of A. baccata.
Right: Amanita baccata grows in sand; note pointed rooting base (see color plate for view of cap).
an indistinct volva or a scaly zone just above the bulb. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
10-15 x 4-6.5 microns, more or less cylindrical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in sand or sandy soil (often buried), associated with
oak and/or pine; distribution spotty-reported from southern Europe, northern Africa,
and Michigan-frequent in our area in the fallandwinter, but never in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as A. boudieri, this is an inelegant but oddly charming
Amanita. The tapered, rooting stem base, soft flesh, absence of prominent warts on the
cap, cylindrical spores,andhabitat in sand form a most distinctive combination of
features. The cap may scarcely poke above the groundandalong with the rooting base, is
usually covered with dirt or sand (see photo). The fruiting body decays rapidlyandis hard
to keep in one piece. For these reasonsandmany more, it is one of my favorite Amanitas.
A manila magn;verrucala (Pine Cone Amanita) Color Plate 55
CAP 7-20 (30) cm broad, nearly round becoming broadly convex or plane; surface dry or
slightly viscid when moist, covered with large (up to 2 cm broadandI cm high!), persistent,
strongly-attached warts, the warts pyramidal at first becoming truncated or more flattened
in age; color white to creamy-white becoming yellowish-buff or tan in old age (sometimes
with darker stains); margin usually with cottony veil remnantsandextending beyond the
gills, not striate. Flesh thick, firm, white; odor unpleasant in age (like chlorine or dirty
socks). GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or creamy, delicately powdered.
STALK 7-12 (20) cm long, 1-4 cm thick at apex, rooting deeply in ground; equal above or
tapering upward from a thicker base or bulb (up to 6 cm broad but sometimes incon-
spicuous), the rooting portion below the bulb tapered downward; white throughout or
with brownish to yellowish-buff stains; firm, rather tough. PAR TIAL V ElL white, mem-
branous, usually forming a fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL_VEIL
wartyandfriable, forming a scaly volva consisting of concentrically arranged rows of
warts or scales at apex of bulb, these sometimes disappearing in age. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 8.5-12.5 x 5.5-8.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under live oakandpine; known only from California,
but related species (see comments) are widespread. In our area it is not uncommon in the
fall, winter,andspring. It develops slowlyandpersists for weeks without decaying.
EDIBILITY Unknown-do not experiment! It belongs to the "Lepidellas," a subgroup
of Amanita that contains both poisonousandharmless species.
COMMENTS One of our most spectacular mushrooms-the large, erect warts on the cap
set it apart, making it look like a white pine cone or a glob of meringue (buttons resemble
the Sierran puffball, Ca/vatia scu/pta). It is one of several large, white, warty Amanitas
that for years have passed under the namesA. strobiliJormis andA. solitaria. However, our
species is quite distinct because of its exaggerated warts,andhas recently been rewarded
with a name of its own. I t has several large counterparts in eastern North America with an
unpleasant, often chlorine-like odorandmore fragile warts, including: A. chlorinosma,
A. polypyramis (especially large),andA. rhopalopus (with a large, deeply rooting base);
A. ravenelii, with brownish imbricate (shingled) warts or scales;andA. daucipes, which
often has a pinkish-or orange-tinged stalk. A. cokeri is a common eastern oak-and pine-
loving species that also occurs in California. It has smaller (to 5 mm broad) but firmly-
attached warts mainly at the center of the cap, a mild odor, a rooting bulb on the stalk, and
an annulus (ring)andvolva (see photo above). A. smithiana grows under conifers in the
Pacific Northwest. It looks something like a matsutake or large A. si/vico/a with its poorly
developed cottony warts, unpleasant odor,and ragged or shaggy stalk with an enlarged but
scarcely pointed base. There are many other closely related white or pallid species (the
"Lepidellas"), particularly in southeastern North America (e.g.,A. abrupta, with a broad,
abrupt basal bulb; A. longipes, usually odorless with a pointed, often flattened, rooting
bulb; A. thiersii, with a shaggy stalk; A. atkinsonianaandA. cinereopannosa, with a
grayish veil;andA. praegraveolens, with a whitish to pinkish-tan, scaly capandnon-
bulbous stalk). .. Lepidellas" grow on lawns as well as in the woods,andare often difficult
to identify without a microscope. They should not be eaten.
Amanita sp. (unidentified) (Anonymous Amanita)
CAP 2.5-5 (8) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, whitish to gray, covered with
darker (gray to brownish-gray) mealy or powdery warts which are easily obliterated;
margin not striate. Flesh white, odor rather pungent in age. GILLS usually adnate or
adnexed ( rarely free), close, creamy-white becoming dingy yellowish or yellowish-orange
in old age. STALK 2-4 (7.5) cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or tapering downward, some-
times with a short, rooting base or swollen slightly above the base; whiteandstriate above
the ring, dingy whitish or tinged cap color belowandsomewhat scaly. PARTIAL_VEIL
membranous but very fragile, disappearing or forming a superior, median, or even basal
ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, mealy-powdery, forming an indistinct or scaly
volva in the form of obscure grayish scales or powdery-mealy warts over lower portion of
stalk. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-8.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in pastures, open fields, hard-packed ground, under
trees, etc. Fairly common in our area in the fallandwinterandsometimes very abundant.
It usually grows in the open, often mingling with Agaricus campestrisandAgaricus
cupreobrunneus. which it superficially resembles. Apparently it is not mycorrhizal.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS This anomalous, anonymous Amanita is quite unamanitalike with its
short stem, compact mealy-warty, grayish cap,andpredilection for growing in meadows.
The volva is so fragile that it may disappear, but the warts on the cap signify Amanita.
A. Jarinosa is a similar species (cap small, powdery-mealy, gray to brownish-gray, etc.),
but has non-amyloid spores, a striate cap, no partial veil,andgrows in forests Or at their
edges. It is widespread but rare in the West. Two similar grayish species, A. cinereoconia
and A. onusta, are largerandapparently restricted to eastern North America; the latter
usually grows in sandy soil.
Amanita rubescens (Blushing Amanita; The Blusher)
CAP 4-I 2 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface slightly
viscid or dry, at first covered with white, pinkish, brownish, or grayish warts, the back-
ground white at first, then flushed sordid reddish, pinkish, reddish-brown, brown, etc.;
margin usually not striate. Flesh firm, white, slowly reddening when bruised; odor mild,
taste mild or latently bitter. GILLS adnate to adnexed when young, sometimes free in age;
close, white or pallid, sometimes stained reddish. STALK 5-14 (20) cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick,
equal or enlarged downward to a swollen base (bulb); at first white, soon stained sordid
reddish, reddish-brown, or pinkish below the ringandoften somewhat scaly; white or
tinged pinkish above. PARTIAL_VEIL membranous, white or tinged reddish, forming a
fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, forming an indistinct
or scaly volva (i.e., disappearing or leaving sordid reddish scaly zones at base of stalk).
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7.5-10.5x 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups in woodsandunder trees, partial to oak but
also found with conifers; commonandwidely distributed. In our area it is monogamous
with live oakandusually fruits twice-a small flush after the first fan rains,anda larger
crop in the late winterandspring (February-April) when A. velosaandA. ocreata
"bloom." It can also turn up in the summer-in fact, I've found it every month ofthe year!
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It is edible when cooked, but indigestible or even
poisonous raw,andit is easily confused with poisonous species. It is highly esteemed in
Europe (chiefly France), but our local version does not have a good flavor.
COMMENTS The "blushing" of the cap, stem,andflesh is the one infallible field mark
of this fickle fungus. The blushing process is slow to manifest itselfandis best seen on the
lower stalk or around the edges of maggot tunnels (see photograph below). In other
respects it is an exasperatingly variable Amanita. Young specimens may be pure white
(in our form), while older individuals usually develop strong reddish or brownish tones.
The warts may be evenly disposed over the entire cap surface, or concentrated at the center,
or more prevalent toward the margin, or completely absent (especially in rainy weather).
Mature specimens are sometimes mistaken for A.pantherina(ifthey are brownish), oreven
A. muscaria (if they are reddish), but the indistinct volva, reddish stains,andamyloid
spores separate it. Pure white buttons, on the other hand, resemble the A. strobiliformis
group (see A. magniverrucata), but lack the tapered, rooting base ofthose species. They can
also be confused with the "false blusher" (see below). The attached gillsandabsence of a
volva can lead to confusion with Armillaria. but once again the reddish stains distinguish it.
The "true" A. rubescens that is so common in eastern North America differs from our
form in several respects. Its universal veil is grayish to dirty pinkishandits cap is soon
reddish-brown to flesh-color to brown or olive-tinged, while ours is often white. Also, it is
a much larger, taller,andmore stately fungus,andis often parasitized bya pallid to pinkish
mold (see photo on p. 884), whereas ourformisnot. In fact, about all that our version has in
common with the "true" A. rubescens is its blushing behavior-and it may eventually
prove to be a distinct variety or species. (Perhaps we should appoint an ad hoc committee
to investigate the problem!)
Also common under live oak in our area is the "false blusher"-an unidentified and
probably unnamed species that closely mimics our A. rubescens in every respect save one:
it does not "blush." Its bulb is often brownish-stained, however,andlike A. rubescens it
is whitish when young, browner in age,andhas warts on the cap. Its edibility is unknown
-another good reason not to eat A. rubescens!
A manila aspera (Yellow-Veiled Amanita) Color Plate 56
CAP 4-12 (15) cm broad, nearly round to convex, then plane; surface viscid when moist,
dark brown to grayish-brown, yellow-brown, or bright yellow, covered with yellow mealy
or powdery warts which become flattenedandgrayish to dingy buff in age or occasionally
disappear; margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh white or tinged yellow, soft. GILLS
white or creamy-yellow" close, adnate to adnexed or free. STALK 5-15 (20) cm long,
0.7-2.5 cm thick, equal or tapering upward, the base often enlarged; white to pale yellow
above the ring, white to yellow, buff, or grayish-tinged below; base often with orangish,
reddish, or brown stains ( on exterior or interior). PAR TIAL V ElL membranous, white or
pale yellow above, bright yellow to grayish-yellow on underside; forming a superior, skirt-
like ring on stalk. UNIVERSAL_VEIL powdery, friable, forming a scaly volva (scaly
zones and/or yellow to grayish-yellow powdery scales) at base of stalk, but volva easily
obliterated. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-12 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups under both hardwoodsandconifers;
common in our areaandthroughout the Pacific Northwest, but seldom in large numbers.
I t often grows with A. muscaria in our coastal pine forestsandthe two make a colorful pair;
it is also frequent in our oak-madrone woodlands. Rather than fruiting in one large,
spectacular burst like A. calyptrataandA. muscaria, it usually keeps a lower profile, fruit-
ing rather sporadically throughout the mushroom season.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. Chemical analysis has failed to reveal the presence of
amanita-toxins, but this does not mean it is edible. True, the European form is edible
(according to one source),andif ourform were poisonous we would probably know by now
-but why tempt fate when there are so many other safe, savory mushrooms available?
COMMENTS This elegant Amanita is easily recognized by its powdery yellow universal
veilandyellow partial veil. Fresh specimens are among our most lovely mushrooms. The
cap color ranges from yellow through yellow-brown to dark brownandis apt to bewilder
the color-conscious beginner. A. pantherinaandA. gemmata are often confused with A.
aspera, but have non-amyloid sporesandwhite veils plus a collarlike volva. A. Jlavo-
rubescens (=A.Jlavorubens) is a very similar if not identical species with a yellow-orange
to yellow or yellow-brown cap. It is common in eastern North America, especially under
oak. A.flavoconia is also similar, but is smallerandnever brownandis rare in the West.
A manila flavoconia
CAP 2.5-7.5 (10) cm broad, nearly oval becoming convex or plane; surface viscid when
moist, bright orange to yellow-orange or yellow, or orange at the centerandyellow at the
margin; adorned with scattered yellow warts which may disappear in age orrainy weather;
margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh rather thin, white. GILLS adnate to adnexed or
free, close, white, sometimes with yellow edges. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick,
tapering upward or equal with an enlarged base; smooth or somewhat scaly, yellow or
sometimes white. PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, forming a superior, skirtlike ring which
usually has a yellow underside. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, forming a scaly volva consis-
ting of powdery yellow scalesandpatches at base of stalk which wear off easily or disappear
in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in woods (mainly under hardwoods, but
also with conifers); often abundant in summerandearly fall in eastern North America, but
rare in the West. (It occurs in Arizonaandhas been found in northern California.)
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS This beautiful Amanita looks like a miniature A. muscaria,andis often
mistaken for the yellow-orange form of that species. However, it does not have concentric
rings at the base of the stalkandis much smaller. The yellow veil remnants are reminiscent
of A. aspera, but the cap is orange to yellow rather than yellow to brown,andthe stalk is
often yellow as well. Other species: A.frostiana of eastern North America is similar, but
has whitish to buff warts, a more distinct volva,andnon-amyloid spores.
Amanita porphyria (Booted Amanita)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface slightly viscid when
moist, gray to grayish-brown, often with a subtle purplish cast; usually adorned with
scattered grayish (or sometimes whitish) warts, these sometimes merging to form a patch
or often wearing off or washing away; margin not striate or only faintly so. Flesh white;
odor often turniplike in age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or sometimes
aging or bruising grayish. STALK 5-18 cm long, 1-1.5 cm thick at apex, equal above with
a large, soft, abrupt, rounded or flattened bulb at the base; bulb often cleft; white or pale
gray above the ring, gray or with grayish to grayish-brown or purple-gray patches below.
PARTIAL_VEIL membranous, forming a superior, skirtlike ring which often collapses
or disappears in age; ring gray or grayish-yellow. UNIVERSAL_VEIL somewhat mem-
branous but also friable; forming a collarlike volva (free rim) around the apex of bulb or
leaving scattered grayish patches or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-10
microns, round, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups under conifers; widely distributed in
northern North America. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest but rather rare in
California. I have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Poisonous?? Do not experiment!
COMMENTS The abrupt, soft, rounded, basal bulbandgrayish color distinguish this
conifer-loving Amanita. The volva may have a free margin but is not truly saclike. In
eastern North America there are two related species with a prominent basal bulb:
A. citrina (=A. mappa) is very common (mainly under hardwoods)andrather slim, with
a pale yellow to yellow-green to whitish capandbuffy-white to pinkish or lavender-gray
warts; A. brunnescens, also fond of hardwoods, has a brown to olive-brown or paler cap,
a stalk that stains reddish-brown,anda longitudinally split or chiselled basal bulb; it has
also been reported from the Pacific Northwest. Neither of these Amanitas should be eaten.
Amanita pantherina (Panther Amanita)
CAP 5-15 (25) cm broad, nearly round or convex becoming plane to slightly depressed;
surface viscid when moist, color variable: dark brown to light brown, tan, dull yellowish,
or paler (see comments), often darker at centerandpaler toward margin; adorned with
many white to pale buff universal veil remnants ( warts), but these often washed off by rain;
margin usually striate. Flesh firm, white. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or
pallid. STALK 5-15 (20) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, tapering upward or equal with a basal
bulb; dry, white or aging buff; usually smooth above the ring, often scaly below. PAR TIAL
VEIL membranous, white, forming a superior or median skirtlike ring whose margin is
often ragged or toothed. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, white, usually forming a collarlike
volva (i.e., adhering to the bulb except for a free rim at apex of bulb), sometimes also with
scaly or ragged zones above the free rim, or sometimes indistinct (no free rim). SPORE
PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed,
but especially common under conifers from the Rocky Mountains westward. In our area it
fruits from fall through springandis quite common under pine, oak,andDouglas-fir,
though rarely in the large numbers characteristic of A. muscaria. In the Pacific Northwest
and Sierra Nevada it is perhaps the most omnipresent of all the Amanitas.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! It contains the same toxins as A. muscaria, but apparently in
higher concentrations-large doses can be fatal! It is said to be one ofthe most common
causes of mushroom poisoning in the Pacific Northwest.
COMMENTS The dark brown to tan or dull yellowish cap with whitish wartsandthe
free rim or collar at the top ofthe basal bulb are the field marks ofthis ubiquitous species. As
is often the case in Amanita, there is considerable variation in cap color as well as in size.
Yellowish forms are difficult to distinguish from A. gemmata-generally they are duller
and often somewhat browner at the center, but the two species appear to intergrade (see
comments under A gemmata). The cap is never red or bright orange-yellow as in A.
muscaria,andthe stalk lacks the grayish patches characteristic of A. porphyria. A. sp;ssa
of eastern North America is somewhat similar, but has amyloid sporesanda gray universal
veil that leaves a powdery-scaly rather than collarlike volva. A. cothuTnata is a slender
eastern species with a whitish cap that is often tinged yellowish or brown at the center. A
mushroom meeting this description occurs in our area, but is rare. Some amanitologists
consider A. cothurnata to be a variety of A. pantherina.
Amanita gemmata (Gemmed Amanita; Jonquil Amanita)
CAP 4-10 (14) cm broad, rounded becoming convex to plane; surface slightly viscid when
moist, creamy to pale yellow, golden-yellow, or buff (but see comments), often slightly
darker at the center; covered with whitish universal veil remnants (warts) which may merge
to form a patch or may disappear in age; margin striate or not. Flesh white, fairly thick.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick,
tapered upward or equal with an enlarged base; dry, white or tinged yellowish, usually
smooth above the ringandsometimes scaly below. PARTIAL_VEIL typically present
(but absent in var. exannulata), membranous, white; forming a fragile, superior to
median, skirtlike ring on stalk, or disappearing. UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable to somewhat
cottony, white, usually forming a collarlike volva (free rim) at apex of basal bulb,
sometimes also with scaly zones above rim, or sometimes forming a thin sheath instead
of a rim, or sometimes the volva more or less indistinct. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
8-13 x 6-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woods or along forested pathsandroads;
widely distributed. In our area it occurs in mixed woodsandunder live oak shortly after the
first fall rainsandless commonly thereafter. In the Sierra NevadaandPacific Northwest
it is common under conifers in the springas well as the summerandfall. The mountain form
differs slightly from the typical formandmay eventually be classified as a separate species.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! Some books list it as edible, but other sources say it contains
the same toxins as A. pantherinaandA. muscaria.
COMMENTS Also known asA. junqui//ea, this attractive Amanita can be distinguished
from typical A. pantherina by its yellow to creamy capandmore modest size. (A. pan-
therina ranges from small to very large.) However, a confusing series of "hybrids" exist
whose cap coloranddegree oftoxicity are intermediate between the two species. A. aspera
and A.j7avoconia differ by having yellow veil remnants, while the yellow-capped form of
A. muscaria is larger, with a volva composed of concentric rings. Sometimes the universal
veil of A. gemmata forms a continuous layer over the entire ca p, but does not peel off easily
like the volval patch of A. calyptrata. The latter also differs inits large, thick, saclike volva.
Other species: A. russu/oides of eastern North America is a similar, slimmer version of
A. gemmataandmay just be a regional variation. A. breckoniihas a double, nearly basal
annulus (ring)anda short, tapered, rooting base beneath the bulb. It occurs in our area
under pineandperhaps oak, but is rare. A small species with an orange cap (sometimes
yellow toward margin)andno partial veil also occurs rarely in our area. It may be a form
ofvar. exannulata or it may be an undescribed species.
A manila muscar;a
(Fly Agaric; Fly Amanita) Color Plates 58, 59
CAP 5-30 (40) cm broad, round becoming convexandfinally plane or slightly depressed;
surface viscid when moist, color variable: bright red to blood-red, scarlet-red, or orange-
red when fresh (var. muscariaandvar.flavivolvata), but often fading to orange, yellow-
orange, or paler; bright yellow-orange to yellow, then fading( var.formosa); yellow with a
peachy center ( var. persicina); or white to buff to silvery-grayish-white( var. alba); covered
at first with a dense coating of universal veil fragments (warts) which are usually white( but
are yellow in var.flavivolvataandoften buff or tan in var. alba); warts flattened in age, often
wearing away or washed off by rain; margin usually at least somewhat striate. Flesh firm
when young, soft inage; thick, white. GILLS adnatetoadnexed or free, close, broad, white.
STALK 5-20 (30) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick at apex, tapering upward or equal with a basal
bulb up to 6 cm broad; white or whitish, or somewhat discolored in age; smooth or
somewhat ragged-scaly below the ring; often fragile in old age. PARTIAL_VEIL
membranous, usually forming a thin, persistent, median to superior, skirtlike ring on stalk
which may collapse in age; ring white or with yellow patches, margin often torn or toothed.
UNIVERSAL_VEIL friable, forming a scaly volva at apex of bulb consisting of one or more
(usually 24) concentric rings. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 6.5-9 microns, broadly
elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious or in large rings in forestsandat
their edges, also with planted trees. Common throughout most of the northern
hemisphere-its fa vorite mycorrhizal mates include pine, spruce, fir, birch,andaspen. The
bright red form with white warts (vaL muscaria) is the common one in western North
America as well as EuropeandAsia. In our area it fruits along with the yellow-warted
variety from fall to early springandis often abundant in our coastal pine forestsandalong
freeways where pines have been planted. It also turns up occasionally under oak and
madrone. In the Rocky Mountains it is common in late summer with spruceandin the
Pacific Northwest in the fall with various conifers. The red-capped form with yellow warts
(vaL j7avivo/vala) has a southern distribution but is quite common in our area. The form
with a bright yellow to yellow-orange cap (vaLjurmu:m) is the dominant one in eastern
North America. In California it iscommonin the Sierra Nevada but ratherrarein the Coast
ranges. The grayish-white form (var. alba) is more common in northern regions. It has been
found in northern California, but is rare. The peach-centered variety (var. persicina) is
most common in the Southeast. It is interesting to note that wherever A. muscaria grows it
is often accompanied by Boletus edulis.andcan serve as a "red flag" indicator for that
species. I've even seen a very large ring of A. muscaria locally that numbered over 100
fruiting bodies, with three bulky B. edu/is growing right in the middle of it!
EDIBILITY Poisonousandhallucinogenic-esteemed by both maggotsandmystics.
Fatalities are extremely rare, but it is undoubtedly dangerous in large or even moderate
amounts. The effects vary from person to person, mushroom to mushroom,andfrom
region to regionandseason to season, so that there is no way to determine in advance
what one's reaction will be. Too many people have had unpleasant experiences for me to
recommend it (for an account of its effects, see p. 894). Tales of "getting off' by nibbling
on a piece of the veil or licking the "stars" off the cap are frivolous. However, the skin ap-
parently contains greater concentrations of the toxins than the rest of the fruiting body.
The name ..fly agaric," incidentally, is derived from the ancient practice of using the mush-
room (often mixed with milk) to stupefy flies. It is also notable for its ability to concentrate
vanadium-a rare, malleable, ductile metal used to add tensile strength to steel-from the
soil.
COMMENTS The brilliant red form of this mushroom needs no introduction-it is
known to every myopic middle-class ..mystic" in America. Its caricature appears on key
chains, incense holders, posters, candles, curtains, calling cards,andcalendars. Large
plastic reproductions can be found on lawnsandin display windows, amusement parks,
and fantasy decor. The irony of it is that few people realize that such a mushroom actually
exists! The color, of course, is its outstanding field mark, plus the numerous warts on the
cap, which look like curds of cottage cheese, or to the more cosmically inclined, like ..stars."
(The warts may be washed off by rain, however.) The white gills, presence of an annulus
(ring),andscaly volva separate it from other bright red mushrooms(notablythe Russulas),
and, unless you're color blind, it is difficult to confuse it with any of our other Amanitas.
The cap may fade drastically as it ages, especially in direct sunlight or after a soaking rain,
but will usually retain at least some vestige of its original splendor. The other color forms,
particularly the white one, are not quite so distinctive,andare best recognized by their
valva, which usually consists of a series of scaly concentric rings above the basal bulb. In
our area the fly agaric grows bigger than any other Amanita-I have seen ..monsters"
nearly two feet broad! In such specimens the stalk has difficulty supporting the weight of
the capandwill break at the slightest provocation, or even topple over of its own accord.
A manila caesarea group (Caesar's Amanita) Color Plate 60
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, nearly oval to convex, becoming broadly convex or plane; surface
slightly viscid when moist, smooth, or sometimes with one or two pieces of thick white
universal veil tissue; bright red to orange-red or orange, often fading to yellowish or even
paler in sunlight or heavy rain; margin conspicuously striate. Flesh thick, yellow under
the cuticle, otherwise white. GILLS close, broad, adnate to adnexed or free, bright chrome-
yellow or at times egg-yellow, or pale yellow with darker yellow edges. STALK 5-15 (20)
cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below (but may appear bulbous from the
thick volva); smooth or with small scales, same color as gills or slightly paler; stuffed with a
pith or jelly, eventually hollow. PARTIAL_VEIL membranous, forming a persistent,
superiorandoften striate, skirtlike ring which is colored like the gills. UNIVERSAL_VEIL
thick, membranous, white, forming a large, rather tough, lobed, saclike volva which is
attached only to the base of stalkandmay have a flange within. SPORE_PRINT white or
faintly yellow; spores 8-12x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or sometimes in large rings, in pineandoak woods in
southern Europeandmuch ofthe warm temperate zone. Its North American distribution
parallels that of Lactarius indigo: it is common in the summer under ponderosa pine in
ArizonaandNew Mexico, as well as with various pines in MexicoandCentral America,
and a slightly different variety (see comments) occurs in the southeastern United States
north to Quebec. It has not been recorded from California but is to be looked for in the
warmer parts of the state (it is apparently supplanted by A. calyptrata). I have seen
enormous fruitings near the Grand Canyon, in AugustandSeptember.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly prized in Europe, where it is considered among the very
best of all mushrooms (it is said to have been a favorite of the Caesars). In America,
however, it is not so highly regarded. Its flavor is very similar to that of A. calyptrata, which
is to say, not to everyone's liking. Because of its brilliant color it is by far the safest ofthe
Amanitas for the table (but not necessarily the best-see A. velosal).
COMMENTS This resplendent prince of the Amanitas is easily distinguished by its bright
yellow gillsandstalk, brilliant red to orange cap with striate margin,andthick, volumi-
nous, white saclike volva. It is a robust fungus that calls to mind A. calyptrata. In fact,
it may mimic the latter in having one or more thick patches of veil tissue on the cap,
especially in dry climates. The variety in eastern North America has a slimmer stalk
(sometimes with reddish fibrils) plus a usually bald, sometimes umbonate cap that is often
yellow toward the margin in age. It is now considered a distinct species, A. hemibapha
(formerly A. umbonata). Another common eastern species, A. parcivolvata, is similar in
color( red to yellow-orange striate capandyellow gills), but lacks a partial veilanddoes not
have a saclike volva; it is harmless anyway. The poisonous A. muscaria is easily dis-
tinguished by its warted cap, white gillsandstalk,andscaly rather than sac1ike volva.
Amanita calyptrata (Coccora; Coccoli) Color Plates 61, 62, 63
CAP 7-25 cm or more broad, rounded becoming convexandfinally plane; surface viscid
when wet, usually with a large, thick, central, cottony whitish patch of universal veil tissue;
otherwise typically dull orange to orange-brown, bronze, yellow-brown, or dark brown,
usually with a paler (yellow) margin, or pale yellow to creamy or whitish (the pale form)
or occasionally greenish; margin usually clearly striate. Flesh firm, thick, white or creamy;
odor mild becoming slightly unpleasant in age. GILLS broad, close, adnate becoming
adnexed or free, white to pale creamy-yellow. STALK 7-25 cmlong, 1-3.5 cm thick, equal
or tapering upward, smooth, creamy to yellowish (typical form) or creamy to white (pale
form) or white to greenish (greenish form); hollow, the cavity often filled with a cottony
or jellylike substance. PARTIAL_VEIL membranous, colored like stalk or slightly darker,
forming a large but fragile, superior, skirt like ring on stalk which is easily obliterated.
UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, white, forming a large saclike volva that sheathes the
stalk base; volva thick, ample, felty or cottony, often lobed, often with a collar or flange
within. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; known only
from the west coast. The distribution of the typical (darker) form parallels that of its
favorite mycorrhizal mate, madrone: it is common in northern Californiaandsouthern
Oregon, where madrone is also common, less frequent in Washington, where madrone is
likewise less numerous, then common again on Vancouver Island in British Columbia,
where madrone is abundant. In our area it usually fruits after the first fall rains, sometimes
in tremendous quantity. The pale form, on the other hand, is a late winterandspring
mushroom. In our area it favors oak, but never fruits in the large quantities characteristic
of the fall (typical) form. In the Sierra Nevada the pale form is prevalent under pine and
other conifers, often forming "mushrumps" (especially in the spring).
EDIBILITY Edibleandpopular, but with a ra ther strong, fishy fla vor tha t doesn't appeal
to everyone. Too many people eatandenjoy the typical form for me not to recommend it.
However, be absolutely sure of your identification, review the comments on pp. 264-265,
and avoid the paleandgreenish forms, which are easily confused with poisonous species
(see photo on next page!). The caps are superb stuffedandthen broiled. The hollow stems
can be sliced crosswise(to make rings)andmarinated. The flesh does not keep well, so use
what you pick as soon as possible. Italian-Americans stalk it with a passion, undoubtedly
because of its resemblance-in both appearanceandflavor-to their beloved A. caesarea
of Italy. "Coccora," "coccoli,"and"cocconi" (another nickname) are presumably derived
from an Italian word for cocoon-a very apt description ofthe large, soft, cottony "eggs."
COMMENTS For many years this species has been called A. calyptroderma, but the
name A. calyptrata, first applied to the greenish form, may be the correct one according
to the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (whose purpose it is to dispel con-
fusion) because it was published first. The typical ( darker) formand the pale form are quite
different in color, as evidenced by the color plates. In my opinion they merit at least varietal
status (just like the varieties of A. muscaria) because they do not appear to intergrade and
are ecologically distinct (see comments above). The rare greenish form, on the other hand,
may be environmentally-induced (mycologist Harry Thiers suggests it is caused by cold
temperatures). The typical form of this magnificent mushroom is distinguished by its
(1) large size (2) orange to brown or yellow-brown cap with a yellow margin (3) cottony
white volval patch or "skullcap" on the cap (4) striate cap margin(5) creamy or pale yellow
tints to the stalkandveil(6) thick, voluminous, saclike volva(7) non-amyloid spores. Even
beginners have little trouble recognizing the typical (darker) form once they've seen it
several times. In the deadly poisonous A. phalloides the cap is usually (but not always)
greenish to greenish-yellow or paler, there is no volval patch or if one is present it is very
thin, the cap margin is only very rarely striate, the spores are amyloid,andan unpleasant
pungent odor often develops in age. Veteran toadstool-testers can differentiate them at a
glance by their color, but beginners should not place undue emphasis on such a capricious
character. The veil tissue on the cap ofA. gemmataandA. pantherina can mimic a" patch,"
but does not peel off easily,andthe volva in those species is collarlike or indistinct, not sac-
like. The pale form of A. calyptrata is easily confused with poisonous Amanitas such as
A. ocreataandA. gemmata.andI cannot recommend it to any but the most seasoned and
intrepid toadstool-tester. The same goes for the greenish form. Another variety, originally
called A. calyptratoides, may be a distinct species. I have found it only once in our area, but
it is quite common in southern California under oaks. It sometimes approachesA. vel os a in
sizeandstature,andhas a very poorly formed, appressed or evanescent annulus (ring), a
brown cap without a yellow margin,anda modest volval patch. It is edible, but care must be
taken in identification!
Amanita velosa (Springtime Amanita) Color Plate 64
CAP 3-12 (15) em broad, at first nearly oval, soon convexandfinally plane; surface viscid
when moist, smooth, pinkish-tan to orange-buff to salmon, beige, "the color of a brown
hen's egg," or sometimes much paler (even white), often fading; usually with a white patch
of universal veil tissue or several large, thick pieces; margin distinctly striate. Flesh
fairly thick, white, odor rather pungent in age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close,
white, sometimes dull pinkish in old age. STALK 5-12 (15) em long, 0.5-1.5 (2.5) em thick,
equal or tapering upward; white or tinged cap color, apex often powdery or striate,
lower portion smooth or broken into rings or scales. PARTIAL_VEIL usually absent, but
a rudimentary ring (annulus) sometimes present as a cottony or fibrillose-scaly zone.
UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, forming a saclike volva which sheathes the stalk base;
volva white or tinged cap color, usually buried, ample but sometimes disintegrating or
obscure. SPORE_PRINT white or tinged very slightly pinkish; spores 8.5-12.5 x 6-10
microns, nearly round to elliptical, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious, common in winterandspring, associated in
our area with live oak but often growing out in the open(in fieldsandaround their edges,
brushy areas, lawns, etc.), up to 40 feet away from its mycorrhizal host (which is often
stunted by poor soil conditions). It also occurs in the aspen-conifer forests of the Sierra
Nevadaandwith various oaks in the Sierra Nevada foothillsandsouthern Oregon. It is
apparently endemic to the west coastandmore common in our area than anywhere else.
With A. rubescensandA. ocreala it forms a striking triumvirate of springtime Amanitas
that are monogamous locally with live oak. It is interesting to note that when all three form
mycorrhiza with the same tree, they frequently occupy distinctly different zones or niches:
A. ve/osa typically grows in the open at the outer fringes of the host's roots; A. ocreala
grows in deep shade near the trunk;andA. rubescens occupies the intermediate zone or
"shade border" near the perimeter of the branche.
EDIBILITY Edibleandincredible! Most "objective" fungophiles rate it far superior to
the better-known A. ca/yplralaandA. caesarea. At any rate, it is far sweeter. As a bonus,
it fruits in the spring when there is a paucity of other collectable delectables. However,
it is nol a good choice for beginners. Faded specimens should be avoided, as they are
easily confused with A. ocrealaandother poisonous Amanitas.
COMMENTS The pinkish-tan to orange-buff, beige, or paler ca p with striate margin and
volval patch or large warts, absence of a partial veil, saclike volvaandhabit offruitingin the
open (unusual behavior for an Amanila.') are the fallible field marks of this handsome but
variable fungus. In our area it is the last of its clan to appear-often not showing up until
February-but as if to make up for its tardiness, it lingers on through April or even May.
A. ca/YPlralaandA. ca/yplraloides both have volval patches but are differently colored,
tend to grow in the woods,andhave a partial veil. However, A. ve/osa often has a
rudimentary ringandone specimen I found had a full-fledged membranous partial veil that
covered the gills when youngandbroke to form an annulus (ring). This lends credence to
the modern trend toward de-emp hasizing gross structural (" Friesian") fea turesandpaying
more attention to chemicalandanatomical (microscopic) similarities. The obsolete genus
AmanilOpsis (Amanitas without a partial veil) was incorporated into A manila onjust such
a pretext. The trend may bode ill for the multitudes without microscopes, but it better
reflects natural relationships. A. crocea, an easternandRocky Mountain species, is similar
and equally delicious, but has an oranger, usually bald capandorangish scales on the stalk.
Amanitafulva (Tawny Grisette)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, oval becoming convex to plane or umbonate; surface slightly viscid
when moist, smooth or rarely with large whitish fragments of universal veil tissue;
orange-brown to reddish-tan, tawny, or tan; margin deeply grooved (striate). Flesh thin,
white, odor mild. GILLS close, adnexed or free, white or creamy. STALK 7-16 cm long,
0.4-1.5 cm thick, more orlessequal, usuallyratherlong, white or tinged cap color; fibrillose
or with a few scales, hollow in age. PARTIAL_VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL_VEIL
membranous, forming a large, loose, persistent, lobed, saclike volva which sheathes the
stalk base; volva or "bag" white to pale tan or rusty-stained. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
8-10 microns, round, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious under both hardwoodsandconifers, often
in boggy areas; widely distributed but not yet reported from California. I have seen large
fruitings in the aspen-conifer forests of the southern Rocky Mountains in late summer.
EDIBILITY Edible, but be sure of your identification!
COMMENTS This species is essentially a "fulvous" version of the grisette, A. vaginala,
and for many years was regarded as a mere color form of that species. The orange-brown to
reddish-tan, markedly grooved cap, absence of a partial veil, large "bag" at the base of the
stem,andrather tall, slender stature distinguish it. It is quite handsome when fresh. Other
species: A. CTocea is similar but has an oranger capandpale orange scales on the stalk.
Amanita vagi nata (Grisette)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, at first oval, then convexandfinally plane or with a slight umbo;
surface slightly viscid when moist, gray to grayish-brown, smooth or sometimes with a
white patch or patches of universal veil tissue; margin grooved (deeply striate). Flesh soft,
white to grayish, thin. GILLS white or tinged gray, adnate to adnexed or free, close.
STALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, usually rather longandslender; equal or tapering
upward, smoothandwhite or often covered with delicate grayish to grayish-brown scales.
PAR TIAL VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, forming a saclike volva that
sheathes the stalk but is attached only at the very base; volva white or tinged gray
(occasionally rusty-stained), loose, lobed. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-12 microns,
round or nearly round, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in woods or under trees; common and
widely distributed. In our area it occurs under both hardwoodsandconifers, but is largely
supplanted by A. pachycoleaandA. constricta.
EDIBILITY Edible when cooked,andfairly good. Though prized in France, it tends to be
flaccid, thin-fleshed,anddoes not refrigerate well. It is one of the safest Amanitas for the
table, but see comments on pp. 264-265 before eating it!
COMMENTS The combination of deeply striate gray to gray-brown cap, white gills,
absence of a ring,andmembranous sack or "bag" at the base of the stem typifies a group of
Amanitas collectively called A. vaginata. The group is especially complex in the South-
west, where a number of forms with white to gray or brown caps are common in ponderosa
and pinyon pine forests after summer thundershowers. Several color forms of A. vaginata
have been described, some of which are now considered distinct species. One is A.fulva
(see description); another isA. alba, which has a pure white, grooved (striate) cap, a saclike
volva,andno partial veil. Although edible, A. alba should not be eaten because of its
resemblance to the destroying angels (A. ocreata, A. virosa, etc.). I have found it only twice
in our area, but it is said to be fairly common in some regions. A. vaginata has also been
called A man;tops;s vag;nataandJ1 ag;nata plumbea.
Amanita constricta (Constricted Grisette)
CAP 4-13 cm broad, oval becoming convex or plane to slightly umbonate; surface slightly
viscid when moist, smooth or covered with a large patch of white to buff or grayish universal
veil tissue which often separates later into several pieces; color beneath the veil tissue (if
present) gray, or sometimes brownish-gray. Flesh fragile, rather thin, white to grayish.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, white or grayish. STALK 10-16 cm long, 1-2 cm
thick, equal or tapering upward, stuffed or hollow in age; smooth or more often belted with
numerous delicate grayish scales. PARTIAL_VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL_VEIL mem-
branous, gray to white or buff, often bruising reddish when wet; forming a constricted,
flaring volva (i.e., lower portion of volva constricted around the stalk, upper margin
flaring outward) which may disintegrate in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9.5-13 x
8-10.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups in woods, associated mainly with oaks;
apparently endemic to California or at least the west coast. Common in our area
throughout the mushroom season but most abundant in the winter
EDIBILITY Edible, but see comments on pp. 264-265 before eating it!
COMMENTS The gray, conspicuously striate cap, absence of a partial veil,andpeculiar
constricted volva are the hallmarks of this Amanita. It is the most common grisette
in our area. It is easily distinguished from both A. pachycoleaandA. vaginata by its
constricted rather than saclike volva,andfrequent presence of universal veil tissue on the
ca p. A. inaurata (= A. strangulata, A. ceciliae) is a closely related species" com plex" whose
volva is also "strangled," usually forming a belt of grayish tissue around the stalk base.
It has a gray to grayish-brown to blackish cap decorated with gray to charcoal-gray warts
(which may wear off in age)andit has round spores(IO-14 microns). It is fairly common in
the Pacific Northwest as well as in eastern North America, but I have yet to find it in our
area.
Amanita pachycolea (Western Grisette) Color Plates 65, 66
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, at first nearly oval, then convex or somewhat bell-shaped, finally
plane or with uplifted marginandoften a low, broad umbo; surface smooth, viscid when
moist, dark brown when young, brown to grayish-brown or paler in age (usually darker
at the centerandpaler toward margin or with a darker brown band at inner edge of the
striations); sometimes completely washed out in old age, occasionally with a thick patch or
patches of universal veil tissue; margin grooved (deeply striate) for 1.5-3 cm. Flesh white,
rather soft; odor sometimes unpleasant in age. GILLS close, broad, adnate becoming
adnexed or free; white with dark brown edges when fresh, sometimes discoloring dingy
orange or yellow-orange in old age. STALK 12-30 cm long or more, 1-3 cm thick, equal
or tapering upward gradually, usually covered with fine, delicate, grayish-brown to brown
particles or fibrillose scales on a pallid background; stuffed or hollow in age. PARTIAL
VEIL absent. UNIVERSAL_VEIL membranous, forming a very large, loose, lobed,
saclike volva which sheathes lower portion of stalk for up to 12 cm but is attached only at
the very base; volva ample, thick, white or rusty-stained. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
11-14.5 x 10-12.5 microns, broadly elliptical to round, smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in mall groups in mixed woodsandunder conifers;
apparently restricted to the Pacific Coast. It is fairly common in our area in the fall and
winter with pineandoak, but rarely fruits in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice. Though meatierthanA. vagi nata, it develops a rather
strong fishy taste in age. See comments on pp. 264-265 if you plan to eat it.
COMMENTS This lofty Amanita is easily recognized by its brown, deeply striate cap,
absence of a ring (partial veil),andhuge sheathing "bag" at the base of the stem. It is one of
the most strikingly beautiful of all mushrooms, differing from its close relatives in the
A. vaginata group by its larger size, brown rather than gray cap,andfrequent presence of
rusty stains on the huge volva. The volva is so voluminous that even washed out specimens
are easily recognized. The stalk in mature individuals is so longandfragile that it is difficult
to transport them home in one piece. Other species: A. umbrino/utea is similar, but is
said to have white gills, smaller spores,anda wide distribution.
Limacella glioderma
CAP 3-8 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate; surface viscid to nearly dry,
bright to dull brick-red. reddish-brown, cinnamon, chestnut-brown, or at times orange-
brown, sometimes fading in age to pinkish-tan; cuticle often breaking up into small fibril-
lose scales or pulling away from the margin, revealing the pinkish flesh underneath; margin
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, tinged pinkish; odor distinctly but pleasantly
farinaceous. GILLS adnexed or notched, or in age becoming free; close, whitish or tinged
cap color. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, often rather slenderandfragile,
equal or slightly thicker at either end; dry or occasionally with a few patches of slime from
the cap; whitish or pallid above the ring, with cap-colored scales, patches, and/or fibrils
below. PARTIAL_VEIL fibrillose, whitish, forming a slight superior ring or ragged zone
on stalk or disappearing entirely. UNIVERSAL_VEIL evanescent (usually not visible),
not forming a volva. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-5 microns, round, smooth, not
amyloid. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed, and
the most common Limacella in our area. I find it regularly in the late fallandwinter with
oak, madrone,andconifers.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike myself, likely to remain so.
COMMENTS The viscid reddish-brown cap, evanescent veil,anddry fragile stem
distinguish this species from other Limacellas. Because the gills may be slightly attached
to the stalk, this fungus has been placed" in Trich%maandArmillaria. However, the
divergent gill hyphae (a microscopic feature) indicate Limacella. The prevalent form in
our area has only a slightly viscid cap, but fairly glutinous specimens are also encountered.
L. g/ischra is a widespread but rare species with a bright reddish-brown capandstalk, both
of which are very slimy when moist.L. kauJJmanii is a southern species with a more or less
golden-brown, viscid-slimy capandstalk. N either of these is worth eating.
Limacella illinita
(White Limacella)
CAP 2-8 cm broad, at first rounded or oval, then convex, finally plane or broadly umbo-
nate; surface smooth, very slimy or at least viscid, white to creamy-white in typical variety,
brownish at the centerandwhite at the margin in var. argi//acea; margin often hung with
slimy veil remnants. Flesh thin, soft, white. GILLS notched or free, white, close, STALK
5-9 (13) cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, equal or tapering upward, slimy or viscid, white in typical
variety, but tinged tan or buff in var. argillacea. PARTIAL_VEIL fibrillose beneath a layer
of slime, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring. UNIVERSAL_VEIL slimy, coating stalk
and cap but not forming a volva. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-6.5 x 4-6 microns,
broadly elliptical to round, smooth, not amyloid. Gill tissue divergent.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups in woods, widely distributed; probably the most
common Limacella in North America. In our area the typical variety turns up occasionally
after heavy rains in the fallandwinter in mixed woodsandunder Douglas-fir. I have seen
var. argillacea only once-a large fruiting under tanoak. The typical variety is also said
to occur in sand dunes. In the South it is said to be common on lawns as well as in woods.
EDIBILITY Unknown. The slime is a formidable deterrent.
COMMENTS The slimy white or brown-tinged capandstem combine with the free gills
to set this slippery mushroom apart. Hygrophorus eburneus isjust as glutinous, but has
adnate to decurrent gillsandis much more common. L. so/idipes is a widely distributed
but rare species with a viscid white cap, large flaring to skirtlike ring,anddry white stalk.
It also occurs in mixed woods in our areaandcould be mistaken for Lepiota naucina,
but the viscid capandwoodland habitat distinguish it. Other species: L. roseicremea,
known only from Washington, is similar but has a creamy or rose-tinged cap plus a dis-
tinctly membranous partial veilandannulus (ring).
Chlorophyllum molybdites (Green-Spored Parasol)
CAP (5) 10-30 (40) em broad, oval or nearly round, then convex to broadly cone-shaped,
plane, or umbonate; surface dry, at first smooth but soon breaking up into light brown to
brown or pinkish-brown scales on a white background; scales flat or curled, usually rather
few at maturityandconcentrated toward the center. Flesh thick, white, soft in age; not
staining when bruised or bruising slowly reddish or occasionally bruising orange in the
stalk. GILLS free, broad, close, white to dingy yellowish, then slowly becoming grayish
to greenish in old age. STALK 5-25 em long, 1-2.5 em thick at apex, equal or thicker at base;
smooth, firm, white or brownish-stained VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent,
superior, double-edged ring on stalk; ring becoming brownish on undersideandusually
movable in age. SPORE_PRINT grayish-olive to greenish; spores 8-13 x 6.5-9 microns,
elliptical, smooth, thick-walled, with an apical pore, dextrinoid. Cap cuticle composed
of narrow, interwoven, mostly repent hyphae (but often upright at center of cap).
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups or large rings on lawnsandother grassy
places, also in gardens; fruiting in summer or during warm weatherandwidely distributed
in the tropicsandwarm temperate zone. It is common in most of easternandsouthern
North America as well as inland northern California. I have seen enormous fruitings on
lawns in Fresno, Los Angeles, Palo Alto,andSan Diego, but have never seen it on the
central California coast, perhaps because of the cool summers.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! Some people eat it without ill effect but many suffer severe
gastrointestinal distress. It is probably the most common cause of mushroom poisoning in
the United S ta tes, a tribute to its growth on la wns, tern pting size( it borders on being irresis-
tible)andresemblance to LeplOta rachodes, Coprinus comatus, Agaricus species, etc.
COMMENTS This distinctive summer mushroom always attracts attention because of
its large sizeandhandsome appearance (frisbee-sized specimens are commonplace). In
much of inlandandsouthern Californiaandthe Southwest, it is one of the commonest
urban lawn mushrooms or "toadstools:' It so closely resembles other large Lepiotas that
some lepiotologists merely consider it an aberrant species with greenish spores (i.e.,
Lep;ota molybd;tes). It is most likely to be mistaken for Lepiota rachodes, especially in the
button stage. It differs, however,inits habitat (usually grass), fondness for hot weather, less
pronounced staining reactions (though this character is variable),andless bulbous stem.
The only completely reliable fea ture, however, is the spore color. But beware-the gills may
remain whitish well into maturity, so that making a spore print is the only sure way to
determine the spore color! Young buttons looklike drumsticks when they first emerge from
the ground. They may not show any white on the cap, whereas adults may be almost entirely
white. Lep;ota morgan; is an older name for it.
Lep;ota rachodes (Shaggy Parasol) Color Plate 69
CAP 5-20 cm broad, oval to convex or marshmallow-shaped, becoming plane in age or
slightly umbonate; surface dry, at first pale brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon-brown,
or brown, soon breaking up into large, coarse or shaggy scales as the cap expands, revealing
the white to dingy buff background, the center usually remaining smoothandbrown;
margin usually fringed or shaggy. Flesh thick, white, fairly firm, typically bruising yellow-
orange to orangeandthen reddish or brown when cut. GILLS broad, free, white, close,
sometimes dingy brownish in old age or when handled. STALK 5-18 cm long, 1-3 cm thick
at apex, enlarged below (var. rachodes), or with a large, abrupt basal bulb which may have
a raised rim (var. hortens;s); white when young, developing brownish stains in age orupon
handling; smooth, dry; interior usually staining bright orange or saffronandthen reddish
to dark brown when cut. VEIL membranous, white or with a brown, ragged margin;
forming a large, thick, collarlike, double-edged, superior ring on stalk which is usually
movable in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-13 x 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, with
a large apical pore, thick-walled, dextrinoid. Cap cuticle composed of enlarged, erect cells.
HABITAT Usually in groups or rings on ground under trees (particularly conifers) and
bushes, in gardensandcompost piles, near stables, on ant hills, along roadsandother
disturbed places, even in basementsandgreenhouses, sometimes also in open fields or in
the woods; widely distributed, but most common in western North America. It fruits
whenever conditions are favorable, i.e. moistandmild,andoften produces several crops a
year. "Patches" are not particularly numerous, but can be very prolific-I've seen several
hundred specimens under a single tree! Variety hortensis is quite common in our area,
especially under planted conifers (e.g., cypress)andin sandy soil along the coast (I have
found it on Ano Nuevo Island in sandandelephant seal dung,andin the splash zone at
Pebble Beach!). The typical variety is more common in the Pacific Northwest.
EDIBILITY Edibleandexcellent, with caution. A number of people have had severe
"allergic" reactions to it, particularly on the west coast,andit is easily confused with
Chlorophyllum molybdites. It has an exceptionally strong, nutty flavor but the water
content is high. For the bestandsafest results, fry it on high heat in an open pan. Delicious!
COMMENTS The outstanding features of this outstanding mushroom are the large
brown scales on the cap, free white gills, prominent collarlike ring (not skirtlike as in
Amanita!), basal bulb or thickened stem base,andbrusing ofthe flesh to orangeandthen
reddish. (The latter feature is best seen by cutting the stem.) The brightnessandduration
of the color changes vary according to the moisture contentandage of the mushroom. In
variety hortensis (the common one in our area), the basal bulb may have a raised rim which
can be mistaken for a volva. However, the brown cap scalesandcollarlike ring point to
Lepiota. The poisonous Chlorophyllum molybdites looks very similar, but has dull
greenish spores. L. rachodes (sometimes spelled L. rhacodesandalso known as Macro-
lep;ota rachodesandLeucoagar;cus rachodes) can also be mistaken for an Agaricus
(especially A. augustus), but the white sporesandgills distinguish it.
Lepiota procera (Parasol Mushroom)
CAP 7-25 cm broad or more, at first oval, then expanding to convex, plane, or umbonate;
surface dry, at first smoothandbrown, soon breaking up into brown scalesandpatches
except for the smooth, dark central umbo; flesh between the scales at first white but soon
weathering to buff, grayish, or brownishandusually with a shaggy or torn-up appearance.
Flesh white or tinged reddish, but not staining orange or red when cut; soft in age. GILLS
free, broad, close, white when young, but sometimes discoloring to pinkish, tan, or dingy
brownish in old age. STALK 12-40 cm long, 0.8-1.5 cm thick, typically very long and
relatively slender with an enlarged base; pallid but the surface below the ring covered with
numerous small brown scales or flakes which often separate into belts or wear away in
age. VEIL membranous, forming a thick, superior, brownandwhite, double-edged ring on
stalk; ring collarlikeandmovable. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 12-18 x 8-12 microns,
broadly elliptical, thick-walled, with an apical pore, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in open woodsandat their
edges, in old pastures, along trails, etc.; fairly common in the summerandfall in eastern
North America (especially New Englandandthe South)andMexico. It (or something
similar) also occurs in southern California,andit may very well grow in southern Arizona
and New Mexico, where a number of so-called "eastern" species (e.g., Lactarius indigo,
Strobilomycesfloccopus) occur.
EDIBILITY Edibleandone of the very best of all agarics! Prized by connoisseurs for its
strong, meaty-nutty flavor, it is now being grown commercially in Europe. It does not rot
readilyandis usually free of maggots. The leathery, sun-dried specimens frequently found
in dry weather can be just as good as fresh ones if treated properly.
COMMENTS Also known as Macrolep;ota proceraandLeucoagar;cus procerus, this
lofty, imposing mushroom is the most distinctive of all the Lepiotas. It is also the safest
and the tastiest, although "allergic" reactions have been reported. It is much taller than L.
rachodes,anddoesn't stain red or orange when cut. The spore print is white(not greenish
as in Chlorophyllum molybdites),andthe brown stalk that breaks up into delicate
branlike scales (which may wearaway) isalsodistinctive. Thereis novolva at the base of the
stalk as in Amanita,andthe solid brown "nipple" or umbo at the center of the cap is also
distinctive. The stalk is so slender in relation to its height that it is not uncommon for large
specimens to topple over in old age from the weight of the cap.
Lepiota naucina (Smooth Parasol; Woman On Motorcycle)
CAP 4-10 (15) cm broad, oval to nearly round when young, then broadly convex to plane;
surface dry, typically dull white but at times gray, buff, or creamy, the center sometimes
tinged pinkish-buff; usually smooth, but sometimes with numerous small branlike par-
ticles, or breaking up into scales in age; one form staining yellow when handled, another
brown. Flesh thick, white, not bruising; odor mild, or in one form unpleasant. GILLS free,
close, white, but often becoming buff, pinkish, or grayish-pink in old age,andfinally
brownish. STALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base; dry,
white, without scales, sometimes staining yellow when bruised,andusually discoloring
brownish in age or upon handling. VEIL membranous, white, forming a distinct,
persistent, superior, double-edged, collarlike or sleevelike ring on stalk which is usually
movable in age (and may fall off). SPORE_PRINT white or very faintly pinkish; spores 7-9 x
5-6 microns, broadly elliptical, thick-walled, smooth, with an apical pore, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in grassy areas (lawns, pastures, etc.),
sometimes also along roads, freeways,andin other disturbed places,andsometimes
under trees or even in the woods; widely distributedandcommon. In our area it is often
abundant in the fallandearly winter,andoccasionally encountered in the spring and
summer as well.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery good, but not recommended. Either some persons are sen-
sitive to it, or certain variants (perhaps the yellow-staining or ill-smelling ones) are toxic.
According to one source, it is one ofthe most frequent causes of mushroom poisoning in the
Pacific Northwest, yet it is listed as "edible" in every mushroom book! One former friend
of mine who had eaten it previously was made quite ill by a cream-of-L. naucina soup
which I had painstakingly prepared. There is also the more serious danger of carelessly
confusing it with a deadly Amanita!
COMMENTS The white to grayish cap, membranous annulus (ring), free gills, white
spores,andfondness for grass are the hallmarks of this cosmopolitan mushroom. Its
appearance on lawnsandin cemeteries marks the beginning of our fall mushroom season.
A good way to become acquainted with it is to bicycle around town: there it will be-tall,
white, stately, in graceful groups on lawns. Later it appears in pastures. It is a beautiful
mushroom when young, the smooth unexpanded cap being reminiscent of a motorcycle
helmet. The shape, though difficult to describe, is very distinctive (see photographs).
Though the stalk base is often enlarged, there is never a sack (volva) as in the deadly
Amanitas,andthe ring is not skirtlike, nor is the cap viscid as in Limacella. The staining
reactions are also an important field mark. In some specimens the capandstem stain yellow
quite dramatically in the tradition of Agaricus xanthodermus. Usually, however, they
discolor yellow-brown to brown after handlingandin age-especially on the stem. The
frequent darkening of the old gills to pink or brown leads to confusion with Agaricus.
and once again points out the folly of equating gill color with spore color. I have also seen
buttons of Agaricus californicus interspersed with L. naucina that were virtually indis-
tinguishable. A final hint: If your "L. naucina" fails to turn brown when cooked, double-
check your identification, because you may have something else! Lepiota leucothites,
L. naucinoides,andLeucoagaricus naucinus are synonyms.
Lepiota americana (American Parasol)
CAP 3-15 cm broad, oval becoming convex, plane, or broadly umbonate; surface dry,
smooth at first, soon breaking into coarse vinaceous-to reddish-brown or pinkish-buff
scales, the center usually remaining smooth; background white, but often reddening with
age. Flesh white, bruising yellow to orange when youngandfresh (especially in stalk), but
aging or drying reddish to vinaceous. GILLS free, close, white, but may stain or age like
the flesh. STALK 7-14 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, enlarged at base or often spindle-shaped
(swollen at or below the middle, with a narrowed base); smooth, at first white, but aging or
drying reddish to dark vinaceous. VEIL membranous, forming a white, double-edged,
superior ring on stalk which may disappear in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-14 x 5-
10 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an apical pore, thick-walled, dextrinoid.
HABITAT In groups or clusters in sawdustandcompost piles, around old stumps, in
waste places, rich soil, etc. Widely distributedandfairly common in eastern North
America, but rare in California. I have found it only once in our area, growing with
Agaricus subrufescens, in the summerandearly fall.
EDIBILITY Edible, but be sure of your identification! I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This species is easily recognized by its tendency to darken to reddish or
burgundy as it ages or dries,andthe yellow to orange staining of fresh specimens (best
seen by cutting the stalk). In addition, the shape of the stalk is quite unusual-often very
slender at the apexandblatantly bulbous at or toward the base(see photo).L. badhamiiof
Europe is very similar, but is said to be poisonous. There are also several closely related
species in the southeastern U.S., including one unnamed variant with pale green spores
and several species (e.g., L. tinctoria) with smaller, paler,andmore numerous cap scales.
Lepiota cepaestipes (Onion-Stalk Parasol)
CAP 2-8 cm broad when ex panded, oval beco ming broadly conical or bell-sha ped to nearly
plane or umbonate, eventually drooping; surface dry, powdery or mealy becoming some-
what scaly or fibrillose-scaly in age, white to pale pinkish (but may be darker when young
and yellowish to brownish in age); margin clearly striate at maturity. Flesh thin, white,
sometimes bruising yellowish. GILLS white, crowded, free. STALK 4-14 cm long, 3-6
mm thick, equal or swollen in places, with an enlarged base; smooth or powdery, slender,
white, but may discolor yellowish when handled. VEIL white, forming a persistent,
superior but easily detachable ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-10 x 5-8
microns, elliptical, with an apical pore, smooth, thick-walled, weakly dextrinoid.
HABITAT In groups or clusters in rich soil, wood chips, around old stumps, straw piles,
gardens-in other words, in decomposing organic matter of almost any kind; widely
distributed, but much more common in eastern North America than in the West. In our
area it fruits in the summer or during warm, moist weather.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Though traditionally listed as edible, it has adverse
effects on some peopleandis very thin-fleshed besides.
COMMENTS Also known asLeucocoprinuscepaestipes, this species is easily recognized
by its mealy, whitish, striate cap. It is essentially a whitish version of L.lurea,andthe two
used to be considered color forms of the same species. There are many closely related tropi-
calandsouthern species, including: L. breviramus, similar but with soft warts on the cap
(including the center)andusually growing scattered or tufted; L.longistriatus, with a tan
to pale tan fibrillose cap;andL. brebissonii, with a small (2-3 cm) white cap with a dark
gray to brownish center. I have found the latter on lawns in Berkeley, California, in the
summer. Because of their mealy, striate caps, all of these species are placed in their own
genus, Leucocoprinus, by many mycologists.
Lepiota lutea (Yellow Parasol; Flower Pot Parasol) Color Plate 70
CAP 2.5-6 cm broad when expanded, oval becoming broadly conical or bell-shaped, then
eventually umbonate or planeandfinally drooping; surface dry, powdery, mealy, and/or
minutely scaly, usually scalierandless powdery in age; bright yellow to greenish-yellow
or pale yellow, the center sometimes brown or buff; fading quickly after it matures or
becoming browner; margin conspicuously striate nearly to center at maturity. Flesh very
thin, yellow. GILLS free, crowded, yellow or pale yellow. STALK 3-10 cmlong, 1.5-5mm
thick, usually slenderandenlarged somewhat at or toward base base; dry, smooth or
powdery like the cap, yellow. VEIL yellow, forming a small, superior, collarlike ring on
stalk which may disappear. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-13 x 5.5-8 microns, elliptical,
with an apical pore, thick-walled, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, tufted, or in groups in flower pots, greenhouses,andplanter boxes, or
if it is warm enough, outdoors (in lawns, gardens, etc.); widely distributed, fruiting indoors
most anytime, outdoors mainly in the summer. The specimens in the color plate were
growing in a planter box in front of the Bank of America in downtown Los Angeles.
EDIBILITY Poisonous to some people, according to some sources.
COMMENTS This brilliant yellow greenhouse mushroom boasts a plethora of pseudo-
nyms, including Leucocoprinus luteus, L. birnbaumii,andL. cepaestipes var. luteus. It
can be the object of considerable consternation to plant lovers when it pokes up in one of
their flower pots. However, it won't hurt the plant (or you, unless you eat it). If one should
appear, consider yourself luckyandtake advantage of the situation-sprinkle it lightly
as you would any other houseplant,andwatch new individuals develop from tiny "pin-
heads" within a few days. The bright yellow colorandstriate cap set apart L. lurea from
other Lepiotas. It has a Coprinus-like stature, but the spores are whiteandit doesn't deli-
quesce (though like many tropical fungi, it withers quickly). Bolbitius vite/linus is also
yellow, but has a slimy-viscid cap. Other species: L. flavescens is another yellow green-
house species with smaller, nearly round spores (5-7 microns broad);L.fragilissimushasa
very thin, fragile capandpale yellow to white gillsandis a tropicalandsubtropical wood-
land species. Lepiota luteophylla has a brownish, non-striate capandbright yellow gills.
It was originally found in California but has also turned up in Michigan.
Lepiota eriophora (Sharp-Scaled Parasol)
CAP 2-7.5 cm broad, oval or convex when young, broadly convex to um bonate or plane at
maturity; surface dry, white to buff, covered with small, erect, pointed brown scales which
rub off easily. Flesh white, rather thin, not staining. GILLS free, white to buff or tinged
pinkish, close. STALK 2-10 cm long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at base,
dry, smooth at apex, covered with brown scales (like cap) below, but these often wearing
away in age. VEIL evanescent, not forming a membranous ring on stalk, but sometimes
leaving a fibrillose zone. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 2-3 microns, oblong, smooth,
dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woodsandin rich soil, widely
distributed. Occasional in our area in the fallandwinter, especially under cypress.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of a number of confusing, Amanita-like Lepiotas with erect,
pointed scales on the cap. It was described in the first edition u"nder the name L. hispida,
a possible synonym. Closely related species include: L. asperula, with an annulus (ring) and
stalk 1-2 cm thick;L. scabrivelata, a small subtropical species with yellow warts on the cap
and stalk;andL. acutesquamosa, medium-sized to large (cap 5-15 cm) with large brown
warts on the cap but few if any on the stalk,andveil often with brown scales on its under-
side but not necessarily forming an annulus (ring). The latter, which is said to be edible,
is fairly common in eastern North Americaandalso occurs in the Southwest.
Lepiota barssii (Gray Parasol)
CAP 4-15 cm broad or more, nearly round to convex, becoming broadly convex to plane or
umbonate; surface dry, covered with fine, flattened gray to brownish-gray radiating fibrils,
the center often darker; sometimes becoming scaly in age or direct sunlight. Flesh fairly
thick, white to grayish, not staining when bruised. GILLS close, free, white or staining
dingy yellowish to brownish. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, equal or more often
swollen below, but with a tapered base (no bulb!); smooth; white or stained brownish.
VEIL membranous, white, forming a superior, collarlike ring on stalk which may be
movable or drop off at maturity. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 5-6 microns,
elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in cultivated or composted soil, lawns, gardens,
pastures,andplowed fields; known only from the west coast. It is fairly common in
WashingtonandOregon, but rather infrequent in our area, where it fruits mainly in the
summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-but be sure of your identification!
COMMENTS The grayish fibrillose cap, membranous ring, free white gills, absence of
a basal bulb on the stalk,andhabitat in cultivated ground are the telltale traits of this
fine fungus. The stalk is often buried deep in the soil, especially if it is growing in mulch.
Specimens growing on lawns or hard soil tend to be smaller, with a shorter stem. The flesh
does not stain noticeably when cut as in L. rachodes. The veil is persistent but may be
obliterated, in which case the free gills are an important field mark. It is much stouter and
paler than L. atrodisca.anddoes not grow in the woods. It is darkerandmore fibrillose
than L. naucina,andit can also be confused with an unidentified Amanita(p. 275) which
has warts on the cap, amyloid spores,andyellowish gills in old age. In the W illamette Valley
in Oregon L. barssii is quite commonandfrequently attains a large size; most of the speci-
mens I've seen in California, however, have been smaller, averaging 4-10 cm broad. Other
species: L. excoriata is vaguely similar, but has a cuticle that recedes from the margin as
the cap expands.
Lepiota atrodisca (Black-Eyed Parasol)
CAP 1-5 (6.5) cm broad, oval or convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane, the margin
sometimes uplifted in age; surface dry, white with flattened black, gray, or greenish-gray
scales or fibrils, the center usually darker(blackish). Flesh thin, white, not bruising. GILLS
free, white or creamy, close. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-7 mm thick, usually slender but
sometimes rather stout, enlarged somewhat at the base; smooth, dry, white or discoloring
slightly upon handling. VEIL membranous, forming a fragile, sleevelike, white or black-
edged ring at or above middle of stalk, or sometimes disappearing. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 6-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotting wood under both
hardwoodsandconifers, fallandwinter, apparently endemic to the west coast. During
cold, dry weather I have seen enormous numbers in woodland thickets (oak-manzanita-
hazel nut)-an unusual abode for a Lepiola-but it is not restricted to that habitat.
EDIBILITY Unknown-do not experiment! It is too small to be of importance anyway.
COMMENTS This attractive little woodland Lepiola is easily recognized by its unusual
grayish-black scales. L. felina (see comments under L. josserandii) has dark brown to
blackish scales on both the capandstem,andan evanescent veil; it is poisonous.
Lepiota flammeatincta (Flaming Parasol)
CAP 1.5-5 (7.5) cm broad, convex when young, then plane or with uplifted margin or
sometimes broadly umbonate; surface dry, with nearly black to dark purple-brown to
brown or reddish-brown fibrils or scales (sometimes very sparse) on a whitish background;
surface quickly staining scarlet to scarlet-orange when bruised, then slowly turning dark
brown or dark purple-brown. Flesh white, staining slightly pinkish, reddish, or orange
when bruised, then fading. GILLS free, close, white, not staining when bruised. STALK
3-10 (15) cm long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, slender, white above the
ring, fibrillose (like cap) belowandquickly bruising scarlet to scarlet-orange like the cap
surface, then discoloring dark brown. VEIL membranous, white, forming a median to
superior, sleevelike ring on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-8.5
x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woodsandunder trees, along trails, etc.; not
uncommon along the Pacific Coast. In our area it fruits in the fallandearly winter, but
seldom in large numbers. L. roseifolia(see comments) is also fairly common.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of our most striking Lepiotas because of the spectacular scarlet-
staining ("flaming") of the capandstem. The dark brown color that wounded areas sub-
sequently assume is also characteristic. L. roseifolia is a very similar species whose gills
turn pinkish or red-orange when bruised (within five minutes); it favors cypress in our area.
An unidentified local species with a lovely purple to vinaceous-pink cap when young
(browner in age) also occurs, usually under oak. Its capandespecially the stalk sometimes
stain orange or orange-red when rubbed. L. brunneseensandL. rose at in eta are two
eastern scarlet-staining species; the latter has a pinkish-red cap.
Lepiota rubrotincta (Red-Eyed Parasol)
CAP 3 cm broad, oval or rounded becoming convex, finally plane or broadly umbonate
or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, at first uniformly pinkish-brown or reddish, then
breaking up into flat, radially arranged fibrils or scales which vary in color from cinnamon-
buffto coral-pink, reddish, or pinkish-orange; background whitishandthecenterremain-
ing smoothandusually darker (deep red to chestnut); margin often splitting in age. Flesh
thin, white, not bruising. GILLS free, white, close, not bruising. STALK 4-16 cm long,
0.4-1 cm thick, usually rather slenderandequal or thicker below, often extending fairly
deep into the humus; smooth, white, discoloring somewhat in ageandbecoming hollow.
VEIL membranous, white, forming a thin, fragile but persistent ring on stalk; ring median
to superior, typically sleevelike aboveandflaring below. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
6-10 x 4 microns, elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid(?).
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in humus, usually in woods; widely
distributedandsometimes common in our area, especially after the first fall rains.
EDIBILITY Not firmly established. Katy Caldwell of Santa Cruz claims to have eaten
a small quantity without ill effect, but it is easily confused with other Lepiotas, some of
which are poisonous.
COMMENTS This beautiful mushroom is one of our more commonandeasily identified
woodland Lepiotas. It is largerandtaller than L. cristata,andhas a more persistent ring.
The color of the cap fibrils varies considerably, but usually has a reddish tone. The smooth,
dark center is suggestive of a human breast. Other species: L. roseilivida is somewhat
similar but smaller, has a purplish cap,andoccurs under various western conifers;L. glat-
felteri has a vinaceous-brown fibrillose capandhas been found in rich soilandunder
cypress in Santa Barbara. Also similar is the beautiful unidentified species mentioned
under L. flammeatincta; its cap is purple or pink at firstandits stalk often bruises orange.
Lepiota cristata (Brown-Eyed Parasol)
CAP 1-5 (7) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane or broadly umbonate;
surface dry, soon breaking up into small tawny to brown or red-brown scales (often
concentrically arranged) on a white background, the center usually remaining smooth and
darker( brown to red-brown). Flesh thin, white, not bruising; odor mild or sweetandfruity
or pungent. GILLS free, white to buff, close. STALK 2-8 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or
thicker below, slender, white to pinkish-buffandoften darker toward base; more or less
smooth, fragile. VEIL white, sometimes disappearing, at other times forming a thin,
fragile, median to superior ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT white to pale buff; spores 5-8 Ie
3-5 microns, bicornute (wedge-shapedandspurred at one end), smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups on ground in woods, under trees (especially redwood
and cypress) or shrubs, on lawns, etc. Widespread; common in our area in fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY To be avoided-perhaps poisonous.
COMMENTS The chestnut to dark brown cap center, fragile ring, small size,andsmooth
stem characterize a number ofLepiotas which can only be differentiated microscopically.
L. castane;d;sca, for instance, has elliptical rather than bicornute spores but is otherwise
identical. In my experience it is just as common in our area as L. cristata. There are many
other similar species too numerous to mention. They include: L. decorata, with reddish to
pink scales; L. roseil;v;da, with a purplish or purplish-pink, fibrillose cap; andL. "tomen-
todisca, " with pale to dark reddish-brown scales. I n all three of these species the center
ofthe cap is minutely hairy (tomentose), a character best seen with a hand lens.
Lepiota sequoiarum (Boring Lepiota)
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, oval becoming convex or finally plane; surface dry, smooth, without
distinct scales, yellowish to tan at the center, pallid toward the margin. Flesh thin, white,
not bruising. GILLS white, free, close. STALK 2-7 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or thicker
below, slender, white, smooth. VEIL membranous, white, forming a superiorring on stalk
which often collapses in age. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9x 3.5-4 microns, elliptical,
smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Scattered or in small groups in woodsandplanted areas, infrequent. I have
found it several times in the fallandwinter under redwood. It is one of several small
Lepiotas apparently endemic to the west coast.
EDIBILITY Unknown-do not experiment!
COMMENTS The smooth cap, small size, membranous ring, free white gills,andwhite
spores are the decisive features of this lackluster Lepioca. The less said about it the better.
A somewhat similar unknown species with a grayer cap when young occurs on wood chips.
Lepiota seminuda (Lilliputian Lepiota)
CAP 1-2 (4) cm broad, conical or convex becoming plane; surface dry, white or tinged
pinkish (especially at center), smooth or minutely powdery-mealy; margin often with veil
fragments. Flesh very thin, white. GILLS free, white to pale pinkish, close. STALK 2-5
cm long, 1.5-3 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, white to dingy pinkish or tinged
cinnamon toward base, thinandfragile, smooth or minutely mealy like the cap. VEIL
evanescent, leaving remnants on the cap margin, but not a distinct ring on stalk. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 3-5 x 2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered in humus under hardwoods or conifers; widespread. Oc-
casional in our area in the fallandwinter (e.g., under redwood) but easily overlooked.
EDIBILITY Unknown. It is hardly worth troubling with such a trifle.
COMMENTS Also known as L. s;strata, this is our smallestandmost delicate Lepiota.
Its lilliputian dimensions might lead to confusion with Mycena or Collybia, but it has free
gillsanda veil when young. It is smaller thanL. sequoiarum,andthe veil does not normally
form an annulus (ring) on the stalk (see photo at bottom of p. 306).
Lepiota castanea (Petite Parasol)
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, convex-umbonate to nearly plane; surface dry, covered with rusty-
ochraceous to chestnut-brown to cinnamon-brown scales on a pallid to yellow-brown or
ochraceous background (scales often densest at center). Flesh very thin, yellowish-buff;
odor sometimes faintly sweet. GILLS close, usually free, white to buff or rusty-stained.
STALK 3-8 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, very fragileandslender, equal or enlarged slightly at
base; smooth above the veil, covered with rusty-ochraceous to dark chestnut-brown scales
(like those on cap) below, often staining orange or yellow-orange when handled or in age.
VEIL fibrillose, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring on stalk, but sometimes leaving
remnants on cap margin. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 9-13 x 3.5-5 microns, bullet-
shaped, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in rich humus in woods, espe-
cially under conifers. It has a wide distributionandis not uncommon in our area in the fall
and winter, but never seems to fruit in large numbersandis likely to be overlooked.
EDIBILITY POISONOUS! Like L.josserandii, it contains deadly amanita-toxins.
COMMENTS The rusty-orange to chestnut-colored scales on capandstem, free or
nearly free gills,andlack of a distinct annulus (ring) typify this petite Lepiota. It
might be mistaken for a Cystoderma, but the gills are usually freeandthe spores are
dextrinoid. It is quite fragileanddifficult to transport home in one piece.
Lepiota josserandii (Deadly Parasol)
CAP 2-5 (7) em broad, convex to plane or sometimes umbonate; surface dry, with cinna-
mon-brown to pinkish-or reddish-brown scales, the center darkerandthe background
whitish to ochraceous, but reddish or rosy tints often developing in age or upon drying;
margin often fringed with veil remnants. Flesh thin, pallid; odor faintly sweetish or musty,
especially if several are left in a closed container. GILLS free or adnexed, close, white to
creamy-yellow, not bruising. STALK 3-7 em long, 0.3-1 em thick, equal or enlarged
downward, pallid at apex, fibrillose-scaly to near smoothandcap-colored (or slightly
pinker) below. VEIL fibrillose, evanescent, not forming a distinct ring on stalk, but
sometimes leaving a hairy zone. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 6-8 x 2.5-4.5 microns,
elliptical, smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in cultivated ground, under bushesandtrees
(including cypress), on lawns, etc.; widely distributedandnot uncommon in California.
I have found it several times in our area in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY POISONOUS! Deadly amanita-toxins have been isolated in this species and
several relatives. Fortunately, they are unlikely to be eaten because of their small size and
infrequent occurrence. However, L. josserandii has been implicated in at least one fatality
(in Albany, New York).
COMMENTS This undistinguished little Lepiota( see photo at top of p. 308) is described
here because it poses a threat to those who sample mushrooms wantonly, or think that only
the Amanitas are deadly poisonous. It belongs to a large group of small, poorly-known,
difficult-to-identify Lepiotas with no annulus (ring) or only a slight one,anda more or less
fibrillose-scaly or cottony stem. Until they are better known, none should be eaten. Several
occur in our area under cypress, including a beautiful pinkish-hued species that might be
L. subincarnata, another poisonous species. Other deadly poisonous species include:
L. helveola, very similar to L.josserandii, but with larger spores (7-10 microns long) and
a slightly more membranous veil;andL. felina, with blackish to dark brown scales on
both the capandstalk. See also L. castanea. Other species: L. cortinariusis a medium-sized
species (cap 3-10 em broad; stalk 0.6-2 em thick) that grows under northern conifers such
as spruce. Its cap cuticle soon breaks up into numerous concentrically-arranged small
brown to reddish-brown scales, its veil is evanescent,andits gills are remote from the stalk
or attached to a collar. It does not age or stain reddish or pinkish; its edibility is unknown.
Lepiota clypeolaria (Shaggy-Stalked Parasol)
CAP 2-8 em broad, oval or bell-shaped becoming convex to nearly plane with a low, broad
umbo; surface dry, soon breaking up into yellow-brown or brown scales except for the
smooth, darker center; often yellower toward margin, which is softandragged from
cottony veil remnants. Flesh white, not staining appreciably; odor sometimes pungent.
GILLS free, close, white or creamy. STALK 4-12 (18) em long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, usually
slenderandabout equal, fragile; sheathed with soft, shaggy or cottony scales below the
veil, usually yellow or colored like cap. VEIL cottony, leaving remnants on cap margin or a
slight cottony-fibrillose ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 12-20x 4-6 microns,
fusiform (elongated), smooth, dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods, widely distributed. In our area
it favors conifers such as Douglas-fir,andis fairly common in the fallandwinter. A related
species or variant (see comments) occurs under oak in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Said to be poisonous-all slender woodland Lepiotas are best avoided.
COMMENTS The ragged or shaggy appearance of the cap marginandstalk, smooth
"eye" at the center of the cap, absence of a distinct annulus (ring), free whitish gills,andlong
narrow spores are diagnostic. In prime condition it is one of our most beautiful and
exquisitely adorned mushrooms. In age, however, it assumes a rather decrepit appearance
-the stalk is weakandcollapses easily. In North America L. clypeolaria is probably a
"collective" species-that is, there are several varieties which may be distinct species. In
addition to the form described above, we have in our area an oak-loving variety with
fusiform spores, a more evenly coloredandless ragged cap,anda whitish, only slightly
shaggy stalk. I call it var. "nabiscodisca" because of its cookie-colored cap cuticle, but it
may prove to be the "true" L. clypeolaria of Europe (and the L. clypeolaria described
above may be L. ventr;osospora-but such issues are best left to licensed lepiotologists).
Other species: L. c1ypeolar;o;des of the Pacific Northwest lacks yellow tones, is not as
shaggy,andhas elliptical spores (6-9 microns long).
Agaricus campestris (Meadow Mushroom) Color Plate 71
CAP 4-11 (15) cm broad, convex or dome-shaped for a long time, then often becoming
plane; surface dry, smooth or silky-fibrillose, pure white, or sometimes with a few grayish
to brown or cinnamon-buff fibrils or fibrillose scales; margin extending beyond the gills,
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, not staining when bruised but sometimes
discoloring brownish or reddish in age or wet weather (especially just above the gills); odor
mild. GILLS close, free at maturity, pale pink in button stage, then bright pink, becoming
purple-brown to chocolate-brownandfinally blackish-brown. STALK 2-6 (10) cm long, 1-
2.5 cm thick, usually with a tapered base; firm, white, smooth above the veil, often with a
few fibrils below; stuffed or hollow (but see comments). VEIL thin, somewhat cottony,
white, forming a thin ring on stalk or leaving remnants on cap margin or disappearing
entirely; ring rarely well-formed, intermediate (sometimes flaring) or rarely skirtlike,
median to superior. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6.5-8.5 x 4-5.5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. Basidia mostly 4-spored.
HABITAT As its name implies (campestre=field), this is a grassland species, occurring
throughout the world from sea level to above timberline. It usually grows in groups or
rings in lawns, pasturesandmeadows, cemeteries, golf courses, baseball fields, etc., but can
also be solitary. It fruits practically year-round in our area, but is most abundant in the fall
and early winter, when stupendous crops are sometimes produced in our pastures. Thou-
sands of pounds, in fact, go unpicked every year. Though they can often be seen from the
road, fungophobic Americans drive right by them, some undoubtedly on the way to the
store to buy mushrooms!
EDIBILITY Edibleandexcellent, both rawandcooked. It is the most widely picked
mushroom in English-speaking countries (where it is also known as the "pink-bottom"),
and is the popular champignon of France. Those who equate it with the cultivated mush-
room (A. bisporus) do it an injustice. Its flavor islar superior, though the texture is softer.
When the gills are bright pinkandthe cap pure white, it is as beautiful as it is delicious.
COMMENTS The silky white cap, bright pink gills when young, poorly defined or evan-
escent annulus (ring), tapered stem, absence of a volva, stocky stature, chocolate-brown
spores,andgrowth in grass are the principal field marks of this universal favorite. It is
the type species of Agaricus as well as the entire order Agaricales. The gills are pinkish
even in the button stage, unlike A. californicus. The cap is white or has scattered brownish
scales, but is not brownandfuzzy in youth as in A. cupreobrunneus. The cap remains
dome-shaped for a long time,andits surface does not bruise yellow, though I have
encountered a solid-stemmed variety in New Mexico whose cap sometimes ages faintly
yellowish. This variety may be A. so/idipes, an edible southern species with slightly larger
spores than A. campestris(bl!t identical in most other respects, including habitat).
In most regions the meadow mushroom is a perfectly safe mushroom for beginners.
Unfortunately, in California it is frequently confused with the mildly poisonous phenol-
smelling Agaricus species. Compare it especially carefully with A. californicus (see com-
ments under that species), which has a more persistent, membranous veilandwhitish
gills in the button stage. A small, anonymous Amanita (p. 275) sometimes grows withA.
campestris in pasturesandlooks very similar from the top. However, its gills are white to
to yellow-orange, never pink or chocolate-brown. The poisonous destroying angels
(Amanita ocreata. A. virosa. etc.) can also be distinguished by their white gills, plus the
presence of a volva (sack) at the base of the stem. Other species: An unidentified, probably
unnamed Agaricus occurs occasionally in our pastures. It resembles A. campestris in
size, shape,andcolor, but has an ample veil with a cogwheel pattern of patches on its
underside. Its veil, in fact, is reminiscent of A. arvensis, but the fruiting body is smaller
and does not have a sweet odor. It stains yellow in potassium hydroxide (KOH), but does
not normally yellow naturally,andits edibility has not been determined (it might be a
member of the A. xanrhodermus-A. californicus group,andtherefore unsavory or toxic).
Agaricus cupreobrunneus (Brown Field Mushroom) Color Plate 73
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane or slightly uplifted; surface
dry, more or less tomentose (hairy) from a layer of small brown to grayish-or reddish-
brown fibrils or fibrillose scales; margin usually extending beyond gills. Flesh white, rather
softandfragile, not staining when bruised but often discoloring reddish to brownish in old
age or wet weather, especially just above the gills; odor mild. GILLS free at maturity, close,
pale dingy pinkish in button stage, becoming pinkish-brown to purple-brown, then choco-
late-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 2-4 cm long, 0.7-1.2 (2) cm thick, usually equal but
sometimes thicker at either end; white, smooth above the veil, often somewhat scurfy or
scaly below; hollow or stuffed. VEIL thin, white, somewhat cottony, forming a thin ring
on stalk; ring more or less median, intermediate (sometimes flaring), well-formed or
disappearing, sometimes with a slight second ring below it. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-
brown; spores 7-9x 4-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH.
Basidia mostly 4-spored.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious( often in rings) in pastures, lawns,andother
grassy places, but showing a special affinity for poor soil; very common in California and
probably widespread. In our area it fruits prolifically in the fallandearly winter, often
growing withandoutnumbering A. campestris.
EDIBILITY Edible. The flavor is comparable to that of A. campestris, but the texture is
much softerandmore fragile. Also, the buttons tend to develop underground, making it
difficult to find specimens with pink gills.
COMMENTS For many years this species has passed as a small, brown, fuzzy form of A.
campestris. It shares with that species certain fundamental characteristics: e.g., a poorly
defined or even absentannulus( ring), stocky stature,andgrowth in grass. However, it hasa
softer texture than A. campestris,andis smallerandbrown-capped from the button stage
on. Other species: A. porphyrocepha/us, widely distributed, is very similar but has dull
reddish-brown to purple-brown fibrils or scales on the cap, firmer flesh,andsmaller
spores. A. ruti/escens is also similar but has a ruddier complexionanda tendency-at least
in some forms-to stain reddish. It grows on lawns or in hard-packed soil along roads, but
is not common. A. argenteus is a grass-loving species with a silky or silvery cap with brown
to grayish-brown fibrils, larger spores,anda better-defined annulus. It is common in
the southern United States. All three of the above species are edible.
Agaricus bisporus (Cultivated Mushroom; Button Mushroom)
CAP 3-16 cm broad, convex when young, often plane or even slightly depressed in age;
surface dry, in one form entirely white, but more often with flattened pale brown to brown
fibrils which in age or dry weather often break up into fibrillose scales; margin inrolled
when young, often extending beyond the gills. Flesh thick, very firm, white, usually (but not
always) discoloring somewhat (brown to reddish or pinkish-orange) when cutandrubbed
repeatedly; odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close, pinkish or pale brown
when young, purple-brown to chocolate-brown in age,andfinally blackish-brown.
STALK 2-8 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, usually stout, very firm, equal or enlarged at base;
white or turning dingy brownish with age, smooth or slightly cottony-scaly below ring.
VEIL membranous, cottony, white, two-layered, typically forming a delicate, median to
superior ring on stalk which may collapse in age; ring intermediate or sometimes skirtlike,
its upper surface often striate. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5.5-8.5 x 4-6.5
microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH. Basidia mostly 2-spored.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or in clumps in compostandmanure, rich
soil, along pathsandin gardens,andalso very common under cypress, but only rarely
found in woods or on lawns; very widely distributed. In our area it ""fruits" year-round
in markets. The major fruiting in the wild is typically in the fall or winter.
EDIBILITY Edible-and if popular demand is any indication-choice (over a halfbil-
lion pounds are cultivated annually in the United States!). However, as with any
mass-produced agricultural product, flavor has been sacrificed for appearance, keeping
quality, yield,anddisease resistance. Pesticides are used, of course,andthe result is, in
Valentina Wasson's felicitous phrase, "a sickly simulacrum" of what a mushroom should
be. The "wild" form is slightly better-especially the young, hard buttons.
COMMENTS Also known as A. brunnescensandA. hortensis (the latter name is
applied only to the white form), the cultivated mushroom mimics the meadow mushroom,
A. campestris. but has 2-spored basidia, a well-developed ring, a browner cap, slightly
reddening flesh,anddoes not normally grow in grass. If you use mushroom compost(from
a mushroom farm) in your garden or put old cultivated mushrooms in your compost pile,
you are likely to get some sooner or later. The largest fruitings I've seen have been around
old compost pilesandunder cypress, where, curiously, it is one of our most common
mushrooms. Care should be taken not to confuse it with A. californicus. which is also
common in gardensandunder cypress. The latter is more slenderandusually smells slightly
of phenol, at least when cooked. For a more detailed comparison, consult couplet #54 of
the key to Agaricus. A very similar edible species with more rapidly reddening flesh,
skirtlike ring,and4-spored basidia, A. blandianus, also occurs quite commonly under
cypress; A. subJloccosus is another similar edible species with 4-spored basidia, but it
has a whitish cap with small, cottony scales (squamules) near the margin,andfrequently
has a strong odor as well. It occurs under conifers, including cypress,andis widely
distributed, but not common. See also A. spissicaulis (under A. arorae).
Agaricus bitorquis (Banded Agaricus; Urban Agaricus) Color Plate 80
CAP 4-18 cm broad or more, broadly convex becoming plane or with a slight central de-
pression; surface dry, smooth or occasionally cracking into scales; white or whitish but
often dirty; not bruising yellow but sometimes discoloring sordid yellowish to tan in old
age; margin inrolled when young, often extending beyond gills. Flesh thick, very firm,
white, not staining when bruised (but may discolor slightly); odor mild. GILLS close, free
or nearly free; pallid, soon becoming grayish-pink, then deep reddish-brown to chocolate-
brown, finally blackish-brown. STALK 2-10 (18) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, very firm,
solid, equal or slightly thicker below, but often with a narrowed or pointed base; white,
without scales. VEIL membranous, white, thick, forming a prominent, persistent, more or
less median (or even basal) ring on stalk; ring band like (upper edge free or flaring and
lower edge free) or sheathlike (like a voIva, with only the upper edge free). SPORE_PRINT
chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not
yellowing in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in grou,ps or rows on road shoulders, in hard-packed
soil, along sidewalks, around playgrounds,andin other disturbed areas; often fruiting
underground (looking for them can be like digging for clams!). Widely distributed but
not common on the coast, where it is largely replaced by A. bernardii. I have heard of
gigantic fruiting bodies (10 inch buttons!) of either this species or A. bernardii buried deep
in alluvial soil in riverbeds in the Livermore-Pleasanton area of California. In colder
regions A. bitorquis often appears along roads where salt is sprayed in the winter. In the
Southwest it is often abundant along highways, but is hard to spot because of its subter-
ranean habit. However, shaggy manes (Coprinus comatus), which are hard not to spot, are
often an indicator of its pres,ence.ln our area I have found it in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Edible,andin my fickle fungal opinion, the best of all Agaricus species. In
Europe it is cultivated commercially because of its immunity to the virus disease that
plagues A. bisporus. It is larger, meatier,andmuch firmer than either A. bisporus or A.
campestris. One devotee goes so far as to say: "Life is like an Agaricus bitorquis-all good
except for a few gills." Life may not be so consistently good, but A. bitorquis certainly is!
COMMENTS The white cap, band like or sheathing ring (see photographs),andun-
changing flesh plus the solid stem, firm texture,andfondness for hard packed soil distin-
guish this hardy, handsome fungus from other species of Agaricus. There is no anise or
phenol odorandit does not stain yellow or red. When it fruits underground you must search
very carefully for the telltale cracks in the soil that mark its presence (see color plate!).
When the annulus (ring) is sheathlike it sometimes resembles a volva, but the chocolate-
brown sporesandgills prevent confusion with Amanita. For years it has been called
Agaricus rodmani; A. edu/is is another name for it. A. ch/amydopus is a similar species
with a cottony white cap, sheathing veil, stout stature,andlarger spores. It is particularly
common in the southern United States on la wnsandalong roads,andis edible.A. vinaceo-
virens is a cypress-loving species with a repulsive briny odoranda slightly scaly or scurfy
whitish to light brown cap. It often develops vinaceous tints in ageandsometimes stains
greenish as well. Its edibility is unknown.
Agaricus bernardii (Salt-Loving Agaricus)
CAP 5-15 cm or more broad, convex to plane or somewhat depressed centrally; surface
dry, smooth or often breaking up to form scales or warts; white or buff, but may discolor
dingy brownish in age; margin inrolled when young. Flesh thick, very firm, white, staining
reddish-orange to reddish, vinaceous, or reddish-brown when cut (sometimes slowly);
odor mild to p.ungentorbriny. GILLS free at maturity, close, soon grayish-pink or pinkish,
then reddish-brownandfinally deep chocolate-brown or blackish. STALK 4-10 (13)
cm long, 24 (8) cm thick, solid, very firm, equal or tapered below (rarely thicker
below), smooth, white. VEIL membranous, thick, somewhat rubbery, white, forming a
more or less median, sheathlike (or occasionally bandlike) ring on stalk (the upper edge
often flaring). SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6-7.5 x 5 microns, broadly
elliptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious in sand, sandy soil, disturbed areas,
on lawns,andin various saline habitats; occurring along the AtlanticandPacific coasts
and in Europe. In our area it is quite common in the fallandwinter, usually appearing after
the first soaking rains. In Santa Monica, California, I have seen it in the summer on lawns.
It apparently has an even greater tolerance (or liking) for salt than does A. bilorquis,
and like that species, sometimes fruits underground.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-almost the equal of A. bitorquis. but a little chewier and
sometimes with a slightly salty or briny taste.
COMMENTS Also known as A. ha/ophi/usandA. mariti mus, this is a characteristic
coastal species. It has the general appearance of its close relative, A. bilorquis. (i.e., hard
flesh, sheathing or even bandlike veil,andwhitish color), but differs in staining reddish
when cutandis more apt to have a warty or scaly cap. In dry weather, however, the staining
may be slow and/or slight. 322
Agaricus lilaceps (Giant Cypress Agaricus)
CAP 7-25 cm broad or more, broadly convex when young, usually plane in age; surface
dry, smooth or covered with flattened brown to pale brown or cinnamon-brown fibrils
which only rarely break up into scales, but sometimes developing strong pink, lilac,
purplish, ochre, or tawny-orange tones (see comments). Flesh very thickandfirm, white,
usually staining vinaceous or dark reddish (often slowly) when cut; odor mild to faintly
sweet or fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close,. pallid or pale pinkish, soon becoming
reddish-or purplish-brown, then chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 5-22
cm long, (2) 3-6 (9) cm thick, equal or enlarged below, very firmandthick, white or often
brownish-stained (but sometimes developing pink to purplish hues as on the cap), usually
buried deeply in the humus; smooth or fibrillose (especially below), base often with
yellow or ochre stains. VEIL membranous, fairly thick, underside sometimes white but
very often yellow at first, with white to brownish patches that soon wear away; rupturing
to form a skirtlike or sometimes flaring, superior ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-
brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface negative in KOH
or staining very faintly yellow.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on ground under old cypresses
(or occasionally other trees), or where cypresses have been cut down; known only from
California. It is locally common in the fallandwinter or whenever it is damp enough; I
have seen large fruitings in MontereyandSan Mateo counties.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice! It is one of the meatiest of all edible mushrooms, but
like A. bitorquisandA. bernardii, it requires thorough cooking to render it tender.
COMMENTS This massive Agaricus has a rather interesting history. It was originally
described as a lilac-or pinkish-hued species on the basis of specimens collected in Pacific
Grove, California, in the 1930's. However, careful study by Rick Kerrigan suggests that
it is typically a brown-capped species with reddening flesh,andonly develops the brighter
colors in certain localities (e.g., the Monterey Peninsula) and/or under certain conditions
(perhaps cold weather or refrigeration). In any event, it is easily recognized by its impres-
sive size, thick hard stem, slowly reddening flesh,andfrequently yellow-tinged veil (when
unbroken). It is our heaviest Agaricus-not as broad as A. crocodilinus nor as tall as A.
augustus, but much denser. As in many other species of Agaricus, soggy or weathered
specimens will not necessarily display the "correct" staining reactions, but are usually
recognizable by their size, stature,andcolor. The common brown-capped form was provi-
sionally called A. "/uteove/atus" by Rick Kerrigan until it became evident that it was
actually A. lilaceps. Another large edible cypress-lover with reddening to barely reddening
flesh, A. pattersonae, has a scalier, darker brown cap. Its veil is brownish on the underside
rather than yellow,andfrequently separates into two distinct rings. It is slightly smaller
than A.lilaceps(stalk2.5-4cm thick)andsometimes grows with othertrees(e.g., redwood).
Agaricus fuscovelatus (Purple-Veiled Agaricus)
CAP 3-9 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped to convex when young, plane in age or with a
slightly uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with brown to cinnamon-brown or dark
reddish-brown fibrils or scales on a white to dingy, gray, or violet-gray background. Flesh
thick, firm, white, staining slightly or slowly yellowish-orange to pinkish-orange or reddish
when cut (especially in stalk); odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS pallid or grayish-pink
becoming pale brown, then chocolate-brown or darker; close, free or nearly free. STALK
4-12 cm long, 0.7-2 (2.5) cm thick, equal or enlarged slightly below, smooth or slightly
scaly near base; white, discoloring somewhat in age; stuffed or hollow. VEIL thin, mem-
branous; underside at first with a layer of white felty patches, soon becoming purplish-
gray to purple-brown or chocolate-brown to nearly blackandscaly; veil often not
breaking free from the cap until the cap has completely expanded, then forming an apical
or superior, fragile, skirtlike, striate ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown;
spores 6.5-8 x 5-6.5 microns, broadly elli ptical, smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in K 0 H.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered under cypress or sometimes other
trees such as cedarandCryptomeria (an exotic bushy conifer); known only from coastal
California. It is sometimes common in the fallandwinter, less so in the spring, but does not
seem to fruit every year. Under a single cypress tree in a cemetery I have seen more than
300 fruiting bodies mingled with dozens of A. bisporus!
EDIBILITY Edible, but rather tough (especially the stem).
COMMENTS The most peculiar feature of this most peculiar Agaricus is the chocolate-
brown to purplish-gray or "fuscous" color of the unbroken veil. Its overall appearance
is also distinctive, but hard to describe: the stalk tends to be straightandcylindrical and
the veil, which is close to the top of the stem, remains intact for an unusually long time
before rupturing (it sometimes stretches over the gills like a piece of tissue paper even after
the cap has fully expandedandspores are being produced!). The staining reaction is best
seen by cutting the stalk in half crosswise. A. /i/aeepsandA. pattersonae (see comments
under A. lilaceps) are somewhat similar but much larger.
Agaricusfuscofibrillosus (Bleeding Agaricus) Color Plate 74
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, smooth, with flattened brown to reddish-
brown fibrils which only rarely break up into scales. Flesh thick, firm, white, quickly
staining red when cut or bruised; odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS close, free at maturity,
pinkish becoming reddish-brown, finally chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 4-10 (14) cm
long, 0.8-2 (3) cm thick, equal or thicker below, hollow or stuffed; smoothandwhite above
the ring, whitish below or with brownish to vinaceous fibrils or scales, or in one variant
sheathed by a "boot" of brownish to vinaceous fibrils; staining red quickly when bruised.
VEIL membranous, white or becoming brownish in age; forming a superior, skirtlike ring
on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-6 (7) x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Cap surface not yellowing in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under cypress or rarely other
trees; sporadically common in our area in the late fallandwinter, but probably more
widely distributed (in habitats other than cypress).
EDIBILITY Edibleand"rich" according to Shalom Compost, who put it in a soup.
Reddish-staining Inocybes (e.g., T. pudica) are poisonous but smaller, with paler spores.
COMMENTS This Agaricus is easily recognized by its "bleeding" fleshandbrown to
reddish-brown fibrillose cap. It is one of several "bleeders" that have traditionally been
lumped under the names A. haemorrho;dar;usandA. s;/vat;cus. (The "true" A. haemor-
rhoidarius has distinct fibrillose scales on the capandis said to be fairly common in the
forests of eastern North America, but has not yet been found in California; A. si/vaticus
has been reported from the Pacific Northwest.) A.fuscofibrillosus, on the other hand, has
an innately fibrillose cap that does not normally become scaly,andgrows almost exclu-
sively with cypress ( in our area). There are several other red-staining species, including:
A. benesi(=A. a/bosangu;neus}, cap pure white or tinged grayish to pale cinnamon, widely
distributed but rare except in our area, where it is fairly frequent under cypress; A. patter-
sonae, a larger, thicker-stemmed species (see comments under A./ilaceps);A. rubronanus,
a very small species (cap 2-3 cm broad, stalk 3-6 mm thick);anda large, stately, delicious
but unidentified species with dark reddish-brown fibrils or fibrillose scalesandminute
spores ( 4-5 microns long). I have found the latter several times in mixed woods, but it is not
common. A. arorae also "bleeds," but usually grows with oakandstains yellow in KOH.
Agaricus arorae
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, with brownish to reddish-brown
fibrils or fibrillose scales, at least at the center, on a white to reddish background; staining
reddish when rubbed. Flesh white, reddening when cut (usually quickly, but sometimes
slowly); odor mild or faintly fruity. GILLS free at maturity, close, pinkish becoming
purple-brown, then chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 5-14 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm
thick, equal or enlarged at base, hollow in age; white, sometimes with scaly zones, staining
reddish when bruisedandoften aging reddish-brown or vinaceous. VEIL membranous,
thin, white (or dingy in age), forming a median to superior, skirtlike, fragile ring on stalk.
SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4-5.5 x 3-4 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth.
Cap surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in mixed woods and
under oaks, fruiting mainly in OctoberandNovember, sometimes common. It is known
only from Santa Cruz County, California, but probably has a wider distribution.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This odd species appears to be a compromise or"bridge" between the red-
stainingandyellow-staining (rufescentandlutescent) sections of Agaricus. The flesh when
fresh bruises red quite dramatically, but the surface of the cap turns yellow in potassium
hydroxide! In the field it can be separated from other" bleeding" species such as A.fusco-
Jibrillosus by its slimmer build (see photo on p. 311)andfondness for oak. A. am;cosus
also reddens when cutandyellows in KOH; it is common under mountain conifers in the
Southwestandsouthern Rockies,andis edible. A. sp;ss;caulis has a stocky stature like A.
bisporus (and is sometimes mistaken for that species)andslowly reddening flesh, yellows
somewhat in KOH, has a slight almond odor,andis widely distributed but rare.
Agaricus subrutilescens (Wine-Colored Agaricus) Color Plate 75
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex or with a somewhat flattened top, becoming broadly
umbonate to plane or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with brown to
purple-brown or wine-colored fibrils or fibrillose scales (sometimes only at the center) ona
whitish to dingy background. Flesh white, firm, not staining when bruised; odor mild or
slightly fruity. GILLS close, free at maturity; at first whitish, then pinkish, then darkening
slowly to pinkish-brownandfinally chocolate-or blackish-brown; when pinkish usually
bruising brighter rosy-pink when cut. STALK 5-20 cm long, 0 .5-1.5 (4 cm thick, equal or
thicker below, smoothandwhite or reddish above the ring, sheathed with soft cottony
white scales below which break up into fibrillose patches in age or wear away; stuffed or
hollow, often fragile in age. VEIL membranous, white, forming a thin, usually superior,
skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Cap surface usually staining greenish-olive in KOH (sometimes slowly).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods, usually under conifers;
common in the fallandwinter along the west coast, also reported fromJ apan. I n our area it
favors redwood, but occurs in Oregon under alder, in northern California under Sitka
spruce, in southern California under oak,andin the Sierra foothills in mixed woods.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, but has been known to cause rather severe gastric upsets
in some people. It is not as meaty as many Agaricus species, but it is delicious.
COMMENTS The dark purple-brown capandshaggy white stem distinguish this hand-
some mushroom from other Agaricus species. Along with A. hondensis, it is our most
common Agaricus of deep, undisturbed woods. A. hondensis, however, has a paler cap
and smooth (not shaggy) stalk. Because of the greenish KOH reactionanda number of
other chemical peculiarities, A. subrutilescens is something of an anomaly. It does not
fit well into any of the existing "sections" of Agaricus, but the rosy-staining gills suggest
a possible relationship to the red-staining species (section Sanguinolenti). It is usually
a rather tallandslender mushroom, but robust individuals can be found, particularly
under pine. A small Texan species, A. v;naceo-umbr;nus, also stains greenish in KOH.
Agaricus hondensis (Felt-Ringed Agaricus)
CAP6-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, smooth, whitish or with pale
pinkish-brown to pinkish-gray to fawn-colored flattened fibrils or fine fibrillose scales
(at least at center), the fibrils often darkening in age to brown, reddish-brown, or reddish-
gray, but in one northern form darker brown from the beginning. Flesh thick, white,
unchanging or staining pale yellowish when bruised, then often slowly discoloring
pinkish; odor of crushed flesh mild or faintly phenolic, but usually distinctly phenolic in
base of stalk. GILLS pale pinkish to pinkish-gray becoming brown, then chocolate-brown
or darker; free at maturity, close. STALK 7-20 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick but witha thicker or
bulbous base; firm, smooth, without scales, white or discoloring dingy pinkish or brownish
in age or after handling; flesh in extreme base usually staining pale yellowish when bruised.
VEIL membranous, white, forming a thick, feltlike, superior ring on stalk; ring skirtlike
but often flaring outward instead of collapsing against stalk. SPORE_PRINT
chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining
yellow in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups, troops, or rings in woods, particularly where there are
thick accumulations of fallen twigsandother debris. Very common in our area in the late
fallandwinter under both hardwoodsandconifers; like A. subrutilescens, which grows
in similar habitats, it is apparently restricted to the west coast. The main fruiting typically
follows close on the heels of A. praeclaresquamosus. It was originally described from
La H onda, California.
EDIBILITY Poisonous to many people, causing stomach distress, vomiting, etc. It's
difficult to imagine a more delicious-looking mushroom, but it has an unpleasant, astrin-
gent-metallic taste even when cooked.
COMMENTS This handsome, alluring woodland Agaricus is distinguished by the pale
cap fibrils which often darken in age, the thick felty annulus( ring), smooth naked stalk, and
chocolate-brown spores. The phenol odor is often absent in the cap but usually quite
pronounced when cooked or if the base of the stalk is broken openandcrushed. It is
frequently mistaken for edible species, particularly A. subrutilescensandA. augustus,
both of which have cottony scales on the stem when young. It has also been confused
with A. silvaticus, a species with reddening flesh (see A.fuscofibrillosus).
Agaricus calijornicus (California Agaricus) Color Plate 72
CAP 3-9 (12) cm broad, at first convex or marshmallow-shaped, the margin inrolled
and often somewhat lobed, then expanding to broadly convex or plane or broadly umbo-
nate; surface dry, smooth or with fibrils or small scales; color variable: most often white to
silvery gray with a brown center, but sometimes entirely whiteandat other times with
brown to grayish-brown fibrils or scales throughout; usually darker in ageandoften with a
metallic luster; often pinkish-or reddish-stained in wet weather; margin often extending
beyond gills. Flesh thick, white, unchanging or staining slightly yellowish when crushed,
then eventually sordid reddish or brown; odor of crushed flesh phenolic but often faint.
GILLS close, free at maturity, usually pallid until the veil breaks, then bright pink to
pinkish-brown, finally chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long,
0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base, stuffed or hollow, smooth, without
scales; white, but often discoloring pinkish to dingy brown in age or after handling. VEIL
membranous, thick, white, often with felty patches on underside; forming a persistent,
superior to median ring on stalk or occasionally clinging to cap margin; ring skirtlike or
intermediate. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious (but not often in rings) on ground,
growing anywhereandeverywhere, but especially abundant in suburbia-on lawns,
in gardens, parks, under trees (eucalyptus, acacia, oak, cypress, etc.), also in the woods,
but only rarely in pastures (except under trees). Found year-round in our area, but most
abundant in the fall, when it often mingles with Lepiota naucinaandother Agaricus
species. It is known only from the west coast, but may very well have a wider distribution.
EDIBILITY Mildly poisonous to some people (causing stomach upsets),andfrequently
mistaken for the common meadow mushom (A. campestris), with which it often grows.
COMMENTS This ubiquitous mushroom gives my students more trouble than any
other, not only because it closely mimics edible species, but also because of the endless
variation it exhibits. "Typical" forms-if they can be said to exist-do not stain bright
yellow like A. xanthodermus, but yellow slightly in cooking, in addition to giving off a
phenol odor. The persistent membranous ring, modest size, rather long stalk, slight
phenol odor when fresh (often not evident to those unfamiliar with the odor)andwhitish
(not pinkish!) gills in the button stage (i.e., before the veil breaks) help distinguish it from
A. campestris, A. cupreobrunneus,andA. bisporus. The cap varies tremendously in color
and scali ness, but is usually brownish at least at the center,andoften somewhat shiny. As
a rule, specimens growing in sheltered situations (such as under oak) are paler or even pure
white, while those growing in the open can be quite dark. Specimens on lawns are usually
rather firmly rooted in the groundandoften have to be dug up to avoid breaking the stem.
F or a comparison with A. campestris, see that speciesandthe key to Agaricus. Since it is
the most ubiquitous Agaricus in coastal California (one quickly tires of finding it), the
name A. californicus is certainly appropriate. It has also been called the ""Fool's Agaric,"
but I don't care for this name because fools aren't the only ones to be fooled by it!
Agaricus praeclaresquamosus (Flat-Top Agaricus) Color Plate 76
CAP 5-25 em broad, at first convex or somewhat marshmallow-shaped, then broadly
convex or plane; surface dry, covered with flattened inky-gray to grayish-brown or brown
fibrils or fibrillose scales (at least at center) on a whitish background, but often developing
reddish or pinkish stains in wet weather; in one form bruising yellow. Flesh thick, white,
unchanging or staining slightly yellow when bruisedandthen slowly discoloring brownish
or vinaceous; odor of crushed flesh phenolic (especially in base of stalk). GILLS close, free
at maturity, at first pallid, then grayish or light pink, becoming reddish-brown to
chocolate-brownandfinally blackish-brown. STALK 7-18 em long, 1-3 (4) em thick, equal
or enlarged below or sometimes ta pering to a point if growing in clusters; stuffed or hollow,
smooth, without scales; white, but often discoloring reddish-brown to dingy brown in age
or upon handling; flesh in extreme base usually (but not always) staining bright yellow
when cut. VEIL membranous, white, thick, feltlike, somewhat rubbery, often splitting at
the margin; rupturing to form a persistent, superior, skirtlike or intermediate ring on stalk.
SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4-6.5 x 34.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap
surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters in woods orundertrees,especiallyalongroads
and paths; widely distributed, but especially common along the west coast. It is frequent
in our area in the fallandwinter,andoccasional in the early spring. The main crop is usually
in November or December, but I have seen gorgeous fruitings of the large form (see
comments) under redwood in Humboldt County, California, in September.
EDIBILITY Poisonous to many, causing vomitinganddiarrhea, but some people eat it
with impunity. Like A. hondensis. it is tempting, but has an unpleasant metallic taste.
COMMENTS Better known as A. meleagr;s, this beautiful omnipresent Agaricus can
be told by the inky to grayish-brown fibrils on the cap, plus the thick veil, smooth stem,
and phenolic odor of the crushed flesh. I n addition, the base of the stalk often bruises bright
yellow when nicked, as in A. xanthodermus. The above description embraces two forms:
one medium-sized (but generally larger than A. californicus)andsometimes clustered, the
other very largeandstrikingly beautiful (about the size of A. augustus)andoften gre-
garious but rarely clustered. The latter is especially tempting for the table(see color plate!),
but can be distinguished from A. augustus by the smooth stem, grayer cap,anddifferent
odor. The larger form is usually found under redwood, whereas the medium-sized form
grows under various trees, including redwoodandoak. Other species: A. placomyces, a
common woodland mushroom in eastern North America, is very similar to the medium-
sized form of A. praeclaresquamosus. but has a more fibrillose (less scaly) cap, a less
rubbery veil,andoften shows yellowish to brown droplets on the underside of the veil or
on the stalk. Another eastern species, A. pocillator, closely resembles A. placomyces.
but lacks veil dropletsandoften has a double ring, is usually smallerandslimmer, and
sometimes has a rimmed ( cuplike) basal bulb. It is especially common in the South. Both
of these species are eaten by some people, but are best avoided.
Agaricus xanthodermus (Yellow-Staining Agaricus)
CAP 6-15 (20) em broad, round to somewhat marshmallow-shaped or convex, then
expanding to broadly convex or plane; surface dry, smooth, pure white to gray or grayish-
buff, or often whitish at the marginandbuff to tan toward the center; often discoloring
brownish in old ageandsometimes breaking up into scales; typically staining bright yellow
quickly when rubbed repeatedly, especially on the margin, but then slowly discoloring
brownish or vinaceous; margin inrolled somewhat when youngandoften lobed. Flesh
thick, firm, white, turning yellowish when crushed; odor phenolic (unpleasant). GILLS
close, free at maturity, at first white, then pinkish or grayish-pink, finally chocolate-
brown to blackish-brown. STALK 5-12 (18) cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or with an
enlarged base, smooth, stuffed or hollow, without scales; white, usually bruising yellow,
then brownish; in age often discolored brownish; flesh in very base turning bright yellow
when cut. VEIL membranous, white or yellow-stained, usually with patches on underside;
forming a large, thick, feltlike, median to superior ring on stalk; ring skirtlike or inter-
mediate, often flaring at first. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 4.5-6 x 3-4.5
microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious under treesandhedges, in yards, on lawns,
along roadsandpaths, also in woods, pastures,andunder cypress; widely distributed.
Abundant in our area from fall through springandeven showing up in the summer. I have
seen stupendous fruitings in an old olive orchard, under acaciaandeucalyptus,andin
numerous cypress plantations as well as with oak.
EDIBILITY Poisonous to many people-causing headaches, nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea. It is a very tempting, meaty mushroom but the unpleasant odor becomes
unbearably obnoxious when the mushroom is cooked,andthe taste is awful as well.
Yet there is no accounting for taste. I know one person who gathers it-and nothing else!
COMMENTS The tendency of all parts to stain bright yellow, the phenolic odor,andthe
white to grayish or tan cap plus the presence of a veilandchocolate-brown spores are the
trademarks of this cosmopolitanandvariable species. The yellow-staining is usually most
dramatic on the margin of the cap, but is most reliable in the extreme base of the stalk, which
turns bright chrome-yellow when nicked. The latter is perhaps the best field mark, since
only the equally poisonous A. praeclaresquamosus stains so brilliantly in the base of the
stalk. Several edible Agaricus species, such as A. augustusandA. albolutescens, stain
yellow on the cap, but do not subsequently discolor brownish. The edible horse mushroom
(A. arvensis)andgiant horse mushroom (A. osecanus group) superficially resemble A.
xanthodermus, but do not stain yellow at the base of the stalkanddo not smell like phenol.
Agaricus pinyonensis* (Pinyon Agaricus)
CAP 6-20 cm broad, convex or shaped like an inverted bowl, expanding slightly in age but
not normally becoming plane; surface smooth or occasionally breaking up to form a few
small scales; entirely white orwitha tan-to buff-tinged center, often discoloring buff to very
pale tan overall in old age; sometimes yellowing when bruised. Flesh very thick(at least 2
cm)andfirm, white, typically not staining; odor mild or merely mushroomy. GILLS
pinkish when young, then darkening to purple-or chocolate-brownandfinally blackish-
brown; close, free at maturity; narrow in relation to the flesh. STALK 5-20 cm long, 2-5 cm
thick or more, often swollen below (just above the base); whiteandsmooth or nearly so,
sometimes discoloring like the cap in old age; firm; solid, stuffed, or with a hollow center.
VEIL thick, membranous, white, usually with patches on underside when young; typically
forming a median to superior skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown;
spores 6.5-8 x 4-5 (?) microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground under pinyonandjuniper; known only from
New Mexico, but probably occurring throughout the Southwest in the appropriate
habitat. It fruits mainly in AugustandSeptember, but does not appear every year.
EDIBILITY Delectably delicious-a favorite of fungus-fanciers in the Southwest. Its
discoverersandnamers, Bill IsaacsandChuck Barrows of Santa Fe, New Mexico, rate it
among the best in the genus ("firm like A. bitorquisandmilder than A. campestris").
COMMENTS This magnificent white mushroom is remarkable for its thick flesh, firm
texture,andfine flavor. It is somewhat reminiscent of A. bitorquis, but its veil is quite
differentandit apparently grows only with pinyonandjuniper. Its name (which has yet to
be officially publishedandmay actually turn out to be A. "barrowsii") is therefore apt,
but its affinities within the genus Agaricus are rather unclear. It may be related toA. arven-
.Provisional name by Isaacs & Barrows
sis, but does not normally smell sweetanddoes not necessarily stain yellow when bruised.
Other species: A medium-sized to fairly large (cap 4-14 cm) whitish species, A. sequoiae.
grows solitary to gregarious or in large clusters in the redwoodandmixed forests of
coastal northern California, usually near rivers or at least in bottomlands. It has a longer
(8-30 cm)andmore slender stem that is usually equal,andit does not stain yellow when
bruised or in KOH, but sometimes has a yellow-tinged veil. It has a mild odorandis edible
according to Rick Kerrigan, who named it.
Agaricus arvensis (Horse Mushroom)
CAP (4) 7-20 cm broad, oval or convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface dry,
smooth or sometimes cracking into small scales, especially at the center; white to creamy,
buff, or yellowish (especially toward center), usually bruising yellow if rubbed (especially
when young); margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, firm, white,
unchanging or yellowing slightly when crushed; odor sweet (like anise or almond extract)
when young, often somewhat musty in age. GILLS close, free at maturity, pallid becoming
grayish (rarely pinkish), then chocolate-brown or darker. STALK5-12(l7)cmlong, 1-3 cm
thick, equal or slightly enlarged below, stuffed or hollow, smooth or with small cottony
scales below the ring; white, sometimes bruising or aging yellowish, but extreme base not
bruising yellow when cut. VEIL membranous, white ortinged yellow, with cottony patches
on underside that often split to form a starlike or cogwheel pattern; forming a fragile,
superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 7-8.5 x 5-6
microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in grassy areas-lawns, pastures, etc.;
commonandwidely distributed. It is frequently encountered in our area on lawnsandin
cemeteries in the spring, summer,andfall, but seems to be replaced in our pastures by the
giant horse mushroom (A. osecanus group).
EDIBILITY Edible (for most people)andexcellent. Buttons have a slightly sweetish
flavor intermediate between that of A. campestrisand A. augustus. Be sure not to confuse
it with the deadly white Amanitas, which have white spores, white gills,anda volva.
COMMENTS The white to pale yellowish cap, sweet odor when young, well-developed
membranous veil which often has a cogwheel pattern of patches on its underside (see photo
on p. 312), chocolate-brown spores,andgrowth in grass typify this beautiful, cosmopoli-
tan mushroom. The cap will often age or stain yellowish-more so than that of A. croco-
dilinusandA. osecanus. However, the base of the stalk does not stain bright yellow when
cut-an easy way to distinguish it from the poisonous, yellow-staining A. xanthodermus.
The stature of A. arvensis is generally more robust than that of A. si/vicola, its smaller-
spored sylvan look-alike, but it is not nearly as ponderous as that of the giant horse mush-
room (A. osecanus group) or A. crocodilinus. The growth in grass is quite characteristic,
though a swamp-inhabiting form (var. palustris) has been described. There are numerous
variants around A. arvensis that have not been critically evaluated, including a small,
slender form (cap only 3-9 cm broad) that occasionally occurs in our area on lawns.
A.fissuratus is a very similar coastal species with a frequently cracked (fissured), white
to yellowish capandslightly larger spores. It is common in the Puget Sound area of
Washington, but probably has a wider distribution,andis edible.
Agaricus osecanus group Color Plates 78, 79,81
(Giant Horse Mushroom)
CAP 7-40 cm broad, rounded or convex, then broadly convex to plane; surface dry, often
very smooth (like kid leather), but frequently with minutely cottony scales in youth and
sometimes cracking into scales or warts in age or dry weather; white, or discoloring buff
or yellowish in age (especially toward center); surface bruising slightly yellowish when
youngandfresh (but usually not staining in age). Flesh thick, very firm when young but
quite soft in age, not usually bruising yellow; odor slightly sweet (like almond extract or
or anise) when young, but often unpleasant (musty or like wet straw) at maturity. GILLS
close, free in age, white becoming grayish or grayish-pink, then reddish-brown, finally
chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 4-16 cm long, (1.5) 2.5-5 (8) cm thick, often
spindle-shaped (swollen at or below the middle) but sometimes equal; firm, usually solid;
smooth above the ring, often with small pointed but easily-obliterated scales below; white,
sometimes aging yellowish or rusty-yellow; flesh in base not staining bright yellow when
nicked. VEIL membranous, white, with patches on underside which form a cogwheel
pattern or adhere to stalk as downward-pointing scales; rupturing to form a median to
superior, skirtlike or collapsed ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores
(5) 6-7x 4.5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups or rings in pastures, lawns,andother grassy
areas; distribution uncertain, but extremely abundant at times in our coastal pastures
(when they are "popping" it is not unusual to pick 100 pounds from a single pasture-along
with some giant puffballs!) There is usually one crop in the fallandanother, larger one in
the spring, but it is also to be expected during warm spells in the winter. Its rangeextendsat
least into northern CaliforniaandOregon, where the very similar A. crocodilinus (see
comments) is also common.
EDIBILITY Edible (for most people),andvery popular with my group of acquaintances.
The young, hard buttons are best-ma ture specimens have very soft fleshanda musty od or
and do better in the compost pile than the frying pan.
COMMENTS This fineandforthright fungus can be spotted from afar, shining like a light
bulb when its spotless white skin catches the sun. It is essentially a larger, squatter, robuster
version of the horse mushroom (A. arvensis), but differs in having a solid, often swollen
stemandsmaller spores. Also, the sweet odorandyellow bruising reaction of young spe-
cimens are weaker than in typical A. arvensis (and may actually be non-existent), while
the musty odor that develops in age is stronger. The appearance ofthecap-whether warty
or smooth-seems to depend largely on age, exposure,andweather conditions (when
growing in the open or exposed to the wind it is more likely to be warty or cracked). Be
careful not to confuse it with the poisonous A. xanthodermus, which may also be large
and white, but has a phenol odor, yellows more rapidly when bruised,andstains bright
yellow in the base of the stem.
yellow in the base of the stem. An equally edible but larger-spored species, A . crocodilinus
("Crocodile Agaricus"-see photo above) is common in parts of northern California
and the Pacific Northwest,andhas also been reported from the prairies of eastern New
MexicoandColorado. It is just as large or even larger than the giant horse mushroom, and
looks virtually the same. True, it is more apt to be warty or scalyandis often slightly
browner in age, but it can also be perfectly smoothandpure white, so that in regions where
both occur the two species can only be separated with certainty by measuring the spores
(in A. crocodilinus they are 8-11 (14) microns long). Our giant horse mushroom,
incidentally, may very well be an unnamed, endemic species. It belongs to a group or
"complex" that is very confused taxonomically,andis listed here as a member of the
A. osecanus group largely because of its spore size. However, it differs somewhat from the
"true" A. osecanus of Europe,andcould just as well be called A. n;vescens-another
European species with a solid stemanda shade smaller spores. U ntiI a critical study of this
group is completed, it is perhaps best to call it "giant horse mushroom," because its
common name cannot be subsequently invalidated or proved "incorrect!" Since all of
these species are equallyandunequivocally edible, the exact (or inexact) differences
between them needn't concern you. At least, they don't concern me! Other species:
A. macros porus (=A. v;llat;cus) of Europe is a large-spored species very similar to, if not
identical with, A. crocodilinus; the suggestive moniker A. urinescens has been given to still
another large-spored variant-a fitting tribute to the indiscreet odor that frequently
develops in old age.
Agaricus silvicola group (Woodland Agaricus)
CAP 5-12 (18) cm broad, convex becoming plane; surface dry, smooth or silky-fibrillose,
sometimes obscurely fibrillose-scaly in age; white, usually aging yellowish, especially at the
center,andstaining at least slightly yellow when bruised, particularly on margin. Flesh
firm, white, unchanging or yellowing slightly when crushed; odor sweet (like anise or
almond extract), at least when young. GILLS close, free at maturity, white becoming gray
or pinkish-gray, then brownandfinally chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 5-14 (20) cm
long, 1-2 (2.5) cm thick, usually enlarged below, stuffed or hollow, smooth or with small
cottony scales below ring; white or pinkish at apex, white below, but often aging or bruising
yellowish; base not staining bright yellow when cut. VEIL membranous, white or stained
yellow, with patches on underside that sometimes form a cogwheel pattern; forming a
prominent, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores
5-6.5x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods; widely distributed and
common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area it is fairly common in the fall
and winter under oak, tanoak,andconifers; at higher elevations it fruits under conifers.
EDIBILITY Edible (for most people)andchoice, with caution. Make sure there is no
volvaandthat the mature gills are not white-I have seen it mix company with deadly
Amanitas that were very similar in size. shape,andcolor!
COMMENTS Also spelled A. sylvicola, this species or species "complex" is recognized
by its white cap, tendency to stain or age yellow, anise odor (sometimes faint, but usually
detectable when the young flesh is crushed), skirtlike annulus (ring), chocolate-brown
spores,andwoodland milieu. It rather closely resembles A. arvensis. but is usually more
erectandless robust, has smaller spores,anddoes not grow in grass. There are several
variants in need of critical study. The "typical" A. si/vicola grows mainly under conifers,
at least in the West, buta large, very statelyandstrikingvariety(see photo) is fairly common
in our area under tanoak, while a form with an abruptly bulbous stem(=A. abruptibulbus)
occurs in California as well as in eastern North America. None of these forms stain as
dramatically as A. albolutescens,andthey do not smell as strong nor are they as robust as
that species. Other species: A. chionodermus looks similar, but has bright pink to reddish
gills for a long time, a mild odor,anda white to silvery-white, often fibrillose cap. It grows
mainly under conifersandis edibleandapparently widely distributed-I have seen it in
New Mexico. See also A. sequoiae (under A. pinyonensis), A. summensis (under A.
augustus),andA. albolutescens.
Agaricus albolutescens (Amber-Staining Agaricus)
CAP 7-18 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or plane; surface usually dry, smooth or
fibrillose, at first white but quickly staining amber to yellow-orange when bruised and
often entirely yellowish to yellow-orange to amber or ochraceous in age; margin often hung
with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, usually bruising yellowish if crushed; odor strongly
sweetandaniselike or almondy. GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid becoming grayish
or grayish-pink, then eventually chocolate-brown or darker; often bruising yellow when
immature. STALK 5-14 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, usually enlarged below (up to 5 cm
thick), firm, white or discoloring yellowish, smooth above the ring, smooth or slightly
cottony-scaly below; flesh in base not usually bruising bright yellow, but exterior of base
may. VEIL membranous, white or yellow-stained, with patches on underside that some-
times form a cogwheel pattern; rupturing to form an ample, superior, skirtlike ring on
stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 5-7 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
Cap surface staining yellow in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; known only from the
West. In our area it is quite common from late fall through early spring under oak( often
in the company of A. hondensis). In the Sierra Nevada a vernal variant occurs.
EDIBILITY Delectably delicious, with a strong sweet flavor. As with most Agaricus
species, some people are adversely affected by it.
COMMENTS This woodland species is reminiscent of A. silvicola. but is easily distin-
guished by its squatter or more robust stature, much stronger odor,andamber-staining
cap. It also tends to occur in larger numbers than A. silvicola. at least in my experience.
(I have seen fairy rings containing nearly 100 specimens!) The rapid yellow-staining ofthe
cap can lead to confusion with the poisonous A. xanthodermus. which eventually discolors
brownish after staining yellow, smells like phenol,andstains bright yellow in the base of
the stalk. A. arvensis is also somewhat similar but usually grows in open, grassy places. In
the Sierra Nevadaandother mountain ranges, what appears to be a variant of A. albo-
lutescens is often common (especially in the spring). It has a fibrillose capandits stem is
tougherandmore cylindrical (less bulbous) than the coastal version, but it is otherwise
quite similar (see photograph above).
Agaricus subruJescens (Almond Mushroom) Color Plate 82
CAP (6) 8-25 em broad, round or marshmallow-shaped becoming convex to plane; surface
dry, smooth but with fine flattened fibrils which may break up into minute scales except at
the center (but in dry weather.sometimes cracking into large warts); fibrils pallid to buff to
pale brown, pale pinkish-brown, orfawn-colored, often becoming browner or ruddier with
age; background white to pinkish-buff, often becoming yellow in age or when bruised.
Flesh thick, firm, white, not bruising yellow or only very slightly; odor strongly sweet (like
almond extract), especially when young. GILLS free at maturity. close, whitish becoming
grayish or pinkish, then reddish-brownandfinally chocolate-brown or darker. STALK6-
15 em long, 1.5-4 em thick, equal or with an enlarged base, smooth or with a few fibrils or
scales below the ring; white, but often staining or aging yellow; base often staining yellow to
yellow-orange but flesh in base not staining bright yellow when cut; base sometimes with
white mycelial threads attached. VEIL thick, membranous, white, usually with patches
(often obscure) on underside; forming a superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT
chocolate-brown; spores 5.5-7 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining
yellow in KGH.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in compost, manure,andrich
soil; originally described from eastern North Americaandapparently widely distributed,
but rare. I have seen it fruit by the hundreds in manure-filled trenches on a berry farm near
Watsonville, California, in the late spring, summer,andearly fall (sometimes accom-
panied by Lepiota luteaandL. americana). It is easily grown at home in a vegetable garden
(if you use compost)andmycelium from thejust-described "patch" is now being marketed
for this purpose. It has the advantage ofliking it hot, meaning you can enjoy it at the same
time as your other summer vegetables (A. bisporus is also grown easily in gardens, but
likes it much cooler).
EDIBILITY Edible (for most people)anddelicious! The almondy odorandtaste is much
stronger than that of A. augustus-so strong, in fact, that some people don't care for it. I
put several specimens in a cream-of-mushroom soupandthose who tasted it swore I had
dumped in a bottle of almond extract! It was apparently cultivated around the turn of
the century, but lost out to A. bisporus-which raises an interesting prospect: if it had
become the "cultivated mushroom" instead of A. bisporus, would the word "mushroomy"
have a completely different (sweetandalmondy) connotation?
COMMENTS The strong almond extract odorandtaste plus the robust stature, presence
of an annulus, chocolate-brown spores,andlight brownish cap make this a fairly easy
mushroom to recognize. The cap is quite similar in color to that of A. hondensis, but the
habitatandodor are completely different, while the paler colorandsmoother stem distin-
guish it fromA. augustus. Other species: In eastern North America, an edible Agaricus with
tawny scales on the cap (like A. augustus), a shaggy stalk,andweaker almond odor has also
gone under the name A. subrufescens, apparently because of its similarly-sized spores.
Whether it is a distinct species or merely an extreme form of A. subrufescens is for licensed
Agaricus-experts to decide.
Agaricus augustus (The Prince) Front Cover, Color Plate 77
CAP 7-30 (40) cm broad, usually marshmallow-shaped but sometimes convex, slowly
expanding to plane or with an uplifted margin; surface dry, covered with numerous dark
brown to warm brown or tawny-brown fibrils or fibrillose scales on a white background
that usually becomes yellowish, buff, or ochre in age, giving an overall golden tone to many
mature specimens; center often darker; surface sometimes breaking up into warts in dry
weatherandbruising yellow when rubbed, at least when young. Flesh thick, white, firm;
odor sweet (like almond extract), especially when young. GILLS close, free at maturity,
remaining pallid for a long time, finally turning grayish-brown (or very briefly pinkish),
eventually chocolate-brown to blackish-brown. STALK 8-35 cm long, 1-4 (6) cm thick,
equal or enlarged slightly below, the base usually buried deep in ground; white, but often
aging or bruising yellowish; smooth above the ring, sheathed with white or brown-tipped
scales below (but these often wearing away in age); rather toughandfibrous. VEIL
membranous, with white to brown cottony patches on underside (but these sometimes
disappearing); forming a large, ample, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT
chocolate-brown; spores 7.5-10 x 5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining
yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clumps on ground in the woods (especially under
redwood), but usually near roadsandpaths, in clearings,andother places where the soil
has been disturbed; sometimes also in flower beds, composted areas, under trees in towns,
in arboretums, etc.; widely distributed, but frequent only along the Pacific Coast and
perhaps more common in our area than anywhere else. It shows a definite preference for
warm weather, fruiting in the spring, summer,andfall-or in the winter if it's mild enough.
Several crops are prod uced each year, so visit your patches regularly. It is curious that such
a large mushroom requires so little moisture to fruit-a little fogdrip is all it needs!
EDIBILITY Edible (for most people)andone of the very best! It's especially significant
beca use it fruits in the springandsummer, when edible fungi are scarce in our area. It's like
getting two mushrooms in one: delectably sweetandalmondy when young, strong and
mushroomy at maturity. Unfortunately maggots, slugs, sowbugs,andcentipedes are fond
of it too!
COMMENTS This prince of a mushroom is distinguished by its large size-caps of"LP"
dimensions (one foot) are not uncommon-almond extract odor, yellow-staining cap with
brown fibrils or scales, prominent annulus (ring), chocolate-brown spores,andshaggy
stem (when young) which is usually buried in the ground. The veil is largeandexquisitely
constructed,andthe marshmallow shape of the young caps (i.e., somewhat flattened on
top) is also characteristic, though several other mushrooms (e.g., A. praeclaresquamosus,
Lepiota rachodes) hae the same shape. The gills remain whitish for a long time-falsely
suggesting that the spores are white-but eventually they will darken to brownandfinally
chocolate-brown. The poisonous A. praeclaresquamosus is often common in the same
habitats, but has grayer cap fibrils, a smoother stem,andsmells like phenol. A. hondensis
also has a smooth stem, while the edible A. perobscurus has darker ca p fibrils when young, a
smoother stem,andsubtler odor. Other species: A. smithii (also called A. peTTQTus) is a
similar but somewhat smaller, more slender version with an ochraceous to ochraceous-
brown capandalmondy odor. It is common in northern Californiaandthe Pacific
Northwest under coastal conifers, particularly Sitka spruce. A pale form of A. augustus
also occurs, but is rare. It resembles the typical form but has pale yellow cap fibrils which
give the cap an overall creamy-white appearance. Somewhat similar to this pale form isA.
summens;s-a large, robust species whose cap is whitish with yellowish to ochraceous-
tawny fibrils. It hasa thick, often bulbousstem(2.5 cm thick or more)andis rare. I have seen
it in our area underf orest trees along roads. Finally, A. augustus hasa smaller-spored look-
alike in eastern North America (see comments under A. subrufescens). All ofthe above
species are edibleanddelicious.
Agaricus perobscurus (The Princess)
CAP 7-20 cm broad, convex or marshmallow-shaped becoming broadly convex to plane
or with margin slightly uplifted; surface dry, at first covered with dark (grayish-brown
to dark brown or blackish) fibrils which tend to break up in age to form scattered, sparse
grayish-brown to dingy olive-brown fibrillose scales on a whitish to ochre-buff background
(but center usually remaining dark); bruising yellow only slightly if at all. Flesh thick, white,
not usually bruising yellow; odor typically of almond extract but often faint oreven absent.
GILLS close, free at maturity, pallid becoming pinkish or pinkish-brown, then brown and
finally chocolate-brown or blackish-brown. STALK 7-15 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or
more often enlarged at base; white or discoloring slightly in age, smooth above the ring,
slightly scaly or fibrillose below, but often appearing smooth, especially in age. VEIL
membranous, with cottony patches on underside (but these often disappearing), forming
an ample, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown; spores 6.5-
7.5x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining yellow in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups under or near trees (usually planted) or shrubs, some-
times also at the edges of woods; known only from coastal California. It is fairly frequent
in the San Francisco Bay region from late fall through spring or even summer, but uncom-
mon to rare elsewhere (not nearly as numerous as A. augustus). I usually find it under pine,
cypress,andacacia, but have never seen it in the red wood forests where A. augus tus thri ves.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-about as good as A. augustus.
COMMENTS This "sister" to A. augustus is likely to be mistaken forthat species, but has
a subtler almond odorandless pronounced tendency to stain or age yellow, a smoother
(less shaggy) stalk,andconsistently smaller spores. In addition, the gills pass through a
more marked pinkish phase before turning brown,andthe fibrils on the cap are much
darker when young( the fibrils may be quite sparse in age, however, giving thecapan overall
paler appearance). It is also likely to be mistaken for the poisonous A. praec/aresquamosus.
but that species has a totally smooth stalk, a phenol odor, often stains bright yellow in
the base of the stem,andis more common in habitats characteristic of A. augustus than
those favored by A. perobscurus.
Agaricus micromegathus (Anise Agaricus)
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, with silky fibrils or fibrillose scales
(sometimes very sparse toward margin); fibrils at first pinkish in one form, yellow-brown
in another, but in both forms becoming brownish to grayish-brown in age on a whitish to
buff background; yellow to orange stains often developing in age or upon handling. Flesh
thin, fragile, white, unchanging or bruising yellowish; odor distinctly sweet (aniselike or
almondy). GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid or grayish, then pinkish, finally chocolate-
brown or darker. STALK 2-6 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base,
white or staining yellow to orange upon handling (especially below); stuffed or hollow,
fragile at maturity. VEIL membranous, thin; forming a fragile, superior to median ring on
stalk, or disppearing entirely; ring skirtlike or intermediate. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-
brown; spores 4.5-5.5 x 3.5-4 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface staining
yellow in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious in lawns, pastures, fields,andother grassy
or open places; widely distributed. Fairly common in ourarea in mild weather, especially in
the fall, often in the company of A. campestrisandA. cupreobrunneus.
EDIBILITY Edible, but thin-fleshedandfragile. Its fragrance suggests that the flavor is
good, but it doesn't often occur in enough quantity to invite collecting. Chuck Barrows
of Santa Fe, New Mexico, attained a small degree of notoriety by smothering an ice cream
cone with raw A. semotus (a very similar species-see comments).
COMMENTS This is one of several puny, poorly-known species with an anise odor, slight
annulus (ring),andfragile flesh. They have a tendency to become yellow or rusty-yellow
in age,andcan be distinguished from most other Agaricus species by their size alone. Simi-
lar species with a distinct anise odor include: A. semotus (see photo on p. 339), with brown
to reddish fibrils on the capandslightly longer stalk, found in woodsandunder trees (espe-
cially oak);andA. comtulus (also spelled A. comptu/us), with a white to yellowish cap
that is usually tinged brown or buff at the center, found in grass. Both of these are edible
and common, but rarely collected because of their small size. Also see A. diminutivus.
Agaricus diminutivus group (Diminutive Agaricus)
CAP 1-4 cm broad, oval or convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface dry , with
flattened pink to purplish-pink to amethyst-gray to reddish-brown fibrils, at least at the
center; margin often paler. Flesh thin, white, not staining; odor mild or faintly fragrant
(like anise). GILLS free at maturity, close, pallid or pink becoming reddish-brown, then
chocolate-brown or darker. STALK 2-7 cmlong, 2-6 mm thick, equal orwitha small basal
bulb, w!1ite or pallid, but in age often stained yellowish or orange below the ring; stuffed
or hollow, fragile. VEIL membranous, thin, white; forming a fragile superior to median,
skirtlike ring on stalk which often disappears in age. SPORE_PRINT chocolate-brown;
spores 4.5-6 x 3.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth. Cap surface yellowing in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups in humus in woods, widely
distributed. The most common variant in our area fruits in the late fallandwinter in mixed
woodsandunder live oak, but farther north this group is common under conifers.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible, but too small to be of valueandsometimes confused
species of Inocybe (e.g., I. pudica), most of which are poisonous.
COMMENTS Members of this species "complex" are easily distinguished from other
Agaricus species by their petite size, reddish-pink to purplish cap color,andwoodland
habitat. The form illustrated is the common one in our area. It has a beautiful amethyst-
tinged capandseems to fit descriptions of A. pUTpUTellus (a member of the A. diminuti-
vus group) quite well. However, there are probably more names (e.g., A. dulcidulus, A.
amethystina) in this group than there are species, so a critical study is necessary before
any positive identifications can be made.
Coprinus comatus (Shaggy Mane) Color Plate 85
CAP 4-15 (25) cm tall, cylindrical or columnar, expanding somewhat as margin curls up
until it is more or less bell-shaped, then deliquescing from the bottom up; surface not vis-
cid, white with a brown to pale cinnamon-brown or buff center, soon breaking up into
shaggy white to brown scales (universal veil remnants) which often recurve in age; margin
striate in ageandoften tattered. Flesh soft, white. GILLS very crowded (like pages in a
book), free or nearly so, at first white, then passing through delicate shades of pink, pinkish-
red, or vinaceous; finally blackandinky (deliquescing). STALK 5-20 (40) cm long, 1-2 cm
thick, tapering upward or with an enlarged, more or less pointed base; smooth, white,
hollow or stuffed with a pith, cleanly separable from cap. PARTIAL_VEIL membranous,
forming a small, white, movable, inferior ring which often drops to the base of the stalk or
falls off. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 10-16 (18) x 7-9 microns, elliptical, smooth; with
a germ pore.
HABITAT Sometimes solitary but more often scattered to densely gregarious or in loose
clumps on hard groundandgrassy areas, rich or disturbed soil, etc. Common throughout
the northern hemisphere, especially along roadsandtrails. In our area the major crop is
in the fall or early winter, but it can be found most any time, In the Southwest I have seen
troops of them crowding highway shoulders for miles-both in the springandfall. For
some reason "shags" seem to gravitate toward asphaltandoften burst up through it.
They've been known to ruin tennis courts,andone is reported to have lifted a 10 pound slab
of concrete in a heroic attempt to proliferate its species. Alexander Smith describes a
fruiting of over 1000 specimens on a baseball field, "extending in a line from first base
to short left field."
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious-one of the best knownandsafest of all wild mush-
rooms. The flavor is very delicate but the texture is marvelous-not slimy as in okra, but
succulent as in octopus. For a delicious snack, slice them in halfanddip them in egg batter
and bread crumbs (or flour), then saute them brieflyandserve hot! Use only young caps-
darkened ones are mostly water-and don't pick more than you can eat in two meals unless
you plan to preserve them, for they will deliquesce quickly. In rare instances they may
react with alcohol in the body to produce effects similar to those of C. atramentarius.
However, I have cooked them in wine many times with no ill effects.
COMMENTS Shaggy manes are the soldiers among mushrooms, the sentinels of the
roads. Their tall, shaggy cylindrical heads are distinctive even in silhouette,andwhen inky
individuals are found in the vicinity of young ones, there can benodoubtas to their identity.
The poisonous Chlorophyllum molybdites can be similar when young, but expands in age
and doesn't deliquesce. Podaxis pistil/aris is quite similar in shapeandcolor, but lacks gills.
"Shags" are as pleasing to the eye as to the palate, especially in the delicate reddish tints the
gills assume as they mature. "Shags" also possess a special spontaneity-seemingly
popping up overnight after a rain, while most mushrooms fruit several days after. Extreme
aridity may arrest development so that the spores never matureandthe gills remain white,
or the gills blackenandthen shrivel up rather than deliquescing. Several formsandvarieties
of the shaggy.mane have been described, including a small, oval one only 5-6 cm high. The
height of the larger forms seems to depend partially on the depth of the humus they must
transcend-I have found specimens in redwood duff by a road that were two feet tall-but
the "normal" height is 6-20 cm. Other species: C. colosseus is a giant version of the shaggy
mane with stalk 35-50 cm longandspores 17-20 microns long; it has been described from
Washington by Fred Van De Bogart, but is rare. Several small (cap less than 5 cm high)
versions of the shaggy mane also occur, including: C. palmeranus, terrestrial; C. alnivorus,
wood-inhabiting; C. sterquilinusandC. umbrinus, on dung or compost piles, the former
with large sporesandthe latter with a brownish stem base;andC. spadiceisporus, on the
dung of wild animals (rabbit, deer, etc.). All ofthese have the ring (annulus) characteristic
of the shaggy maneandare too smallandrare to be worth eating.
Coprinus picaceus (Magpie Mushroom)
CAP (3) 5-8 cm broad, oval or cylindrical when young, broadly bell-shaped in age; surface
at first covered with whitish universal veil material which soon breaks up into discrete
patches, flakes, or "spots" on a dark brown to eventually black background; finely striate
nearly to the center in age,anddeliquescing. Flesh thin, fragile, soft. GILLS white, soon
becoming reddish-or vinaceous-tinted, finally blackandinky (deliquescing); crowded,
more or less free. STALK 7-15 (25) cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, base usually enlarged and
with woolly hairs; hollow or stuffed, white, smooth, fairly fragile. PARTIAL_VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores (13) 14-20 x 10-13 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on ground in woodsandalong paths, etc.; widely
distributed, but not common. I have found it only once in our area, but it is not uncommon
in southern California when it is damp enough. In Europe it grows under beechandis said
to be partial to alkaline soil.
EDIBILITY Poisonous, at least to some people.
COMMENTS The mottled brown-and-white or black-and-white cap makes this one of
the easiest of all inky caps to recognize. Large specimens are reminiscent of the shaggy
mane in shape-but the resemblance ends there. Greg Wright of Los Angeles, who has
had more experience with this species than I, says the odor is also distinctive-like that of
"mothballs, a hot grass pile, or burnt hair, or rank." Other species: In my own pathetic
excuse for a garden I ha ve found a somewhat smaller, mottled (black-and-white), unidenti-
fied Coprinus with a distinct annulus (ring) on the stalk.
Coprinus atramentarius. the common inky cap. Note hollow stalk in the beautiful slice at bottom
Coprinus atramentarius (Inky Cap; Tippler's Bane)
CAP 2-8 cm high and/or broad, round or ovalandoften somewhat lobed when young,
becoming conical to bell-shaped, or in old age convex; deliquescing from the margin
toward the center; surface dry, smooth or with silky whitish fibrils (universal veil tissue)
when young, grayish-brown to grayish-tan when young (the center often browner or with
small brown scalesandthe margin sometimes pallid), becoming lead-gray to inky-gray in
age; margin striate or grooved, usually tattered OI splitting in age. Flesh thin, soft, pallid or
grayish. GILLS free or nearly free, crowded, at first white, soon gray or with pinkish to
vinaceous tints, finally blackanddeliquescing(becoming inky). STALK 4-15 (20) cm long,
0.6-1.5 em thick, equal or with a narrowed or enlarged base; white or with grayish to brown-
ish fibrils below; hollow. PARTIAL_VEIL fibrilloseandevanescent or leaving a median
to basal ring or ridged zone on stalk, or sometimes even a rudimentary volva near base,
SPORE_PRINT black; spores 7-12 x 4 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or in massive clumps in cultivated areas,
lawns, gardens, roadsides, around or on old stumps, etc., sometimes also in the woods;
widely distributedandvery common, fruiting in our area practically year-round. It used to
be an unwanted intruder in cultivated mushroom beds,andis one of our characteristic
"suburban" mushrooms. The largest fruiting I've seen in the wild was under aspen in New
Mexico. Several crops are generally produced each year.
EDIBILITY Edible when youngandfairly good-but sometimes reacting with alcohol
in the body to produce a peculiar type of poisoning (see p. 896 for details). The grayish-
brown caps look rather unappetizing-and precisely for this reason were the very first wild
mushroom I ventured to eat. Inky cap-and-salami sandwhiches became a staple item in
my teen-age diet until I discovered finerandmore flavorful fungal foods, such as
"s parassis Sole"and.. Agaricus Elegante."
COMMENTS The lead-gray to brownish, bell-shaped caps of this species are a familiar
sight in vacant lotsandgardens. Several varieties occur, including one with a pointed or
umbonate cap (var. acuminatus)andone with a copious universal veil. The typical variety,
however, has a non-umbonate capandonly slight universal veil remnants on the cap (if
any). The young unexpanded buttons provide an unexpected visual treat when sliced open
lengthwise, but true to their name, they turn into an unsightly inky black mess as they
mature, suitable for writing but not biting. The inky cap sometimes rivals the shaggy mane
in sizeandabundanceandmay even mix company. I have seen gigantic 1O-lb. clusters
fruiting from an old cut stump in a field, but it does not necessarily grow in clumps. Other
species. C. insignis (=c. alopecia) of eastern North America is a similar species with rough
spores. It grows on hardwood stumps, especially maple,andis poisonous to some people.
Coprinus micaceus (Mica Cap; Glistening Inky Cap)
CAP 2-4 cm high when young, 1.5-5 cm broad when expanded; at first oval, soon bell-
shaped, then expanding to convex; surface sprinkled at first with minute glistening whitish
particles (universal veil remnants) which often disappear in age, otherwise tan to yellow-
brown to ochre, buff, fulvous, or cinnamon-brown (margin often paler), becoming grayer
in age, especially toward margin; striate at least half way to center, the margin usually
tattered or split at maturity. Flesh thin, pallid or white, soft. GILLS crowded, adnate to
adnexed or free, palllid soon becoming gray or brownish, finally black; deliquescing
(sometimes partially, sometimes completely). STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 2-6 mm thick,
more or less equal, fragile, hollow, smooth, white or discoloring buff. PARTIAL_VEIL
absent or rudimentary, but stalk sometimes with a slight basal ring (presumably formed
by the universal veil). SPORE_PRINT dark brown to black; spores 7-11 x 4-6 microns,
elliptical but often compressed (flattened) somewhat, smooth.
HABITAT Gregarious, usually in clusters, on wood or woody debris, around stumps,
or on roots or buried wood (thus appearing terrestrial); widely distributedandvery
common. It fruits practically year-round in our area. Like C. atramentarius, it is a common
feature of suburbia but also occurs in the woods (on cottonwood, oak, alder, etc.).
EDIBILITY Edible, but thin-fleshedandwatery. The flavor is said to be good, however,
and since it often occurs in large numbers, it is easy to gather enough for a meal. It does
not always digest itself completely, another point in its favor.
COMMENTS The cap color of this ubiquitous Coprinus varies considerably, but typi-
cally falls somewhere between tanandrusty-yellow. It is striate, but not translucent as in
the much smaller C. disseminatus. It might be mistaken for a Psathyrella if the gills do not
liquefy, but old caps become very tattered as the margin gets eaten away. The mica-like
particles responsible for its name are not always evident because they wear away quickly.
Other species: C. silvaticus is a very similar species that lacks the particles when young
and has larger spores. C. radians is also similar, but can usually be distinguished from
C. micaceus by its deliquescing gillsandthe presence of a cinnamon-brown to yellow-
brown or yellow-orange woolly mycelial mat or network of mycelial strands (oozonium)
in the surrounding substrate. It often grows indoors (on wet wood in basements, bath-
rooms, etc.),andbountiful crops sprout periodically from the woodwork of a popular
cafe in Santa Cruz, California. Its employees are divided on how to respond: whether to
advertise its presence as a unique organic addition to the existing decor, or whether to
hush it up by organizing daily "searchandsquish" patrols. for fear of alienating the more
squeamish members of their clientele.
Coprinus domesticus (Domestic Inky Cap)
CAP 1-5 cm high, oval to bell-shaped, expanding slightly in age; surface buff, pallid, or
yellowish with a tawny to ochre or fulvous center, at first covered with silky white to buff
fibrils or patches (universal veil remnants) which often disperse or disappear in age; conspi-
cuously striate nearly to the center; margin often splitting in age. Flesh thin, pallid. GILLS
crowded, free or adnexed, white becoming gray to reddish-gray, finally blackandinky
(deliquescing). STALK 3-8 cm long, 3-10 mm thick, equal or with swollen base, white,
hollow. PARTIAL_VEIL evanescent or sometimes forming a ragged ring or ridged zone on
stalk, or even a rudimentary volva at its base. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 7-10 x 3.5-4.5
microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Gregarious in small, scattered clumps on wood chi ps, compost,andvegetable
debris in a large garden in Saratoga, California; probably widely distributed. Crops were
produced in the above locality more or less continuously except in very cold weather.
EDIBILITY"Of very good flavor when cooked," says Greg Wright of Los Angeles-
but I don't recommend it because of possible confusion with other species.
COMMENTS The name C. domesticus has apparently been applied to more than one
species, so its use here must be regarded as tentative. However, our specimens compare
favorably to the original (European) description of the species. It resembles C. micaceus,
but has a somewhat paler cap with silky white fibrils (instead of particles) when young,
and deliquesces to a greater degree. A rather similar but unidentified species with a darker
(ochre to tawny) capanda white fibrillose universal veil (see photo above) occurs in our
area on ashes.
Coprinus lagopus group (Woolly Inky Cap) Color Plate 86
CAP 1.5-5 (7) cm high when unexpanded, 2-6 cm broad when expanded; at first oval or
cylindrical to acorn-shaped or conical, then expanding to nearly plane with the margin
splittingandoften recurving (curling upandback); deliquescing in wet weather; surface
dry, grayish to brownish-gray becoming blackish, but at first clothed with delicate white
to grayish hairs or fibrils (universal veil tissue) which break up into patchesandoften wear
away in age; striate nearly to the center beneath the hairs, at least at maturity. Flesh very
thin, soft. GILLS more or less free, narrow, fairly close, pallid St>on becoming grayish,
then blackandinky (but in dry weather merely withering). STALK 4-15 (20) cm long, 2-5
mm thick, equal or tapering upward, very fragile, hollow, white, at first clothed with
minute white hairs (like cap); base with long woolly white hairs. PARTIAL_VEIL absent
or evanescent. SPORE_PRINT blackish; spores 10-13 x 6-7 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in dense troops in leaf litter, woody debris, burned
areas, etc. (usually in the woods); widely distributed. Along with closely related species
( see comments), it is fairly common in our area in the fall, less so in the winterandspring.
The fragile fruiting bodies last only a few hours before consuming themselves.
EDIBILITY Probably harmless-but also fleshlessandflavorless.
COMMENTS The above description encompasses a "complex" of closely related inky
caps that are one big headache for compulsive Coprinus-categorizers. In addition to the
"true" C. lagopus. there is the very similar C. lagopides, which has smaller spores (7-10
microns long)andappears to be fairly common in our area. There are also several look-
alikes that are somewhat smallerandgrow on dung, manure, or wet straw. These include:
C. fimetariusandC. macrorhizus (the latter with a rooting stem base); C. macrocephalus,
with large spores (11-J 6 microns long);andC. tectisporus, which grows in greenhouse soil
and only partially deliquesces. To make matters more confusing, the name C. cinereus is
often used, sometimes for a woodland species like C. lagopides but with a taller cap, and
sometimes as a synonym for C. jimetariusandC. macrorhizus. You needn't know the
exact names of these inky caps, however, to appreciate their beauty (see color plate!), and
they are easily recognized as a group by their slender, fragile, white stalkandstriate
grayish cap that is clothed exquisitely with white hairs when young. The dung-and straw-
inhabiting forms, incidentally, are often abundant in our areaandare extremely ephemeral
-the caps deliquesce within a few hours, leaving behind only the long, slender, fragile,
bean-sprout-like stalks. (For a miniature dung-inhabiting version, see the C. radiatus
group.) Other species: C. arenatus is also similar to C. lagopus. but grows in sand; C.
narcoticus grows in manureandrich soilandhas a strong, unpleasant odor. Finally,
there is C. "chevicola," which fruited one season on the floor of my ramshackle '67 Chevy
Nova Supersport. It superficially resembled C. lagopus, but was smalleranddiffered in
several other respects, not the least of which was its choice of abode!
Coprinus radiatus group
(Miniature Woolly Inky Cap)
CAP minute, 2-8 mm high, 14 mm broad before expanding, at first oval or cylindrical,
then ex panding to plane or nearly plane (with the margin usually splittingandcurling up),
then deliquescing; surface gray or with a brownish center, but at first covered with long
white to grayish hairs and/or scales (universal veil tissue); striate nearly to the center
beneath hairs. Flesh very thin, soft. GILLS narrow, well-spaced in age, free or nearly free,
pallid soon becoming gray to black, deliquescing with the cap. STALK 1-5 cmlong, about 1
mm thick, more or less equal, hollow, very fragile, white, with rooting, hairy base.
PARTIAL_VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 11-14 x 6-8 microns, elliptical,
smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dung, compost,andmanure; widely distributed and
fruiting whenever it is damp enough. It is one of our commonest dung fungi, especially on
piles of horse manure mixed with straw.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares?
COMMENTS The small sizeanddense white to grayish hairs on the cap distinguish this
diminutive dung-lover. It is essentially a miniature version of the equally common C.
cinereus-c. fimetarius-C. macrocephalus complex (see comments under the C. lagopus
group),andis itself a "complex" of difficult-to-distinguish forms. Because of its small size
and brief life span it is best observed in a "dung garden" (dung or manure placed in a moist
chamber). Other dung lovers include: C. pseudoradiatus, very similar but with smaller
sporesanda non-rooting stalk base; C. niveus, larger, with a mealy snow-white cap (at
least when fresh); C. semilanatus, like C. niveus. but with a slightly darker cap (beneath
the veil remnants);anda host of small species which cannot be reliably identified without
a microscope. Also see C. ephemeroides. which has a large annulus (ring), C. ephemerus
and C. miser (under C. plicatilis), which have a bald or nearly bald cap,andcomments
under the C. lagopus group.
Coprinus ephemeroides (Ringed Dung Inky Cap)
CAP minute, 1-5 mm broad, convex or in age nearly plane; surface with minute granules or
particles (but may appear smooth), grayish or tinged yellowish to ochre at the center;
practically transparent; striate. Flesh very thin (almost non-existent). GILLS usually
adnexed or free, becoming grayish or black, narrow, soon shrivelling or deliquescing.
STALK 0.5-6 cm long, about 1 mm thick or less, equal or with a small bulb at base, very
fragile, whitish, smooth; base sometimes with a rudimentary volva (in one form).
PAR TIAL VEIL membranous, forming a large, persistent, more or less median ring on
stalk; ring disclike or saucerlike. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 6-9x 3-6 microns, angular
(appearing almost triangular), smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dungandmanure (especially of horses)andstraw
piles; widely distributedandcommon. Fruiting in our area whenever it is moist enough.
EDIBILITY Academic-a tremendous number would be needed for one mouthful!
COMMENTS One of our tiniest gilled mushrooms, this inky cap is easily recognized by
its growth on dungandthe large saucerlike annulus (ring) on the stalk. The ring is some-
times as broad as the cap, giving the illusion of a stalk with two caps! The name C. ephemer-
oides should not be confused with C. ephemerus, a slightly larger dung-lover that lacks an
annulus (see comments under C. plicatilis). C. bulbilosus is a synonym.
Coprinus plicatilis (Pleated Inky Cap) Color Plate 87
CAP 0.5-1.5 cm high when youngand1-3 cm broad when expanded; oval or cylindrical
to conical when young, broadly convex or plane in age; surface buff to yellow-brown,
usually with a darker (cinnamon-brown or fulvous) center, in age becominggrayishexcept
for center; deeply grooved (pleated) nearly to center; margin sometimes recurved in age.
Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS free (but attached to a collar around stalk apex), well-
spaced, narrow, soon grayandeventually black, but tending to wither rather than liquefy.
STALK 3-7.5 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, very fragile, thin, smooth, white
or buff, hollow. PARTIAL_VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 10-13 x 6.5-10
microns, broadly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in lawnsandother grassy areas, under
trees, in woods, along pathsandroads, etc; widely distributedandfairly common in our
area, especially in the fallandearly winter. I have seen it fruit prolifically with the similarly
named Marasmius plicatulus in grass under eucalyptus.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inconsequential due to its thin flesh.
COMMENTS The exquisitely pleated cap, small size,andterrestrial habit distinguish
this petite, parasol-like inky cap (see color plate!). The free collar to which the gills are
attached is also distinctive, but is not evident in one form (perhaps a distinct species). It is
larger than C. disseminatusandoccurs in smaller numbers,andits cap lacks the white
patches or hairs (universal veil remnants) typical of C. lagopusandmost other inky caps.
Other species: C. ephemerus also lacks hairs on its cap, but is slightly smallerandgrows in
dung, straw,andcompost; C. miser is a minute species (cap 1-5 mm high, reddish-brown
to orange-brown when fresh, but fading) that it also common on dung.
Coprinus disseminatus (Little Helmet; Fairy Bonnet)
CAP 5-10 mm broad, oval soon becoming bell-shaped, then sometimes convex; surface
minutely scurfy when young, then smooth; pallid or buff with a cinnamon-brown to honey-
brown center, becoming grayish toward the margin in age; deeply striate or pleated to the
centerandtranslucent at maturity. Flesh very thin, soft. GILLS adnate to adnexed or
appearing free,-fairly well-spaced, at first white but soon gray, finally black or slightly
paler; not deliquescing. STALK 1.54 cm long, 1-2 mm thick, equal, white or buff, hollow,
fragile, smooth, often curved. PARTIAL_VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT dark brown to
black; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. with a large apical germ pore.
HABITAT Densely gregarious (sometimes hundreds) on or near decayed wood and
debris, or on buried wood; usually found in woods or grassy areas, widely distributed.
It fruits throughout the mushroom season in our area, but is not particularly common.
In eastern North America it is often abundant.
EDIBILITY Too small to be of any value.
COMMENTS This dainty little fungus grows in troops that do indeed resemble "little
helmets" or "fairy bonnets." Because the gills do not deliquesce, the ""splitters" have
rewarded it with the name Pseudocop,inus disseminatus. It has the general aspect of C.
micaceus, but is much smaller. The translucent, pleated cap separates it from Psathyrella,
(to which it has also been assigned); it is also reminiscent of Mycena, but the spore print is
black or nearly black, not white. Other species: C. impatiens is a similar but slightly larger
species with crowded, at least somewhat deliquescent gills; it usually occurs in smaller
groups of up to one dozen individuals.
Panaeo/us so/idipes
(Solid-Stemmed Panaeolus)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, rounded to convex or broadly bell-shaped; surface smooth or
wrinkled, not viscid or only slightly so, buff to whitish, or dingy yellowish in age (or gray
from spore dust); sometimes breaking up into small scales as it matures. Flesh fairly thick,
whitish. GILLS adnate to adnexed, close; edges whitish; faces pallid becoming mottled
with grayandblack,andfinally entirely black. STALK (4) 8-20 cm long, (3) 5-15 mm thick,
equal or thicker below, solid, rather tough, smooth or longitudinally twisted-striate; often
beaded with droplets when youngandmoist, especially at apex; white to buff or tinged
gray from spores. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 14-22 x 9-14 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on dung (especially of horses), manure,andstraw;
widely distributed. In my experience it is not particularly common, but often prolific when
it fruits. I have seen large numbers near Saratoga, California, in January,andnear
Flagstaff, Arizona, in September. O.K. Miller says it is common during the summer in
Alaskaandthe Yukon.
EDIBILITY Edible. I haven't tried it, but McIlvaine says, "it is one of the best of the
toadstools." The relatively large size makes it the only non-hallucinogenic Panaeo/us
worth eating.
COMMENTS The large sizeandsolid stem are remarkable for a Panaeo/us. Along with
the black spores, pale cap, absence of a veil,andgrowth on dung, these features make it
easy to recognize. P. pha/aenarumandP. sepu/chra/;s are synonyms,andit has also been
placed in the genus Ane//aria(along with P. semiovalus, to which it is closely related). The
latter species, however, has a veil which usually forms a ring (annulus) on the stalk.
Panaeo/us semiovatus (Ringed Panaeolus)
CAP 2-6 (9) cm broadand2-6 cm high, oval at first, then bluntly conical or parabolic;
surface viscid when moist, often shiny when dry, smooth or slightly wrinkled, pale tan
becoming buff or whitish in age, or tinged gray from spores; margin sometimes hung with
veil remnants. Flesh soft, pallid. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding; edges whitish,
faces pallid becoming brown or grayish, then mottled with black,andfinally entirely
black. STALK (5) 8-15 (18) cm long, (3) 5-10 (12) mm thick, equal or with enlarged base,
stuffed or hollow, whitish to buff, apex often striate. VEIL membranous, usually forming
a superior to median ring on stalk which is blackened by falling spores, but sometimes
merely leaving a fibrillose zone. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 15-22 x 8-12 microns,
elliptical to somewhat pip-shaped, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dungandmanure, especially of horses; widely
distributedandfairly common in mild, wet weather. It is not uncommon in our area, but
the largest fruitings I've seen were in New Mexico, in the summer.
EDIBILITY Edible, according to most sources. However, there is one dubious report
of psilocybin-containing specimens from Colorado.
COMMENTS Also known as Panaeo/us separatusandAne//ar;a separata, this species
is easily recognized by its white to buff cap, presence of an annulus (ring),andgrowth in
horse dung (see photograph at bottom of p. 357). Since the cap is slightly viscid, it might
be mistaken for a Psi/ocybe or Siropharia. The mottled gills, however, signify Panaeo/us.
Specimens without a distinct annulus (ring) resemble P. so/idipes, but that species has a
thicker solid stemandlacks a veil even in the button stage. The paler cap color helps dis-
tinguish P. semiovalus from the P. campanu/alus group, which can have a "ring" of black
spore dust on the stem.
Panaeo/us campanu/atus group (Bell-Shaped Panaeolus)
CAP 1-4 cm broad and/or high, bluntly conical or bell-shaped, scarcely expanding in
age; surface not viscid, often shiny when dry, smooth or finely wrinkled or often cracking
to form scales (especially in sunlight); some shade of brown, gray, or olive-gray when
fresh (or in one form reddish-brown), paler (olive, tan, or buff) when faded, or dusted
black by spores; margin hung with small, white, toothlike veil remnants, at least when
young. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS adnate or adnexed but often seceding, fairly close; edges
whitish, faces gray becoming mottled with black; entirely black in age. STALK 6-15 cm
long, 1-3 (5) mm thick, equal or thicker at apex, often quite longandthin, very brittle or
fragile, brown to grayish, minutely powdered. VEIL evanescent, usually seen in young
specimens as flaps of sterile tissue on margin of cap,andsometimes in older specimens as a
thin band of black spore dust on the stalk. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 13-18 x 7.5-12
microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in "families" on or near dung or in grass where cattle have grazed,
sometimes also in compost; widely distributedandvery common. It is often abundant in
our coastal pastures in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Some strains ofthis species "complex" (see comments) have mild hallucino-
genic effects when eaten raw in large quantities (see p. 354). More often, however, there
is no effect. Traces of psilocybin as well as serotonin have been isolated.
COMMENTS The gray to brown, more or less bell-shaped cap, long thin brittle stalk,
mottled gray to black gills,andtoothlike veil remnants on the margin of the cap when
young are characteristic of a closely-knit group of dung-lovers: P. campanulatus,
P. sphinetrinus,andP. papilionaeeus. Since even the experts cannot agree on the exact
differences (if any) between them, it would be presumptuous to attempt to differentiate
them here. At any rate, they are among our most common cow patty ("meadow muffin")
mushrooms, along with Psilocybe coprophilaandStropharia semiglobata. The stalk is so
fragile that it is difficult to bring home a specimen in one piece. Similar species include: P.
retirugis, a smaller species with an often conspicuously veined or reticulate cap (see photo-
graph),.also found in our area, but not nearly as commonandseemingly partial to horse
dung; the P. aeuminatus-P. riekenii group, with a conical to bell-shaped capandno veil
(check young specimens!);andP. jimieola, which also lacks a veil, but has a more convex
or hemispherical (domed) cap. None of these are worth eating.
Panaeo/us cyanescens (Blue-Staining Panaeolus)
CAP 1.54 cm broad, bell-shaped to convex; surface smooth or sometimes cracked, not
viscid, brown when moist, fading to grayish or whitish as it dries; margin often wavy orsplit
in age. Flesh thin, bruising blue or bluish-green. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding,
gray to black, the faces usually mottled. STALK 6-12cm long, 24 mm thick, equal or with
a slight bulb at base, usually longandslender, smooth, pallid to yellowish, grayish, or
pinkish, the base brownish or tinged flesh-color; bruising bluish at least somewhat when
handled. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 12-14 x 8.5-11 microns, elliptical,
smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in groups on or near dung in pastures;
widely distributed in the tropicsandsubtropics. It is fairly common along the Gulf Coast
of the United Statesandalso occurs in MexicoandHawaii. Two similar species (see
comments) have been reported from California.
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic-as might be expected of a blue-staining Panaeo/us.
P. tropicalis (see comments) is also potent,andboth species are gathered by "magic
mushroom" hunters in Hawaii.
COMMENTS Blue-staining Panaeo/us species are largely tropicalandsubtropical in
distribution. They can be distinguished from the blue-staining Psilocybes by their black
spore print, non-viscid cap (unless very wet),andgrowth on dung. Other blue-staining
species include: P. tropica/is, with smaller spores (10-12 microns long)andno pinkish
tinge to the stalk;andP. cambodginensis, with an olive to ochre-brown cap when moist,
and smaller spores. All of these are placed by some in a separate genus, Cope/andia. The
latter two have been found in southern California on well-fertilized lawns.
Panaeo/us subba/teatus group
(Belted Panaeolus)
CAP 2-6 cm broad, convex or bluntly conical becoming broadly convex to broad Iv
umbonate to plane or with uplifted margin; surface smooth or wrinkled, in age some-
times breaking into scales (fissured), not viscid; color variable: brown to reddish-brown or
cinnamon-brown when moist, fading as it dries to tan, buff, or even whitish (or grayish
from spores), often with a darker (reddish-brown to brown or dark gray) marginal zone
when partially dry. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, close,
broad, at first pale watery brown or reddish-brown, darkening gradually to black; edges
whitish, faces usually mottled in age. STALK 4-10 cm long, (I) 3-6 (10) mm thick, equal or
tapered at either end, hollow but not fragile, brown to reddish-brown, but often appearing
whitish from a fine powder, or dusted gray by spores; apex often paler; usually longitudi-
nally striate throughout; base (and mycelium) occasionally staining faintly bluish when
bruised. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT black; spores 10-14 x 7-9 microns, elliptical,
smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious-often in small clumps-in manure, com-
post,andfertilized lawns; widely distributed. In our area it fruits practically year-round
but is most common in warm weather. I've seen several hundred specimens in a garden
overgrown with vetchandmulched with compost from a mushroom farm. (It is one of the
major mushroom "weeds" in cultivated mushroom beds.)
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic-the psilocybin content varies from moderate to low,
perhaps due to differences in the nitrogen concentration of the substrate. A middle-aged
Santa Cruz woman who mistook them for cultivated mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) was
hospitalized with hallucinations (a frightening experience if you're unprepared for them!),
but recovered shortly. It is one ofthe more popular" recreational" species on the west coast,
and is easily cultivated.
COMMENTS The above description encompasses what may be a single variable species
or a complex of closely related forms. The key features are the convex to broadly umbonate
to plane cap (not bell-shaped!), brown gills when young, rather firm stalk, absence of a
veil, black spore print,andfrequent presence of a darker marginal band on the cap as it
dries out. The tendency to grow in small clusters is also unusual for a Panaeo/us. The black
sporesandnon-viscid cap separate it from Psilocybe,andthe larger sizeandblack gills in
age distinguish it from the common, lawn-inhabiting Panaeo/us foenisecii, which may
also have a zoned cap. P. subba/teatus is the most common "psilocybin" mushroom in
California, but does net normally stain blue. However, the base ofthe stalk mayoccasion-
ally stain blue very slowly,andit is sometimes coated with cottony, bluish-tinged mycel-
ium. One variant (also hallucinogenic) that is common on fertilized lawns in our area has
a slimmer stalk (1-3 mm thick)andsmaller cap. Whether it is a ..new" species or merely a
diminutive form of P. subba/teatus is for the Panaeo/us-pundits to decide.
Panaeolusfoenisecii (Haymaker's Panaeolus)
CAP ]-3 (4) cm broad, bluntly conical to bell-shaped, expanding to convex, broadly
umbonate, or nearly plane; surface smooth or cracking into scales in dry weather, hygro-
phanous but not viscid; chestnut-brown to dark brown or cinnamon-brown when moist,
fading as it dries to dingy buff or tan, often with a darker marginal band when partially
dry. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, fairly close, brown be-
coming deep brown, deep grayish-brown, or chocolate-brown, the faces often somewhat
mottledandthe edges paler or whitish. STALK 4-8 cm long, ] .5-4 mm thick, equal or with
an enlarged base, fragile, more or less smooth, white to dingy brownish (often becoming
brown from the base upward). VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT deep brown or purp]e-
brown; spores 12-17 x 6-9 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups on lawnsandother grassy places; very common in
warm wet weather (or on watered lawns) throughout the northern hemisphere. It is one
of our characteristic spring, summer,andearly fall lawn mushrooms, often mingling
with Conocybe lactea. Marasmius oreades. Psathyrella candolleana.andthe Agrocybe
pediades group. In contrast to most Panaeolus species, it doesn't grow on dung,andin
our area it doesn't even seem to grow in pastures.
EDIBILITY Harmless in small quantities, but potentially poisonous to toddlers in
the "grazing" stage, since chemical analysis has revealed traces of psilocybin in some
collections. However, western material is apparently "inactive."
COMMENTS This pixieish Panaeolus is one of our very common lawn-inhabiting
""LBM's." Its small size, thin fragile stem, absence of a veil, growth in grass (not on dung!),
and dark brown sporesandgills distinguish it. Because the gillsandspore print are not
black as in other Panaeolus speciesandthe spores are not smooth, the""sp]itters"(seep.lO)
have erected a special genus for it, Panaeo/ina. Alexander Smith, on the other hand,
dumps it into Psathyrella in his voluminous testament to that genus (his arguments for
placing it in that genus are actually quite persuasive, but he has the weight of tradition
against him in this case). Other species: P. castaneifol;us is a similar diminutive lawn
lover with a slightly thicker (3-6 mm) stem, purple-black gills,andpurple-black, slightly
roughened spores; I have not seen it in our area but it may occur. P. subbaltealUs is also
simi]ar, but has black gills at maturityandblack sporesandis usually larger. P. acum;natus
(see comments under P. campanulalUs group) also grows on lawns, but has smooth black
sporesandlacks the marginal band on the cap.
Psathyrella longistriata (Ringed Psathyrella)
CAP 2.5-8 (10) cm broad, conical to convex becoming broadly convex to plane or
umbonate in age; surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, with whitish veil fibrils when very
young, not viscid; some shade of brown, but sometimes fading in age. Flesh thin, fragile.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or seceding, close, pallid becoming dark brown or purple-
brown. STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal, pallid or white, fragile, hollow, with
scattered whitish scales (veil remnants) below ring. VEIL membranous, white, forming a
persistent, superior, usually striate ring on stalk which is eventually darkened by spores.
SPORE_PRINT deep brown to nearly black; spores 7-9 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in woods, particularly under conifers;
fairly common in the Pacific Northwest, less so in California-I have found it but a few
times in our area, in the winter.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The persistent ring on the stalk is unusual for a Psathyrella.andhelps to
distinguish this western species. Panaeo/us semiovatusandStropharia semig/obata are
somewhat similar but grow in dung or grass, not in the woods. Another Psathyrella with
a prominent ring, P. kauffmanii, occurs under hardwoods in eastern North America, and
is quite common in the aspen forests of the Rocky MountainsandSouthwest.
Psathyrella candolleana (Suburban Psathyrella)
CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, bluntly conical or convex when young, becoming broadly convex
to plane or broadly umbonate in age; surface smooth or with a few scattered patches of
whitish fibrils (veil remnants) when young; hygrophanous but not viscid; brown, honey-
colored, or yellowish when moist, fading quickly as it dries to buff or whitish (the
center often remaining darker); margin often hung with veil remnants, at least when
young. Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS close, adnate but sometimes seceding, at first
whitish, soon grayish or grayish-purple, finally dark brown. STALK 4-10 cm long, 2-7
(10) mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile, white or whitish, often silky or scurfy. VEIL white,
usually disappearing, but sometimes forming a fibrillose ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT
deep brown; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or tufted in lawns, gardens, on or about old hardwood
stumps, on buried roots or debris, etc.; widely distributedandvery common in urban
and suburban settings, sometimes also in the woods. It fruits year-round in our area but
is most common in the late spring, summer,andearly fall.
EDIBILITY Edible. Some authors describe it as delicious, but it is very fragile, insub-
stantial,andnot particularly easy to identify. Its main asset is its easy availability.
COMMENTS The fragile, usually convex cap that is more or less honey-colored when
freshandpallid in age, plus the fragile white stalk, deep brown spores,andfondness for
suburbia mark this ubiquitous but boring mushroom. The cap color is so variable that it is
more of a hindrance to identification than a help. The situation is complicated by the
presence of some very similar suburbanites, including P. hymenocephala, with a more
cinnamon-colored cap when young,andP. ;ncerta (formerly Hypholoma ;ncertum and
often listed as a synonym for P. candol/eana), with smaller sporesanda pale yellowish cap.
All of these are so fragile that getting them home in one piece is difficult!
Psathyrella hydrophila (Clustered Psathyrella)
CAP 2-5 (7) cm broad, bluntly conical or more often convex when young, expanding to
nearly plane in age; surface smooth, hygi-ophanous but not viscid, dark reddish-brown
to orange-brown or rusty-brown when moist, fading as it dries to pale tan or sometimes
grayish; margin often darker brown and/or hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, fragile.
GILLS crowded, buff to pale brown, becoming chocolate-brown or dark brown in age;
adnate to adnexed. STALK 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, equal, hollow, fragile,
smooth, white to faintly grayish or sometimes brownish in old age, especially below. VEIL
fibrillose, evanescent, leaving remnants on cap marginandoccasionally an obscure zone
of hairs on stalk. SPORE_PRINT deep brown; spores 4-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Gregarious, usually in tufts or large, dense clusters on hardwood stumps, logs,
and buried wood; widely distributed. Common in our area from fall through early spring.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Reportedly harmless, but some collections are bitter and
closely related species haven't been tested.
COMMENTS This is one of several Psathyrellas that grow in attractive, often large
clumps on decaying wood. The principal field marks are the white or pallid stalk, dark
brown spores, fragile texture,andsmooth, hygrophanous, usually convex cap. It is likely
to be mistaken for a Naematoloma. but is much more fragileandnot as brightly colored,
or for a Galerina or Pho/iota. which have paler brown spores. Other clustered Psathy-
rellas include: P. spad;cea, similar, but with a thicker (4-10 mm) stalkandno veil, growing
mainly on Populus (poplar, cottonwood, aspen); P. JuscoJolia, also lacking a veil, but
with stalk only 2-4 mm thick, on decaying wood; P. circellat;pes, also slender-stemmed,
with spores 12-15 microns long, favoring aspen; P. multipedata, with clusters originating
from a common, deeply rooted base or "pseudorhiza"; P. sublater;t;a, with a reddish-
hued spore print (rather unusual for a Psathyrella);andP. con;ssans, with a pinkish-red
spore print (highly unusual for a Psathyrella).
Psathyrella longipes group
CAP 2-7 cm broad, broadly conical or bell-shaped, expanding slightly in age (rarely plane);
surface smooth, hygrophanous, brown to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown when moist,
fading to tan, buff, or whitish as it dries; margin often adorned with widely spaced, tooth-
like veil remnants. Flesh thin, fragile. GILLS close, adnate but often seceding, at first
whitish, soon darkening to brown, finally dark brown to blackish. STALK 6-16 cm long,
2-8 mm thick, equal or enlarged slightly at base, fragile, hollow, white. VEIL white,
somewhat membranous, but soon disappearing except for remnants on margin of cap.
SPORE_PRINT deep brown to blackish; spores 10-15 x 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or debris in woods; found
mostly in the West. Fairly common in our area from fall through early spring, under both
hardwoodsandconifers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The broadly conical to bell-shaped cap, long white fragile stalk, small veil
remnants on the cap margin, relatively large size (for a Psathyrella),anddark brown to
almost black spores are characteristic, but there is a multiplicity of Psathyrella look-alikes
that are best identified with a microscope. In the "true" P. longipes, the spores are slightly
flattened in end view; in the very similar but more common P. elwhaensis, they are not.
Other species include: P. atroJol;a, widely distributedandcommon, cap honey-brown
fading to buff, with veil remnants on the margin (but not widely spaced or toothlike) and
spores 8-10 microns long; P. subnuda, slightly larger, with a more cinnamon-colored
convex cap when moistandpractically no veil;andP. conopilea, with a reddish-brown to
orange-brown conical cap that fades to buff,andspores 14-18 microns long, especially
common in southern California under oaksandin gardens, but widely distributed. All of
the above species tend to grow scattered to gregarious on the ground or in lignin-rich
humus, rather than in clusters on wood. They do not grow in dung or manure like
Panaeolus. See also P. gracilis, which lacks a veil.
Psathyrella gracilis group (Graceful Psathyrella)
CAP 1.54 (5) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped becoming convex or nearly plane; surface
smooth, not viscid, brown to dull yellowish-brown when moist, paler (or with a pinkish
tinge) as it dries,andsometimes grayish from spore dust; translucent-striate when moist.
Flesh very thin, fragile. GILLS close, broad, adnate but often seceding, pallid becoming
grayish to brownandthen dark brown. STALK 6-12 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less
equal, straight, fragile, thin, white or stained darker by spores. VEIL absent or rudimen-
tary (and quickly disappearing). SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown to nearly black;
spores 10-15 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops on ground, debris,andwood chips in woods,
parks, under trees, etc.; commonandwidely distributed. I have seen colossal fruitings on
wood chip mulch in a park at regular intervals throughout the mushroom season.
EDIBILITY Too thinandfragile to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS This species lacks the veil remnants on the cap margin characteristic of
the P. /ongipes group. The long, thin, straight, whitish stalk, brown to grayish cap that is
so thin as to be translucent-striate when moist, absence of a veil, dark spores,andterrestrial
growth habit are the main field marks. There are many similar Psathyrellas which can only
be differentiated microscopically.
Psathyrella carbonicola (Charcoal Psathyrella)
CAP 1.5-6 cm broad, bluntly conical to convex; surface dry, at first covered with a dense
coating of whitish fibrils, these eventually wearing away to reveal the chocolate-brown to
brown background; fading in age. Flesh rather thin. GILLS close, adnate but sometimes
seceding, pale brown becoming dark brown in age. STALK 3-7 cm long, 2-6 mm thick,
more or less equal, rather fragile, sheathed with white fibrils or scales below the veil, at
least when young; base often brownish in age. VEIL white, evanescent or forming a slight
fibrillose superior ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT dark brown; spores 6-8 x 34 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on charred soilandwood,
common after forest fires in northernandwestern North America. In our area I have seen
large fruitings in the winters following controlled burns. It is often accompanied by Pho-
/iota high/andensis. P. brunnescens.andMyxompha/ia maura.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The whitish fibrillose coating on the capandstalk when young plus the
growth on burnt ground make this one of the easiest of all Psathyrellas to identify. Other
species: P. canoceps is one of several small species with a coating of silky white fibrils on
the cap, but it does not grow in burned areas; a small, unidentified, whitish-capped
species with black spores is common in our area in woodsandunder trees.
Psathyrella velutina
CAP (2) 5-10 cm broad, obtuse to convex or broadly umbonate, becoming nearly plane;
surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly but sometimes nearly smooth in age; dull
yellow-brown to tawny to rusty-brown or sometimes darker brown; margin often paler,
splitting in age,andhung with veil remnants. Flesh rather thick, brownish to ochre. GILLS
crowded, adnate to notched or seceding, pale yellowish becoming light brown to rusty-
brown, finally deep brown as spores mature; faces usually mottled in age, edges white and
sometimes beaded with droplets. STALK 5-15 cm long, (0.3) 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, equal or
swollen at base, fibrillose or scaly, dry, whitish above, light brown to dingy tawny or ochre
below. VEIL fibrillose-cottony, usually forming an obscure superior hairy or cottony ring
or zone on stalk which is darkened by spores. SPORE_PRINT blackish-brown; spores
8-12 x 5-8 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened, with a prominent snoutlike germ pore.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or small clusters in grassy places, roadsides, around
sawdustandcompost piles, on gravelly ground, or sometimes in the woods; widely dis-
tributed, but infrequent in our area. I have found it in the fallandspring.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended.
COMMENTS Also known as Lacrymar;a velut;na, this species is unusually large and
sturdy for a Psathyre//a.andis likely to be looked for in another genus. The fibrillose to
fibrillose-scaly capandstalk, obscure hairy annulus (ring),andblackish-brown spores
are distinctive. P. lacrymabunda is often listed as a synonym, but has smooth spores
according to Smith. Both species are sometimes placed in a separate genus, Lacrymaria.
Other species: P. maculata is somewhat smaller, has blackish-to grayish-brown fibrillose
patches on the cap,andgrows in clumps on alder in the Pacific Northwest. Also see
P. u/iginico/a (couplet # 13 of the key)andP. carbonico/a.
Psilocybe coprophila (Meadow Muffin Mushroom)
CAP 0.5-2 (3) cm broad, hemispherical toconvex or broadly bell-shaped, or at times nearly
plane in age; surface viscid when moist, then dry, smooth or with minute white particles or
patches at margin (when young), dark reddish-brown to cinnamon-brown, brown, or
orange-brown, fading to tan or sometimes grayish-brown as it dries (or darker from spore
dust); margin striate when moist. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS adnate to slightly de-
current, fairly well-spaced, grayish-brown becoming deep purple-brown or black. STALK
1-4 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, more or less equal, fibrillose, pallid to yellowish or brown,
darkening in age but not bruising blue. VEIL absent or rudimentaryandevanescent.
SPORE_PRINT purplish-brown to nearly black; spores 11-14 x 6.5-8.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills.
HABITAT Solitary or in small colonies on dungandmanure (especially cow patties);
widely distributed. It is one of our most common dung fungi, fruiting whenever it is damp
enough. It can be "raised" by bringing home a "meadow muffin"andkeeping it moist.
EDIBILITY Generally regarded as harmless, but some strains apparently contain enough
psilocybin to be rewarded with the euphemistic label "active." A large number would be
needed to produce any noticeable effects, however.
COMMENTS The small size, viscid brownish cap, purple-brown to dark brown spore
print,andabsence of an annulus (ring) distinguish this diminutive dung addict. Also found
on dung is P. (=Strophar;a) merdar;a, which is similar, but has a dingy yellow to orange-
brown or cinnamon-brown cap,anda veil which often forms a fibrillose annulus (ring)
on the stalk. It is common also,andwidely distributed. Other species: P. angust;spora is
a minute conical brown inhabitant of the Pacific Northwest; it grows on the dung of elk,
sheep, etc.
Psilocybe semilanceata (Liberty Cap)
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broadandhigh, narrowly conical to bell-shaped with a pointed umbo,
scarcely expanding in age; surface smooth, chesnut-brown to brown or olive-brown and
at least slightly viscid when moist, fading to tan, olive-buff, or even yellowish as it dries;
margin sometimes with bluish or olive stains. Flesh very thin, pallid. GILLS adnate to
adnexed or seceding, pallid, soon becoming gray, then finally dark purple-brown or
chocolate-brown; edges whitish. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-2 (3) mm thick, equal, often
curved or sinuous, pliant, whitish or with brownish base, sometimes with a bluish or blue-
green tinge in age, especially at base. VEIL absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT purple-
brown; spores 11-14 x 7-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in pastures, tall grass, etc., but not on dung;
widely distributed. It is especially common west of the Cascades from northern California
to British Columbia. It fruits from late summer through early winter or sometimes in the
spring. I have not found it in our area.
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic (see p. 895),andoften gathered for recreational use despite
its small size. It is not as potent as P. cyanescens, but is much stronger than P. pe//icu/osa.
COMMENTS The liberty cap is one ofthe most distinctive "pupil-dilating" Psilocybes.
The sharply conical or "peaked" cap, dark spore print, small size,andgrowth in grass
(often tall) make it distinct. The fleshandstalk bruise blue only slightly, if at all, but may age
olive or slightly bluish. Another "liberty cap," P. pe//;cu/osa, is often mistaken for P. semi-
lanceata. It is common under conifers in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California.
In addition to its different habitat, it is not quite as conicalandhas a more pronounced
tendency to bruise or age blue-green. It is only mildly hallucinogenic, with 20-40 caps
constituting an "average" dose. A third species, P. s;/vat;ca, has spores less than 10 microns
long; it also grows under conifersandoccurs across the northern half of the continent.
There are also a number of small to minute, more or less conical, brown or gray Psilocybes
(e.g., P. montana) that do not contain psilocybin. They grow mostly in bogs or in beds of
mossandare very d ifficul t to dis tinguish (see key to Psilocybe). All of the species discussed
above, including the liberty cap, resemble Panaeo/us species, but have a viscid pellicle
(skin) that peels easily from the cap, slightly paler spores,anddo not grow in dung.
Psilocybe cyanescens
(Potent Psilocybe)
Color Plate 88
CAP 1.5-4 (5) cm broad, soon convex to broadly convex, then plane or with an uplifted,
often wavy margin; surface smooth, viscid when moist, dark brown or reddish-brown
becoming caramel-brown, then fading as it dries to tan, yellowish-brown, or paler;
sometimes with blue or blue-green stains, especially near margin. Flesh thin, bruising blue
or blue-green. GILLS typically adnate but sometimes seceding, fairly close, brown or
cinnamon-brown becoming dark smoky-brown or sometimes bluish-stained; edges
whitish. STALK 3-8 cm long, 2-6 (8) mm thick, equal or with an enlarged base, sometimes
curved; dry, whitish, but staining blue to bluish-green when handled or bruised. VEIL
fibrillose or cobwebby, copious but disappearing or at most forming a very slight ring
or hairy zone on stalk. SPORE_PRINT purple-brown to purple-gray or purple-black;
spores 9-12 x 5-9 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent on gills.
HABITAT Widely scattered to densely gregarious on wood chips, sawdust, mulch, and
humus,andon lawns rich in lignin; partial to coniferous debris, but also fond of alder
and eucalyptus. It is fairly common in the San Francisco Bay area in cold weather
(December-February), especially in landscaped areasandmulched flower beds,andis
also fairly common in Oregon, Washington,andBritish Columbia. It is easily cultivated,
and its aggressive mycelium responds readily to transplanting-given the proper
conditions.
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic (see p. 895)andextremely potent, especially ra w. Along with
P. baeocystisandP. stricti pes (see comments), it is the most powerful known hallucino-
genic mushroom in the north temperate zone. Only one or two caps are needed to induce
marked changes in perceptionandsensation. Psilocin is primarily responsible, with
psilocybinandpossibly other compounds contributing to the effects. Together they are
said toconstituteO.6% ofthe mushroom on a dry weight basis-substantially more than the
better known P. cubensis. A six-year-old Washington boydied!fteringestingan unknown
quantity of P. baeocyslis along with other unidentified mushrooms However, effects on
adults other than those typical of psilocybin-and psilocin-ingestion have not been
reported.
COMMENTS The dark spores, viscid caramel-brown cap that fades as it dries, evanescent
veil,andblueing of the stalkandflesh are the fallible fieldmarks of this potent Psilocybe.
There are two very similar, closely-related, equally potent species on the west coast: P.
baeocyst;s, with a less copious veilandmore conical cap that is usually olive-brown when
young;andP. str;ct;pes, with a long, slender stalk (10-13 cm long, 2-3 mm thick). They may
well occur in California, but earlier reports of P. baeocyslis from San Francisco were
apparently based on P. cyanescens. Spore prints should be taken to distinguish all three of
these species from deadly Galerinasandother "LBM's."
Psilocybe stuntzii (Stuntz's Blue Legs)
CAP 1-4 (5) cm broad, bluntly conical becoming convex to broadly umbonate, plane,
or with an uplifted margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: deep
olive-brown to chestnut-brown when young, but often fading as it ages or dries to dingy
yellow-brown or yellowish-buff; margin striate when moistandoften tinged greenish.
Flesh thin, pallid to brownish. GILLS adnate or adnexed, pallid soon becoming grayish
or brownish; close or fairly well-spaced. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1.5-4 mm thick, equal or
thicker at either end, often curved, yellowish to brown or sometimes with darker or bluish
stains, especially below; not viscid, often with mycelial threads at base. VEIL membranous
but thin; forming a fragile ring or fibrillose zone on stalk which is often blue or bluish-
green but eventually may be darkened by falling spores or may disappear. SPORE_PRINT
dark purple-brown; spores 8-12 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent
on gills.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on wood chips, mulch, etc., in
lawns, gardens,andlandscaped areas; also under conifersandin fields. It is known only
from the west coastandis especially common in the Puget Sound region of Washington in
the fall, early winter,andspring. (The appearance of large numbers in wood chip mulch on
the University of Washington campus in Seattle more than a decade ago helped spur the
"magic mushroom" craze that subsequently swept the Pacific Northwest.) In our area I
have found it in mulched flower pots.
EDIBILITY Weakly hallucinogenic (see p. 895), but popular with "magic mushroom"
hunters because it often fruits in large numbers. Be sure not to confuse it with deadly
Galerina species, which can look quite similar, but have rusty-brown spores-they will
even grow intermixed with P. stuntzii!
COMMENTS Like the liberty cap (P. semilanceata), this "LBM" contains psilocybin,
but bruises blue only weakly if at all. However, the dark spore printandring on the stalk
plus the viscid cap when moist are distinctive. It is named after the late, great Dr. Daniel
Stuntz of the University of Washington, who was the first person to collect it-or more
precisely, the first to collect specimens for the herbarium rather than for consumption!
The common name, which was coined by Gary Lincoff, is apparently a reference to the
tendency of the stalk or "leg" to stain bluish, though it often won't stain. Other species: P.
caerulipes of eastern North America also blues only slightly if at all; it has a more or less
evanescent veilandgrows on hardwood logsanddebris. Like P. stuntzii, it is weakly
hallucinogenic.
Psilocybe cubensis (Magic Mushroom)
CAP 1.5-8 (10) cm broad, broadly conical or oval or bell-shaped (often with an umbo) when
young, gradually expanding to convex, broadly umbonate, or plane; surface smooth or
with small whitish veil remnants when young, viscid when moist, soon dry, color variable:
whitish with a brown to yellowish center, or entirely yellow to yellowish-buff to yellow-
brown, or sometimes cinnamon-brown when youngandsometimes dingy olive in old age;
bruisingandaging bluish; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh firm, white,
staining blue or blue-green when bruised. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or seceding to
free; pallid, soon becoming gray, then deep purple-gray to nearly black; edges whitish.
STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-1.5 cm thick, equal or more often thicker below, dry, white or
sometimes yellowish to yellow-brown, aging or bruising blue or blue-green; smooth. VEIL
membranous, white or bluish-stained, usually forming a thin, fragile, superior ring on stalk
which is blackened by falling spores. SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown to blackish;
spores 11-17 x 7-12 microns, elliptical, smooth, thick-walled, with a large apical germ pore.
Cystidia present on faces of gills, but chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dungandmanure, especially in cattle pastures; widely
distributed in the tropicsandsubtropics-Colombia, Central America, Mexico, etc.-and
in the Gulf Coast region of the United States. Since it is being cultivated on a widespread
basis, it may eventually turn up in the warmer parts of California-as it did in Santa Cruz
during muggy summer weather (on compost from a "magic mushroom" farm). It can be
cultivated on a variety of simple grain or compost mediums, but strict temperature control
and sterile conditions are necessary to induce growthandprevent contamination.
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic (see p. 895). It is not as powerful on a dry weight basis as
P. cyanescens, but is larger. At one time the demand for "magic mushrooms" far out-
stripped the supply, with the result that many of the "psilocybin" mushrooms sold on the
street were actually grocery store mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus ) laced with LS D or other
substances (one sample I examined proved to be a soggy chanterelle soaked in ammonia!).
Now that cultivation procedures have been refined, you're much more likely to get the real
thing. It is often sold dried, though drying decreases the potency. The mycelium is also
"active." Ironically, natives of Oaxaca, Mexico, consider this species inferior to others,
such as P. mexicana (perhaps because it was unknown to them until the Spaniards intro-
duced cattle). Instead of using it themselves, they sell it to eager gringos!
COMMENTS This is the largest, handsomest,andbest known of all the "psilocybin"
mushrooms. The brownish to yellow or pallid cap, membranous ring on the stem, and
tendency to bruise blue are the main fieldmrks-plus its growth in fields, usually on cow
patties. It resembles the yellow-capped Stropharias (e.g., S. semiglobata) so closely that
it is called Strophar;a cubens;s by many mycologists. The Stropharias, however, do not
stain blue. In shape it resembles Agrocybe praecox, but the spore print is darker,andit
has a decidedly different "aura"-or so I'm told by at least one certified fruitcake! Other
species. The ""Landslide Mushroom," P. caerulescens, is another common, blue-staining,
hallucinogenic species that occurs along the Gulf Coast as well as in Mexico. It has an
evanescent veil, bitter taste,andan olive-black cap when young that may become redder
(e.g., reddish-brown) in age. As its name implies, it grows in recent landslides, as well as on
sugar cane mulchandother debris. P. tampanens;s, discovered in Florida, is a slender-
stemmed hallucinogenic species that forms 1-2" underground ""tubers."
Stropharia semiglobata (Hemispherical Stropharia)
CAP 1-5 (6) cm broad, hemispherical (rounded) or broadly bell-shaped, becoming
convex or rarely plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, pale yellow to straw
colored, yellowish-buff, or yellow-brown; margin often paler, sometimes hung with
whitish veil remnants. Flesh pale or watery yellowish, thin. GILLS typically adnate but
sometimes seceding, at first grayish, then dark purple-brown to black. STALK 5-8 (13) cm
long, 2-6 mm thick, typically longandslender, equal or slightly enlarged at base; somewhat
fibrillose above the veil, viscid or slimy below( when moist); white to yellowish. VEIL slimy,
delicate, forming a fragile, superior, fibrillose ring or zone on stalk which is soon blackened
by falling spores, or sometimes disappearing entirely. SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown
to black; spores 15-19 x 7.5-10 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on dung, manure, rich soil, straw,andgrazed or
fertilized grass; widely distributed,andone of our most common dung fungi. In our area it
fruits whenever it is damp, often in the company of Psilocybe coprophilaandthe Pan-
aeo/us campanu/atus group.
EDIBILITY Edible, but slimyandmediocre according to most sources. As usual, how-
ever, Captain Charles McIlvaine disagrees, stating that, "the caps are equal to any
mushroom-tender, good,andharmless."
COMMENTS Our most commonanduninteresting Stropharia. this species is sometimes
mistaken for the considerably more interesting Psilocybe cubensis. which has a more
prominent ringandstains blue or green when bruised. The viscid to slimy yellowish cap,
slender viscid or slimy stem,anddark gills set S. semig/obata apart. The veil may form a
slight ring, but is not as membranous as that of S. coronilla. There are several closely
related species or variants which are difficult to distinguish, including: S. stercoraria, with
cap usually plane at maturity, stalk not viscid or only slightly so,andspores larger; S.
siccipes, with a dry, sometimes rooting stalkandsmaller spores; S. (=Psilocybej umbona-
tescens, with a conical to distinctly umbonate cap, dry stalk,andsimilarly-sized spores;
and Psilocybe (=Stropharia) merdaria(seecomments under P. coprophila). All of these are
partial to dung, manured ground,andgrass, while S. albonitens, another similar species,
grows on the ground in a variety of habitats. It has a whitish or yellow-tinged, often umbo-
nate capanda membranous but thin or evanescent veil. Agrocybe species are also similar
in colorandshape, but have browner gillsanda brighter or browner spore print. See also
S. riparia (under S. ambigua).
Stropharia coronilla (Garland Stropharia)
CAP 2-6 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly uplifted in age; surface usually smooth (but
in one form with small orangeish scales), slightly viscid when moist, golden-brown to
yellowish, yellowish-buff, or creamy. Flesh soft, white. GILLSadnate or at times adnexed
in age, close, pallid becoming grayish, then purplish or purple-gray to purple-black.
STALK 2-5 cm long, 3-6 (10) mm thick, usually rather short, more or less equal, not viscid;
whitish, minutely scaly or cottony above the ring, fibrillose to smooth below; base often
with white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent, median to
superior ring on stalk; ring usually striate or grooved on upper surfaceandsoon darkened
by spores (but in one form not striate). SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown to blackish;
spores 7-11 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on la wnsandbase ball fields, also in pasturesandother
grassy areas; widely distributed but not particularly common, at least in our area. It fruits
most any time but is most frequent in the fall.
EDIBILITY Dubious-poisonous according to some; hardly worth experimenting with.
COMMENTS This attractive little Stropharia is often mistaken for an Agaricus. but has
attached rather than free gillsanda frequently grooved or lined (striate) ring. It is shorter
than S. semiglobata. the ring is more prominent,andthe stalk is not viscid. Forms with a
deeply grooved ring have been called S. hi/amellata. A similar, widespread species with a
paler (whitish or tinged creamy to ochre at center) cap, S. melanosperma, grows on dung
or in pastures. S. hardii is a slightly larger ( cap up to 10 cm broad) eastern species that grows
in grass as well as in woods. Its veil is moreapttodisappearinageand it has smaller spores.
Like S. coronilla. it is easily confused with Agaricus. but has attached rather than free gills.
Stropharia ambigua (Questionable Stropharia) Color Plate 89
CAP 3-15 cm broad, obtuse to convex, becoming plane or even uplifted in age; surface
smooth, viscid orslimy when moist, yellow to yellowish-brown to yellowish-buff, tawny, or
sometimes nearly white; margin hung with cottony white veil remnants. Flesh white, thick,
soft. GILLS pale gray, gradually darkening to purplish-gray or purplish-black; close,
typically adnate but sometimes seceding. STALK 6-18 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, more or less
equal, often long; stuffed or hollow; silkyandwhite above the veil, clothed with soft, dry,
delicate, cottony white scales below (but these sometimes wearing off); often yellowish
toward base in age; base often with white mycelial threads attached. VEIL soft, white,
cottony, leaving shreds or strands on the cap marginandsometimes a superior ring or
ragged zone on the stalk. SPORE_PRINT dark purplish to nearly black; spores 11-14 x 6-
7.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups in rich humus, usually under conifers, but
also with alderandother hardwoods; known only from the Pacific Coast. It is fairly
common in our area from late fall through early spring, especially in dank, cold places (in
rain forests, along woodland streamsandgullies, etc.).
EDIBILITY Edible? According to one authority, it tastes "like old leaves:' As I do not
make a habit of chewing on old leaves, I cannot attest to the validity of this comparison.
COMMENTS There is nothing ambiguous or questionable about this elegant, stately
fungus. It is our most common woodland Strophariaandat its best is one of the most
exquisitely beautiful of all mushrooms-well worth seeking out. The soft, delicate white
scales that sheathe the stemandthe strands of veil tissue on the cap margin are very striking.
Amanita gemmata is somewhat similar in color but has white gills; S. hornemannii has a
duller capandmore prominent ring. Other species: S. riparia (=S. magnivelaris?) is a
somewha t similar but sligh tl y smallerandslimmer (stalk less than 1 cm thick) species that is
fairly common in the West in a variety of habitats (under aspenandalder, along streams,
under mountain conifers, etc.). I ts veil is thinner than that of S. ambiguaandmore kleenex-
like,andoften leaves remnants on the cap near the margin rather than dangling from the
margin itself. Also, the stalk is not nearly so shaggy as that of S. ambigua,andthe cap,
although similar in color, is more apt to be slightly umbonate.
Slrophar;a rugoso-annu/ala (Wine-Red Stropharia)
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate to
plane; surface smooth, slightly viscid or dry, color variable: wine-red to purple-brown
to reddish-brown when fresh, but fading to tan, stra w-color, or even gra yish as it ages. Flesh
thick, fairly firm, white. GILLS adnate or notched (but sometimes becoming free in age),
crowded, at first whitish but soon grayandfinally purple-gray to purple-black with whitish
edges. STALK 7-12 (25) cm long, 1-3 (7) cm thick, often enlarged at base, white ordis-
coloring yellowish to brownish in age; base often with white mycelial threads attached.
VEIL membranous, white; forming a thick, persistent, superior ring on stalk that is soon
blackened by falling spores; ring grooved or lined (striate) on upper surfaceandoften split
radially into segments. SPORE_PRINT deep purple-brown to black; spores 10-15x 6-9
microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in mulch, wood chips, straw, lawns, gardens, and
other cultivated areas; widely distributed. It is quite common in New Englandandhas
also turned up in Washington. I have yet to find it in our area, but it is bound to turn up
sooner or later (probably sooner).
EDIBILITY Edible,andthe best ofthe genus for the table. It is easily grown at home and
widely cultivated in Europe (particularly eastern Europe). The flavor is fairly good-
reminiscent of "undercooked potatoes soaked in burgundy," according to Rick Kerrigan.
COMMENTS This large, handsome Slropharia is easily recognized by its wine-red to tan
cap, purple-black spores,andgrooved, often segmented or clawlike annulus (ring). Its
growth in planted areas suggests that it is an "alien," but its origin is unknown. The gills are
never pink as in Agaricus.andthey are attached to the stalk-at least when young-and the
spores are purple-black rather than chocolate-brown.
Stropharia hornemannii
CAP 4-12 (15) cm broad, obtuse to convex, becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface
viscid or slimy when moist, smooth or with a few whitish scales (veil remnants) near margin;
dull brown to dingy purple-brown, grayish-brown, grayish-purple, or smoky reddish-
brown, often fading in age to yellow-brown or grayish-tan. Flesh thick, soft, white; taste
rather disagreeable. GILLS typically adnate but sometimes seceding, broad, close, pale
gray becoming purple-gray to dull purple-brown to nearly black. STALK 5-15 cm long,
0.5-2.5 cm thick, more or less equal, silky-smooth above the ring, sheathed with soft, dry,
delicate, cottony white scales below, at least when young; base often with white mycelial
threads. VEIL membranous, white, forming a persistent, flaring or skirtlike, superior ring
on stalk which is darkened by falling spores. SPORE_PRINT purple-brown to purple-
black; spores 10-14x 5.5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotting wood under
conifers; widely distributed in northern North America. Like S. ambigua, it is quite
common in the late summerandfall in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but
does not seem to range as far south as that species (I have yet to find it in our area). In Mt.
Rainier National Park in Washington the two species can often be found growing together
on the Longmire Trail.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but not worth experimenting with because of its poor taste.
COMMENTS This beautiful mushroom resembles S. ambigua, but has a duller (browner
or grayer) cap,andits veil forms a prominent, well-developed annulus (ring) rather than
leaving copious strands on the cap margin. S. depilata is apparently a synonym. Other
species: Pholiota albivelata is somewhat similar, but smaller (cap 4-8 cm broad, pinkish-
brown to vinaceous-brown), with a white stalk that is scurfy or scaly below the mem-
branous, persistent, striate annulus. It is placed in Pho/iota because it has cinnamon-
brown to dark yellow-brown spores; however, it has acanthocytes on the mycelium,
suggesting that, like P. subcaerulea, it belongs in Stropharia. It occurs under conifers
in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but rarely fruits in large numbers.
Stropharia aeruginosa (Blue-Green Stropharia) Color Plate 91
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, broadly bell-shaped to convex becoming broadly umbonate or
nearly plane; surface viscid when moist, smooth orwithafew whitish scales (veil remnants)
near margin; bright green to blue-green when fresh, developing yellow tones in age. Flesh
soft, white or tinged blue. GILLS typically more or less adnate (but may secede), fairly
close, at first pallid but soon grayish, finally purple-brown or chocolate-brown. STALK
3-8 cm long, 3-8 (12) mm thick, more or less equal, smoothandpallid above the ring,
colored like the cap or paler below,andusually with small cottony scales; often slightly
viscid when moist. VEIL membranous, white, soft,formingafrAgile,superiorringonstalk
which often disappears in age. SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown to purple-black; spores
6-10 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in rich soil, humus, woody debris, or sometimes
even in grass; widely distributed. I have not found it in our area, but it is quite common in
southern California, especially in the winter under oak. In the Southwest I've collected
it under aspen in the summer,andin the Pacific Northwest I've seen it under conifers.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It is deemed poisonous by many authors, but is
supposedly eaten in Europe.
COMMENTS This is one of the most distinctive of all the agarics, easily identified by
its viscid, greenish to blue-green or yellow-green capandgray to chocolate-brown or
blackish-brown gills. Two similar species occur under conifers in the Pacific Northwest:
S. albocyanea, with a paler (whitish to yellowish) capandstalk tinged variously with
blue or blue-green;andPho/iota subcaerulea, with a bluish cap (when fresh)andpaler
(cinnamon-brown) sporesandmature gills.
Stropharia kauffmanii Color Plate 90
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface not viscid; covered with brown to yellow-
brown or grayish-brown scales on a dull yellowish or tan background; margin some-
times hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white. GILLS adnate or notched, narrow, thin,
close or crowded, pallid becoming gray, then purple-gray to purple-black; edges often
eroded. STALK 6-10 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or slightly swollen at base; whitish or
creamy, with erect or recurved fibrillose scales, especially below the ring; base often with
white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous, forming a fragile, white, superior ring on stalk
which is soon darkened by falling spores, or often disappears in age. SPORE_PRINT dark
purple-brown to purple-black; spores 6-8 x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, apical germ
pore absent or minute. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in rich humus, around brush pilesanddecayed
woody debris, etc.-usually under hardwoods such as alder, cottonwood,andaspen,
spring through fall. It occurs in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest, but in my
experience is more common in the aspen forests of the Southwestandsouthern Rockies
than anywhere else. There it fruits, like most other mushrooms, in the summer.
EDIBILITY A tempting mushroom, but I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS The dry (non-viscid) scaly cap is unusual for a Slropharia,andcombines
with the scaly stemandviolet-gray gills to distinguish this beautiful species. Its closest
relative is probably Pholiota Julvosquamosa, which differs in having brown gills and
brown spores. Both species are in some respects more typical of Agaricus than of the
Strophariaceae, but have gills attached to the stem (at least when young). Another species
with a scaly stalk, S. (=Psilocybe) squamosa, has a smaller, viscid cap (see key to Slro-
pharia). It is widely distributed, but particularly common in the Pacific Northwest.
Naematoloma aurantiaea (Orange Naematoloma) Color Plate 93
CAP 1.5-5.5 cm broad, convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface slightly
viscid or dry, smooth, bright scarlet to red-orange or orange, or at times brick-red to rusty-
reddish to reddish-brown; margin often hung with whitish veil remnants. Flesh pallid, not
bruising blue. GILLS close, pallid or yellowish when young, then grayish-brown or gray-
ish-oliveandfinally purple-brown to purple-black in old age; adnate or notched, some-
times seceding. STALK (2) 3-7 (10) cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, equal or with the base
slightly swollen or narrowed; white or tinged yellow above, developing bright orange to
reddish-orange stains over the lower half; base sometimes with white to yellow mycelial
threads. VEIL membranous but very thin, whitish, soon disappearing or forming a slight,
easily-obliterated ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT dark purple-brown; spores 10-14x 6-9
microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on wood chips, sawdust,andhumus rich in lignin,
but often appearing on lawns, in gardens, etc.; distribution uncertainanderratic, but
fairly common in California. It is common in the parks of the San Francisco Bay area. It
also occurs in Los Angeles,andI have found it in Santa Cruz growing from fallen
eucalyptus seed pods. It likes the same habitats as Psilocybe cyanescens, but has a longer
season, fruiting from fall through spring, or even in the summer if it is wet enough.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as Strophar;a aurant;aca, this bright, attractive little mush-
room is easily recognized by its reddish-orange cap, dark spore print,andtendency to grow
in parks or gardens. It is probably an introduced species, but its origin is unknown. Other
species: Strophar;a thrausta (=S. squamosa var. thrausta) is a similarly colored species with
a frequently umbonate capandreddish to orange scaly stem. It is widely distributed (I
have seen it in New Mexico), but does not occur in our area. N. sublater;t;um of eastern
North America has a brick-red cap with a paler marginandmuch smaller spores. It fruits in
clusters on dead hardwoods in the fallandearly winter,andis edibleandquite common.
Naematolomafaseieulare (Sulfur Tuft) Color Plate 92
CAP (I) 2-5 (9) cm broad, at first broadly conical or bell-shaped, soon becoming convex,
then broadly umbonate to plane; surface smooth, not viscid, bright sulfur-yellow to
greenish-yellow, or at times yellow-orange (especially when young), the center sometimes
darker (orange-tan to orange-brown); margin often hung with small veil remrlants. Flesh
thin, yellow; taste very bitter (rarely mild). GILLS close, typically adnate but sometimes
seceding, at first sulfur-yellow, becoming greenish-yellow or olive, then finally dusted
purple-brown to nearly black with spores. STALK 5-12 cm long, 3-10 (15) mm thick, equal
or tapering downward, yellow to tawny, but often developing rusty or brownish stains from
base upward; often curved or sinuous, dry, firm. VEIL thin, pale yellow, evanescent, or
leaving slight vestiges on cap margin or an obscure fibrillose zone on stalk which is
subsequently blackened by falling spores. SPORE_PRINT purple-brown to deep purple-
gra y; spores 6-8 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills.
HABITAT Gregarious, usually in tufts or dense clusters on decaying wood of both
hardwoodsandconifers, but sometimes growing from buried wood or rootsandthus
appearing terrestrial; widely distributed. It is abundant in our area in the fallandwinter,
less so in the spring,andis one of the first woodland mushrooms you're liable to encounter.
EDIBILITY Poisonous. In EuropeandAsia it has caused several deaths; in America only
gastrointestinal upsets have been reported. Fortunately, the bitter taste is a deterrent.
COMMENTS The yellow to greenish-yellow gills, dark spores, bitter taste,andclustered
growth habit are the principal fieldmarks of this attractive, cosmopolitan mushroom
Hypholomafasciculare is a synonym. In age the clustered caps often assume a grayish or
purple-brown tinge from a coating of spore dust. N. capnoides is quite similar in cap
color, but its gills are gray to purple-brown (never yellow),andit has a mild tasteandgrows
only on conifers. Several similar Naematolomas grow on the ground (see N. dispersum).
Other species: N. subviride is a small southern version of N.fasciculare; N. dispersum var.
idahoense has a tawny to cinnamon-brown capandbitter taste,andgrows in clusters on
conifers. For similar brown-spored species, see comments under Pho/iota malicola group.
Naemat%ma capnoides (Conifer Tuft)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex or slightly umbonate to plane; surface smooth, not viscid,
yellow to tawny, orange-brown, rusty-brown, or cinnamon, the margin often yellower and
hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin, pallid; taste mild. GILLS close, usually adnate but
often seceding, at first pallid, then grayish, finally dark gray to purple-brown. STALK 5-10
cm long, 3-8 (lO) mm thick, equal or tapered downward, dry, slender, pallid or yellowish
above, often rusty-brown to tan or brownish below. VEIL evanescent or leaving small
patches of tissue on cap marginandsometimes an obscure fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE
PRINT purple-brown to deep purple-gray; spores 6-7.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills.
HABITAT Gregarious, usually in clusters, on rotting conifers; widely distributed, but
especially common in the Pacific Northwest. I have seen it in our area in the fallandwinter
on Douglas-fir, but it is not common.
EDIBILITY Edible, but thin-fleshedandnot particularly tasty.
COMMENTS Also known as Hypholoma capnoides, this nondescript Naematoloma
resembles its ubiquitous relative, N. fasciculare. in cap color, but has a mild taste and
grayish rather than yellow or greenish-yellow immature gills. The stalk is often quite long
in relation to the cap. Several Pholiotas look similar (see Pho/iota ma/icola group), but
have brown or cinnamon spores. Other species: A pale-capped version occurs under
mountain conifers in the spring; it mayor may not be a distinct species; N. radicosum of
eastern North America is similar in color but has a deeply rooting baseandbitter taste.
Naematoloma dispersum (Dispersed Naematoloma)
CAP 1-4 cm broad, bell-shaped, but sometimes expanding to convex oreven plane with an
umbo; surface smooth, not viscid, tawny to tawny-orange, fading to yellowish; margin
often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thin; taste typically somewhat bitter. GILLS usually
adnate, but sometimes seceding, close, pallid, becoming dingy olive or olive-gray, then
finally purple-brown with paler edges. STALK 6-12 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal, usually
longandslender, rather toughandpliant but sometimes also brittle; yellowish above and
brown to dark reddish-brown below. VEIL fibrillose or cobwebby, evanescent or leaving a
fibrillose zone on upper stalk. SPORE_PRINT purple-brown; spores 7-10 x 4-5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on faces of gills.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in humusanddebris under conifers; wide-
spread, but particularly common in logged-over areas of the Pacific Northwest from late
summer through early winter. It occurs in northern California, but not in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as Hypholoma d;spersum, this is one of several Naemato-
loma species that characteristically grow in a scattered to gregarious fashion rather than in
clusters. The tendency of the gills to develop olive tints in age is one of its distinctive fea-
tures, as is its tall slender stalkandpurple-brown spore print. It may grow in small tufts, but
not in the large clumps typical of N.fasciculare.andthe stem is not white as in Psathyrella.
There are a number of similar Naematolomas that are difficult to distinguish, but of little
interest to the average collector since none are good edibles. Their ranks include: N.
ol;vaceot;nctum, with a greenish-tinted cap (and often gills) in age; N. squal;dellum and
N. polytr;ch;, with yellow gills that become greenish-yellow in age;N. er;caeum, a southern
species with a slightly viscid brown to ochre cap; N. udum, with a browner capandlarger
spores (14-I 8 microns long), ""growing on muck in bogs, especially along rabbit runways"
(A.H. Smith); N. elongatum, with dull cinnamon spores;andN. myosot;s, growing in
bogs, with a viscid capanddull cinnamon spores (the latter two species are also placed in
Pholiota). The above species are not as fragile as the Psathyrellasanddo not have white
stems. All tend to grow in groups on troops on the ground rather than in clumps on wood.
Pholiota astragalina (Pinkish-Orange Pholiota)
CAP 2-5 cm broad, bell-shaped or obtuse becoming convex, umbonate, plane, or with an
uplifted, often wavy margin in old age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when wet but soon
dry; bright reddish-orange to pinkish-orange, the margin sometimes paler, fading some-
what in ageandoften developing blackish discolorations; margin often hung with veil
remnants when young. Flesh thin, orange to yellow; taste bitter. GILLS typicallyadnexed
or notched or even free, close, bright yellow or yellow-orange, discoloring where bruised or
in age. STALK 5-12 cm long, 4-7 mm thick, equal or tapered toward base, fibrillose, with-
out scales, hollow, sometimes sinuous, pale yellow, the base often oranger or discoloring
brownish. VEIL yellowish, leaving remnants on cap margin or disappearing. SPORE
PRINT brown; spores 5-7 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clusters on rotting conifers; widely dis-
tributed. It is especially common in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California in
the late summerandfall; I have not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Inedible because of the bitter taste.
COMMENTS The brilliant pinkish-orange cap plus the yellow gills, brown spores, and
growth on conifers make this one of our most distinctive as well as beautiful Pholiotas. It
is reminiscent of Naematoloma, but has paler (browner) sporesanda viscid cap when wet.
Pholiota malicola group (Forgettable Pholiota)
CAP 3-8 (15) cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface viscid or
dry, smooth or with a few veil remnants at margin, yellow to ochraceous-tawny, orange, or
orange-buff, fading somewhat in age; margin often wavy. Flesh pallid or yellowish; odor
mild or faintly fragrant; taste mild. GILLS close, adnexed or notched, yellowish becoming
rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-1 (2.5) cm thick, equal or
tapered downward or enlarged at base; solid, dry, fibrillose but not scaly; pallid or yellow-
ish above, darker (tawny or colored like cap) below, becoming rusty-brown in age from
falling spores. VEIL fibrillose, disappearing or forming a slight ring or zone of fibrils near
top of stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7.5-11 x 4.5-5.5 microns, elliptical,
smooth, with an apical germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT In groups or clusters on rotting logsandstumps, wood chips, etc.; widely
distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This forgettable Pho/iota is a member of the so-called" P. alnicola com-
plex"-a group of difficult-to-distinguish, scale-less(but not veil-less), yellowish to rusty or
tawny, wood-inhabiting species. They are reminiscent of Naematolomas in their color
and clustered growth habit, but differ in having rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown spores.
They also approach Gymnopilus, but the species in that genus have oranger spores.
Clumps growing in wood chip mulch might be confused with P. terrestris, but that species
has small scales on the stalk below the veil. Closely related and/or superficially similar
Pholiotas include: P. flavida, with slightly smaller sporesanda frequently fragrant or at
least distinctive odor; the ..true" P. alnicola, with a mild to bitter tasteandyellowish or
olive-tinged cap; P. spinuliferaandP. fibrillosipes, with smaller spores, a viscid cap and
conspicuous cystidia on the gill faces, found in groups or clusters in soil, mulch,andsaw-
dust (veil remnants whitish in former, yellow to orange in latter); P. subochracea, with a
viscid, pale yellow to ochre cap, long (5 cm or more) stem, chrysocystidia,andsmall
spores (5-6 microns long), found in the Pacific Northwest;P.prolixa, like P. subochracea
but larger-spored, common in eastern North America, often in large clusters in low
hardwood forests or bottomlands;andP. multifolia, also eastern, with a dry yellow cap
and tendency to bruise rusty-brown or orange-brown. None of these are worth eating.
Pholiota terrestris (Terrestrial Pholiota)
CAP (I) 2-8 (10) em broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or somewhat
umbonate; surface usually with dry fibrillose scales, but viscid or slimy in wet weather
beneath the scales, which sometimes wear off; color variable: dark brown to light brown,
grayish-or yellow-brown, or tawny, the scales darker; margin sometimes streaked, often
hung with veil remnants. Flesh white to watery yellow or brown, thin. GILLS attached
(usually adnate), close, at first pallid to grayish, then dull brown to dull cinnamon-brown.
STALK 3-10 (13) em long, (2) 4-10 mm thick, equal or narrowed below, slender, solid or
becoming hollow, dry, pallid to buff, or brownish toward base; covered with brown scales
or patches below the veil. VEIL fibrillose, whitish, forming a slight superior, fibrillose ring
or zone on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 4.5-7 x 3.5-4.5 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT In groups or clusters on the ground, especially along roads, paths,andin other
disturbed areas; also on lawns, lignin-rich debris, rarely on or around old stumps. It is
widely distributedandespecially common along the west coast (including our area)
in the fallandwinter. Single individuals are occasionally found. but tufts or clusters are
the rule.
EDIBILITY Edible but thin-fleshed, insipid,andusually wormy to boot.
COMMENTS Our most common Pholiota, this is the only veiled, brown-spored mush-
room that habitually grows in clusters on the ground (several dark-spored Psathyrellas
also do). The scaly stemandevanescent veil are good secondary fieldmarks, but the color,
viscidity,anddegree of scaliness exhibited by the cap vary considerably according to age
and weather conditions. The veil does not form a prominent ring as in the white-spored
honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea), but after collapsing it traps falling spores and
turns brown as in Cortinarius. P. squarrosoides (see comments under P. squarrosa) is
very closely related to P. terrestris, but has paler scalesandis not terrestrial.
Pholiota squarrosa (Scaly Pholiota) Color Plates 96, 97
CAP 3-10 (15) em broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly bell-shaped to slightly
umbonate or plane; surface dry, pale tan to straw color, buff. or pale yellow-brown, or in
age darker yellow-brown or sometimes greenish-yellow toward the margin; covered with a
dense layer of upright or recurved, often darker (brown) scales; margin incurved at first
and often fringed copiously with veil remnants. Flesh pale yellowish, rather pliant; odor
mild in some forms, distinctly garlic-or onionlike in others; taste mild or rancid. GILLS
crowded, adnexed to adnate to slightly decurrent, pale yellowish to buff or tinged gray,
then often developing a greenish tinge before finally becoming brown or dull rusty-brown.
STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, solid, smooth above
the veil, covered with erect or recurved scales below (like on cap); colored like cap or
becoming darker brown or reddish-brown below. VEIL membranous-fibrillose, forming
a fragile, often torn, superior ring on stalk or only leaving shreds on cap margin. SPORE
PRINT dull rusty-brown; spores 5.5-9 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ
pore. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT In tufts or dense clusters on wood, usually at the bases of trees (both hard-
woodsandconifers); widely distributed. It is very common on aspenandspruce in the
Rocky MountainsandSouthwest during the summer. It is also common on aspen in the
Sierra Nevada in the summerandfall, but I have never seen it on the coast.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some people eat it regularly but others have suffered
severe stomach upsetsandold specimens are often rancid-tasting.
COMMENTS A beautifulandmemorable mushroom in its prime, the erect or recurved
scales on the capandstalk plus the tan to pale tan colorandbrown spore print set this
species apart. The cap is not viscid as in most Pholiotasand the garlic odor, when present, is
also distinctive. It is usually found on wood, whereas P. lerreslris. which is closely related,
typically grows on the ground. Other species: P. squaTTosoides (COLOR PLATE 98)
is a very similarandedible scaly species with a somewhat paler (whitish to pale tawny or
yellowish or light brown) capandmild odor. Its gills are never greenishandin age or wet
weather the cap becomes viscid from a gelatinous layer beneath the scales. It occurs on
hardwoods such as mapleandalder,andis much more common than P. squarrosa in
northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest. In addition to the color plate, a young
cluster is shown on p. 385. Another similar but unidentified species with a very distinctive
citrus fragrance occurs in New Mexico.
Pholiota aurivella group (Golden Pholiota) Color Plate 95
CAP (3) 5-16 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate or
plane; surface very sticky-gelatinous or slimy when moist (but may dry out), pale to dark
yellow, tawny, golden-orange, or rusty-orange (or sometimes rusty-brown when young),
decoratd with darker scales (the scales largeandflattened to slightly recurved and
triangular to strap-shaped or spotlike) that sometimes wear away or wash off in age;
margin often hung with veil remnants when young. Flesh pallid to yellowish, soft in age.
GILLS close, adnate or notched, pallid to yellow becoming brown to rusty-brown or
even brownish-orange in age. STALK 4-15 cm long, 0.4-2.5 cm thick, equal or tapered in
either direction, central or off-center, dryandmore or less smooth above the veil, scaly
below (the scales usually not viscid); yellow to pale yellow-brown or colored like the cap
(but often paler). VEIL fibrillose, whitish or yellowish, forming a slight ring or fibrillose
zone on upper stalk or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores8.5-1 0x 5-6.5 microns
(but see comments!), elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia often present.
HABITAT Gregarious (often tufted or clustered) on living or dead hardwoods and
conifers; widely distributed. I n our area this species "complex" occurs rarely on hardwoods
in the fallandwinter, but it is a very prominent fungal feature of the coniferous forests
of the Rocky Mountains, Southwest, Sierra Nevada,andPacific Northwest, especially in
the summerandfall. In the Southwest I have also seen large fruitings on aspen.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. Some books list it as edible, but many people have suffered
gastric upsets after eating members of this species "complex." The texture is rather soft
and gelatinous anyway,andit is said to taste "like marshmallows without the sugar."
COMMENTS This striking mushroomandits look-alikes (see below) are easily recog-
nized by their scaly stalk, brown spores,andyellow to orange, viscid cap with large
spotlike darker scales. The honey mushroom (Armillariella mellea) is somewhat similar,
but is not as brightly coloredandhas white spores. Distinguishing species within the
P. aurivella "complex," however, is not so easy. Many variants have been described (e.g.,
P. connata, with a thinly viscid stalkandP. ab;et;s, with pale brown immature gills), but
recent cultural studies have revealed the presence of three widespread, non-interbreeding
species which differ principally in spore size: P. aurivella, with spores 8.5-10 x 5-6.5
microns, P. limonella (=P. squarroso-adiposa), with spores 6.5-9.5 x 3.5-5.5 microns
and apparently the most common of the three in North America;andP. ad;posa, a hard-
wood-lover with even smaller spores (5-6 x 3-4 microns)andoften viscid scales on the
stalk. To complicate matters, there are some other closely related species, including:
P. aur;vello;des, with even larger spores than P. aurivella;P. hiemalis, found on northern
conifers usually late in the fall, with viscid scales on the stalkandpallid, yellow-edged gills
when young;andP. filamentosa, with a lemon-yellow to greenish-yellow capanda thick,
persistent annulus (ring) on the stalk, also found with conifers. Whew!
Pholiotaflammans (Flaming Pholiota; Yellow Pholiota)
CAP 3-8 (10) cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming broadly umbonate to nearly plane;
surface brilliant yellow or at times dark yellow or tawny at the center, covered with bright
yellow scales which may wear off in age; dry or in wet weather sometimes viscid beneath
the scales; margin usually fringed with veil remnants. Flesh fairly firm, yellow. GILLS
usually adnexed or notched, bright yellow becoming rustier in age, close. STALK (3)5-10
cm long, 4-10 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker at base, bright yellow or the base slightly
darker; smooth above the veil, sheathed with a dense layer of recurved yellow scales below;
not viscid. VEIL bright yellow, disappearing or forming a slight superior ring or fibrillose-
cottony zone on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 3-5 x 2-3 microns, oblong to ellip-
tical, smooth. Chrysocystidia present on gills.
HABITAT Solitary or tufted on conifer logsandstumps; widely distributed in northern
North America, not common. In California it fruits in the fallandwinter, but is rare.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice (see comments on edibility of P. aurivella).
COMMENTS The brilliant yellow color sets apart this beautiful mushroom. It is most
likely to be confused with the P. aurivella group, but the cap is dry to only slightly viscid and
the scales on the stalkandcap are yellow rather than rusty, cinnamon, or brown. P. adiposa
(see comments under the P. aurivella group) is somewhat similar, but favors hardwoods.
Pholiota albocrenulata
CAP 3-10 (15) cm broad, broadly conical or convex becoming broadly umbonate to nearly
plane; surface viscid or slimy when moist, orange-brown to dark rusty-brown or reddish-
brown, becoming dark vinaceous-brown in age,andadorned with scattered brown fibril-
lose scales (veil remnants); margin often fringed with veil remnants. Flesh thick, whitish;
taste mild or bitter. GILLS close, notched or adnate to slightly decurrent, whitish be-
coming grayishandfinally brown, the edges finely scallopedandwhite or beaded with
tiny white droplets. STALK3-10(15) cm long,0.5-1.5 cm thick, more or less equal, rather
fibrous, stuffed or hollow; pallid or grayish above, brown to reddish-brown (like cap)
below, with scattered brown scales below the veil; often curved. VEIL fibrillose-cottony,
forming a slight superior fibrillose ring or zone on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT
brown; spores 10-15 (18)x 5-8 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups( twosandthrees) on stumps, logs,andliving trees,
usually of hardwoods (especially mapleandelm); widely distributed, but seldom found
in quantityandapparently absent on the west coast. I have collected it twice inN ew Mexico
in August-once on a ponderosa pineandonce on an aspen.
EDIBILITY Said to be harmless, but seldom eaten.
COMMENTS Though not often encountered, this is a striking mushroom by virtue of
its reddish-brown to dark brown, scaly, viscid capandwhite-edged gills. Microscopically
it is close to Stropharia.andis placed in that genus by some mycologists (along with
several other Pholiotas, e.g., P. subcaeru/eaandP. a/bive/ata).
Pholiota lubrica group (Lubricous Pholiota)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or sometimes with an uplifted, wavy margin;
surface viscid or very slimy when moist, smooth (but see comments), color variable: dark
reddish-brown to rusty-brown, rusty-orange, or ochraceous-tawny at the center, often
paler (yellowish or even whitish) toward the margin, which is often hung with veil remnants
when young. Flesh fairly thick, whitish to watery yellow or greenish-yellow. GILLS adnate
to adnexed, close; whitish, yellow, or sometimes greenish-yellow, becoming brown or dull
cinnamon as the spores mature. STALK 5-10 cm long,(0.4)0.8-1.5 cm thick, more or less
equal, smooth above the veil, usually with small scales below which may wear off; white or
yellow, the scales often darker; sometimes brownish-stained in age. VEIL fibrillose to
somewhat membranous, forming a slight superior ring or fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE
PRINT brown; spores 5.5-7x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humusandon woody debris in woods;
widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the late fall, winter,andearly spring,
especially under pine.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The above description will more or less fit a large number ofPholiotas with
a viscid-slimy capandscaly stalk that grow solitary to gregarious (but not often clustered)
in humus Or on rotting wood. They are particularly prevalent under conifers but also occur
with hardwoods,andtheir identification is best left to pholiotologists. The "true" P.
/ubrica is said to have a dark brown to reddish-brown cap with a paler or whitish margin.
Some of the other commoner species or variants are: P. ferrug;nea, with an oranger cap;
P. ferrug;neo-/utescens, occasional in our area, with a slightly oranger capanda thicker
white stem that stains yellow; P. sub/ubr;ca, with brownish veil remnants on the cap and
a thicker (1-1.5 cm) stem; P. ve/ag/ut;nosa, with a bright to dark reddish-brown Or brown
cap that lacks veil remnantsanda viscid or glutinous veil, sometimes abundant in our
coastal pine forests (see photograph);P./enta, with a pale cap (whitish to buff or sometimes
tinged ochre or gray or pinkish) that features whitish veil remnants; andP. decorata, with
a fibrillose-streaked cap that is dark vinaceous-brown to reddish-brown with a paler
marginandhas rows of concentrically-arranged veil remnants when young, common in
the Pacific NorthwestandRocky Mountains. Also see P. spumosa, which lacks scales on
stalk,andP. a/bive/ata (under Stropharia hornemannil), which has a membranous ring.
Pholiota brunnescens (Charcoal Pholiota)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, convex to plane or with an uplifted, often wavy margin; surface viscid
or very slimy when moist, smooth or with small scattered whitish veil remnants;
chestnut-brown to dark reddish-brown to orange-brown, tawny, or dark yellow-brown,
sometimes fading in age to dull orange; margin often paler. Flesh rather soft, dingy
brownish; odor usually mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed, crowded, narrow, whitish or
grayish or pale yellowish, becoming dull cinnamon-brown to brown in age. STALK 4-6 (9)
cm long, (4) 7-10 mm thick, equal, whitish to pale yellow, often darkening somewhat below
in age or staining tawny when handled; covered with numerous small yellowish, fibrillose
scales (usually arranged in concentric belts) below the veil. VEIL fibrillose, lemon-yellow,
usually disappearing or forming only a slight superior ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT
brown; spores 6-7 x 4-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on wood or soil in recently burned
areas; locally common in its favored habitat throughout the mushroom season. It is
known only from the West, but the similar P. high/andensis(see comments) is widespread.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several closely-related Pholiotas that fruit only on charred
soil or wood. It is distinguished by its sticky-slimy, tawny to orangish to dark reddish-
brown cap, scaly stem, brown spores,andyellow veil. The other common ash-lovers
have slimmer stems (2-6 mm thick). They include: P. h;gh/andens;s (=P. carbonar;a of
Europe), widely distributed, with a whitish veilandslightly smallercap;P. carbonar;a, with
a rusty-red to reddish veil; P. Ju/vozonata, with an orange-brown or russet-colored veil;
and P. subangu/ar;s, with a small cap that is only slightly viscid (if at all)anda pallid veil.
Pho/iota spumosa
(Slender Pholiota)
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming umbonate or plane; surface
smooth or appearing fibrillose or streaked, viscid or slimy when moist; color variable but
usually olive-brown when young becoming brown to tawny or tawny-ochre at the center
and yellow to dingy greenish-yellow toward the margin. Flesh yellow or greenish-yellow,
soft, thin; odor mild. GILLS close, adnate or notched, yellow to pale greenish-yellow,
becoming grayish or tawnyandfinally brown. STALK 3-7 (10) cmlong,4-6(8) mm thick,
more or less equal, fibrillose but not scaly, yellow to pale greenish-yellow above, becoming
sordid brownish below or from the base upward. VEIL pale yellowish or whitish, delicate,
fibrillose, disappearing or leaving slight remnants on cap marginandstalk. SPORE
PRINT brown or dull rusty-brown; spores 6-9 x 44.5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Chryso-
cystidia absent.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered to gregarious or tufted on groundanddebris under
conifers, widely distributed. Fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter under pine,
but rarely fruiting in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species belongs to a complex group of Pholiotas with yellow to
greenish-yellow fleshandgills, a viscid to slimy cap,andan evanescent veil. The veil is not
slimy as in P. velaglutinosa, nor is the stem scaly below the veil as in the P. lubrica group.
Other species: P. graveo/ens is similar but has a strong odor. In our area I have also found
P. scamba, a small species (cap 1.5-3 cm broad) with a whitish to pale yellow or cinnamon-
tinged capandthin (1-3 mm) fibrillose or woolly stalk. It grows in groups or small clusters
on dead conifer logs, sticks, etc. Also see comments under the P. lubrica group.
Pholiota destruens (Destructive Pholiota)
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or rarely plane; surface slightly
viscid when moist, white to creamy, buff, or at times ochre to brownish, covered with soft
or cottony, whitish to buff scales or patches which may be come matted or washed off in
age; margin often shaggy from veil remnants. Flesh thick, white, firm. GILLS adnate or
notched, close, white becoming dull brown todeeprusty-cinnamoninage.STALK(3)5-15
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or enlarged below, central or off-center, solid, hard, white, but
often developing brownish stains below in age; smooth above the veil, at first clothed with
whitish to buff scalesandpatches below. VEIL cottony, white, forming a slight superior
ring on stalk, or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores 7-9.5 x 4-5.5
microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters on dead cottonwoodandpoplar or sometimes
aspen or willow, especially on the cut ends of logs; widespread. It is particularly com-
mon in the valleysandbottomlands of the West, where Lombardy poplarandcotton-
wood are so prevalent. I have seen it in Oregon, New Mexico,andthe Sacramento Valley
in California, but not on the coast. It usually fruits late in the season.
EDIBILITY Edible, but rather toughandpoorly-flavored.
COMMENTS This large Pho/iota is distinct by virtue of its pale overall color, soft whitish
veil remnants (scales or patches) on the cap, thick hard stalk, brown spore print, and
occurrence on poplar (or sometimes willow). Its name refers to the fact that it rapidly
destroys the wood on which it feeds.
Pholiota mutabilis (Changeable Pholiota)
CAP 1.5 cm broad, obtuse becoming convex,_broadly umbonate, or even plane; surface
smooth, lubricous or slightly viscid when wet, hygrophanous: rusty-brown to orange-
brown, reddish-brown, or tawny when moist, fading from the center outward to yellowish-
brown, ochre, or yellowish-buff as it dries (often two-toned: yellowish at center and
browner toward margin); margin translucent-striate only when moist. Flesh thin, white
or tinged brown. GILLS adnate to slightly decurrent, close, pallid soon becoming brown or
dull cinnamon. STALK 3-10 cm long, 2-10 (12) mm thick, equal or tapered toward base,
stuffed or hollow, smoothandwhitish above the ring, becoming brownish below and
covered with numerous small, often recurved scales (at least when fresh); base sometimes
blackish-brown in age. VEIL whitish, forming a small membranous or fibrillose superior
ring on stalk, or sometimes disappearing. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores
5.5-7.5 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore. Chrysocystidia absent.
HABITAT Typically in clusters-often large-on logs, stumps, or occasionally buried
wood; widely distributedandvery common, late summer through early winter, but I have
not seen it in our area. Although it is said to prefer hardwoods, I usually find it on conifers
in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest. The fruitings are sometimes so massive
that the substrate (log or stump) is hidden from view.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended. Experienced collectors sometimes harvest
the large clusters, but it is easily confused with the poisonous Ga/erina autumna/is and
numerous other "LBM's" of unknown edibility.
COMMENTS Also known as Kuehneromyces mutabilisandGalerina mutabilis, this
brown-spored "LBM" is best recognized by it smooth, hygrophanous, often two-toned
cap, scaly stalk with a ring,andpenchant for growing in dense clusters. The poisonous
Ga/erina autumna/is is quite similar, but lacks scales on the stem, has roughened spores,
and does not usually grow in large clusters. Several N aemat%maandPsathyrella species
are also similar but have darker spores. Other species: P. verna/is is closely related and
similar, but lacks scales on the stem (or has only a few patches)anddoes not grow in such
large clusters. It is common in the mountains of western North America shortly after
the snow melts in the spring, but occurs elsewhere also.
Galerina autumnalis (Deadly Galerina)
CAP 1-4 (6.5) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or slightly umbonate; surface smooth,
viscid when moist, dark brown to yellow-brown or tawny, fading to tan or yellowish as it
dries; margin translucent-striate when moist. Flesh thin, watery brown; odor mild or
slightly farinaceous. GILLS attached (slightly decurrent to adnexed) but often seceding,
close, yellowish to pale brown becoming rusty-brown or brown. STALK 2-10 cm long, 3-
6 (10) mm thick, equal or thicker below, dry, hollow, pallid to brownish, often darker
below in age, fibrillose below the veil; base often with white mycelial strands. VEIL fibril-
lose or somewhat membranous, usually forming a thin, superior, white ring on stalk which
is subsequently darkened by falling spores or often disappears in age. SPORE_PRINT
rusty-brown; spores 8-11 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, roughened and/or wrinkled.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or tufted on rotting woodanddebris of both hard-
woodsandconifers; widely distributed. Fairly common in our area from fall through early
spring, especially during relatively dry years.
EDIBILITY DEADLY POISONOUS-it contains amanita-toxins! Fortunately, it is
rarely eaten because of its diminutive dimensionsandmundane appearance.
COMMENTS Since this drab ..LBM" is deadly poisonous, it is important to learn its dis-
tinguishing characteristics: (I) the rusty-brown spores (2) the small sizeandthin stem (but
in areas of high rainfall overgrown specimens often occur) (3) the veil which usually (but
not always!) forms a thin whitish superior annulus (ring) (4) the growth on wood (some-
times buried or very decayed). The annulus may turn brown in age or even disappear, so
it is best to avoid any mushroom that is remotely similar, including the edible Pho/iola
mutabilis, which typically grows in large clustersandhas small scales on the stem. There
are several very similar deadly poisonous Galerinas with a thin annulus, including: G.
marginata, with a moist but not viscid cap, found mainly on decaying conifers;andG.
venenata, with a reddish-cinnamon cap that fades to pinkish-buff or whitish in age,
growing on lawns or buried woodandknown only from the west coast. Other species: G.
paludosa also has a white superior annulus, but it has a long thin stemandgrows in bogs;
its edibility is unknown.
Galerina heterocystis
CAP 5-20 mm broad, bluntly conical becoming bell-shaped or convex or sometimes
umbonate; surface smooth, hygrophanous: pale yellow to pale cinnamon to tawny and
translucent-striate when moist, paler(more or less buff) when dry. Flesh very thin, fragile.
GILLS close, usually attached but not decurrent, pale yellowish becoming pale cinnamon-
brown. STALK 1-8 cm long, 1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, tubular, fragile, pallid to
pale yellowish darkening to bown or cinnamon; lower portion faintly fibrillose. VEIL
absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT pale cinnamon-brown; spores 11-17 x 6.5-8.5
microns, more or less elliptical, roughened to nearly smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in damp mossy or grassy places (usually in or near
woods); widely distributed. In our area this speciesandits numerous look-alikes are
especially common during relatively dry weather when other mushrooms are scarce.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS There are dozens of Galerinas that will more or less fit the above descrip-
tion,andthey can only be differentiated microscopically. Unlike G. autumnalis, the veil is
evanescent or even absent, but like that species the cap is usually translucent-striate when
fresh. Some are found in the woods or at their edges, others frequent seepage areas, still
others grow on logs or in bogs; most are moss-inhabiting. Conocybe species may also
key out here, but are generally more sharply conical, not as translucent,andhave a cellular
cap cuticle; they favor lawns, dung, or cultivated ground, but a few grow in moss. Psi/o-
cybeandPsathyrella species are also similar, but have darker spores. Other Galerinas
with an evanescent or absent veil include: G. semilanceata, with a fibrillose veil, usually
found on the ground; G. cedretorum, larger (cap 1-3 cm), with a more or less convex cap
and no veil, found in humus or debris under conifers; G. hypnorum, minute, with a rudi-
mentary veil, found on mossy logs; G. triscopa, also minute, but with a sharply conical
cap when young, growing on logs;andG. tibicystis, growing only in Sphagnum bogs.
N one of these should be eaten.
Tubariafurfuracea (Totally Tedious Tubaria)
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface smooth to
finely fibrillose or often with minute whitish flecksandpatches (veil remnants); hygro-
phanous but not viscid, brown to reddish-brown, cinnamon-brown, or tan when moist,
fading to buff, pinkish-buff, orwhitish as it dries( often fading incenter first); margin striate
when moist. Flesh thin, brownish. GILLS close, adnate to slightly decurrent, pale tawny to
cinnamon or brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below,
colored more or less like cap or paler, sometimes with whitish flecks, fibrillose, fragile;
base usually with whitish mycelium. VEIL whitish, fibrillose, evanescent. SPORE_PRINT
ochre-brown to pale ochre; spores 6-9 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground, sticks,andwoody debris in wet places-
woods, vacant lots, landscaped areas, along trails, etc.; commonandwidely distributed. It
seems to be most abundant whenandwhere other mushrooms are scarce-perhaps
because it is only likely to be noticed whenandwhere other mushrooms are scarce. I have
seen enormous fruitings in wood chip mulch at Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is it, folks-your quintessential "LBM" (see p. 32)-as boring as it is
ubiquitousandas innocuous as it is inconspicuous. The brownish spores, adnate to
decurrent gills, thin stalk,andwhitish-flecked, hygrophanous cap are the most distinctive
(or least undistinctive) field marks. To say more about it would do the more interesting
mushrooms in this book an injustice. Other species: The "Totally Tedious Tubaria" is
easily mistaken for the "Truly Trivial Tubaria," T. pelluc;da, which, however, is slightly
smaller (cap 0.5-1.5 cm broad)andhas slightly smaller spores. T. tenu;s, otherwise known
as the "Truly Trivial AND Totally Tedious Tubaria," is also smaller, but has a completely
glabrous (bald) capandwidely spaced gills. A small unidentified viscid-capped species
also occurs in our area. There are various other "LBM's" belonging to obscure genera
such as SimocybeandAlnicola. You can find more information on these in the key to
Galerina, Tubaria. & Allies, but don't you have something more exciting to do?
Tubaria confragosa (Not So Tedious Tubaria)
CAP 1-5 cm broad, broadly convex to more or less plane or slightly uplifted; surface moist
or dry but not viscid; hygrophanous, brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown to
reddish-cinnamon when moist, markedly paler (buff to cinnamon-buff) as it dries out;
smooth or often a ppearing hoary at first from a thin la yer of w hi tish fi brils or min ute scales
(especially toward the margin, which is striate when moist). Flesh thin, fragile, colored
like cap. GILLS cinnamon to rusty-brown to reddish-cinnamon to brown, adnate to
slightly decurrent, close. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1.5-6 mm thick, equal or thicker below, soon
hollow, colored like cap or paler, usually with fibrils or a few small scales below the ring;
base typically with white mycelial mat. VEIL usually forming a membranous, often flaring
superior ring on stalk, but sometimes disappearing or leaving only a fibrillose zone.
SPORE_PRINT brown to dark reddish-cinnamon; spores 6.5-9 x 4-6 microns, broadly
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Gregarious ( often clustered) on rotting logs, sa wd ust, etc.; widely distributed.
I have seen large fruitings in the fallandwinter in wood chip mulch, sometimes accom-
panied by T. furfuracea.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The presence of a well-defined annulus (ring)-at least in many specimens
-rescues this "LBM" from the obscurity it so richly deserves. It is slightly larger than
T. furfuracea,andis more likely to be cespitose (clustered). I t is also known as Phaeo-
ma,asmius conf,agosusandPholiota conf,agosa, but the hygrophanous, non-viscid cap
and smooth to only slightly scaly stalk separate it from the Pholiotas of this book.
N aucoria vinicolor
CAP 1-4 em broad, convex to plane or obtusely umbonate; surface smooth or finely
fibrillose or occasionally fibrillose-scaly, not viscid, dark red to wine-red (vinaceous), the
center often darker. Flesh thin, tinged cap color; odor mild. GILLS slightly decurrent to
adnate, adnexed, or notched, close; dark red or vinaceous when young, soon becoming
cinnamon or rusty-brown as spores mature. STALK 1-7 em long, 2-6 mm thick, equal or
slightly thicker below, colored more or less like cap but often overlaid with a fine whitish
silky-fibrillose coating. VEIL fibrillose, vinaceous, disappearing or forming a slight hairy
zone on stalk which turns cinnamon from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-
brown; spores 6.5-8 x 4-5 microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT In small tufts or clusters (or sometimes solitary) on dead wood; known only
from California, but perhaps more widely distributed. I have found it several times on oak
in the fallandwinter, but it is rare.
EDIBILITY Too rare to be of value. Greg Wright, who has found it in Los Angeles
County, reports that it is harmless, with a "mealy, moderately mushy" textureanda flavor
"that suggests bland beef." (I just can't wait to try it! Can you?)
COMMENTS This interesting mushroom was originally described in 1909. It does not
belong to the genus N aucoria in its modern sense, but has not officially been transferred to
another genus-per ha ps because of its rarity, but perhaps also because its .. correct" genus
is in doubt! The fibrillose veilandcinnamon-brown spores give it the aspect of a small
Cortinarius (e.g., C. sanguineus), but it always seems to grow on wood, usually in small
clusters. I ts wine-red colorandsmall size plus the spore colorandgrowth on wood are the
distinguishing field marks. Lactarius fragilis sometimes grows on wood but has a latex
and/or a fragrant odor, lacks a veil,andhas white or yellowish spores. Naemat%ma
aurantiaca is similarly colored but has darker sporesandis usually terrestrial.
Crepidotus herbarum (Little White Crep)
CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline; surface hairy or downy,
white, not viscid. Flesh very thin, white. GILLS fairly well-spaced, white becoming pale
ochre or brownish; radiating from point of attachment to substrate. STALK absent or
rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT pale yellow-brown; spores 6-8 x 34 microns, pip-shaped to
lance-shaped or somewhat elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops on fallen branches, twigs, herbaceous stems,
and debris( usually of hardwoods); widely distributed. Common in our area throughout the
mushroom season, but often overlooked.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike most of us, destined to remain so.
COMMENTS This is one of several small whitish CrepidolUs species that typically grow
on twigsandbranches, sometimes com pletely covering their host. I t is likely to be mistaken
for a Claudopus or small PleurolUs, but has brownish spores. Similar species include:
C. veTsutus, with dull brown, elliptical spores 9-10 microns long; C. vaTiabilis, with pale
brown to pinkish-brown, minutely warty, elliptical spores 5-7 microns long; C.fusispOTUS,
with pinkish-buff, fusiform (elongated) spores; C. applanatus, very commonandwidely
distributed, with round, minutely spiny sporesanda larger ( 1-4 em), nearly smooth, white
cap that often becomes brownish in age;andC. maculans, also largerandsmooth, but
usually blackish-spotted in age.
Crepidotus mollis (Jelly Crep; Flabby Crepidotus)
CAP 1-5 (8) em broad, fan-or kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline, convex to plane;
surface gelatinous in wet weather beneath a dense to rather sparse coating of fulvous to
rusty-ochre to brown fibrils (hairs) or small fibrillose scales; in age often smooth or with
very few fibrilsandvarying in color from tawny to pale ochreto brown, orfadingto whitish.
Flesh soft, thin, pallid, soon flaccid. GILLS close, whitish becoming brown or dull cinna-
mon; radiating from base of cap. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT dull
brown to yellowish-brown; spores 7-11 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Usually in groups or overlapping tiers on the bark of dead hardwoods (or
rarely conifers); very widely distributedandcommon. In our area it is frequent throughout
the mushroom season, especially on live oak.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as C. fulvotomentosusandC. calolepis, this is our most
commonandconspicuous Crepidotus, often fruiting in attractive masses on dead oaks.
The relatively large size(for a CrepidolUs), gelatinous texture when wet, brown spores and
mature gills,andfibrillose scales on the cap when young are the main field marks. In age it
becomes quite flabbyandis likely to attract your attention for this reason iffor no other.
C. CTocophyllus is a similar, widely distributed species with yellow to ochre-orange imma-
ture gills. I have found it several times in our area.
Gymnopilus sapineus (CommonandBoring Gymnopilus)
CAP (1) 2-5 (9) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or sometimes obscurely umbonate;
surface dry, usually with minute scales or scattered patches of fibrils, often cracking in age;
golden-yellow to tawny-orange, the margin sometimes paler. Flesh yellowish, firm; taste
usually bitter. GILLS attached (usually adnate), close, yellow becoming rusty-yellow to
rusty-cinnamon in age. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 3-7 (10) mm thick, equal or tapered slightly
below; yellowish-buff to yellow, becoming brownish-yellow inage or when handled; fibril-
lose. VEIL yellowish, fibrillose, disappearing or leaving a few hairs near top of stalk which
turn rusty from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT amber-to rusty-orange to bright rusty-
brown; spores 7-10 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small tufts or groups on rotting logs, cones, and
humus rich in lignin; widely distributed, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area
it is common under conifers (especially pine) throughout the mushroom season. Similar
species turn up occasionally in nursery flatsandflower pots.
EDIBILITY Unknown; the small sizeandbitter taste are deterrents.
COMMENTS There are several small, eminently undistinguishedandevidently indis-
tinguishable Gymnopilus species that will more or less fit the above description. As a group
they can be recognized by their yellow to orange-brown color, modest size, growth on
wood, dry cap,andrusty-orange spores. Some have an evanescent fibrillose veil, others
have no veil at all. G. sapineus is distinct by virtue of the small scales or fibrillose patches
on the cap. The others are hardly worth differentiating, but some of them are: G. luteo-
caTneus, common in California on conifers, with a smooth, darker (tawny-cinnamon to
russet) capandpale yellowish, evanescent veil; G. penetTansandG. flav;dellus, with a
smooth yellow to yellow-orange capandwhitish evanescent veil, the latter with a stalk
that stains orange-brown when handled;andthe following species with no veilanda
smooth, tawny to orange, rusty, or cinnamon-brown cap: G. l;qu;T;t;ae, growing on wood,
taste bitter; G. bellulus, on wood, taste bitter, but cap only 1-2.5 cm broadandsmooth to
minutely scurfy;andG. teTTestT;s, usually terrestrial under conifers, with a mild taste.
Gymnopilus aeruginosus
CAP (2) 5-15 (23) cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface dry, fibrillose-scaly (or
cracked in age); color variable: at first dull bluish-green or variegated with green, yellow,
salmon, red, Cor vinaceous, sometimes fading to buff or pinkish-buff in age; scales tawny to
reddish to dark brown. Flesh whitish or tinged blue or green; taste bitter. GILLS adnexed
to adnate or slightly decurrent, often seceding; buff to yellow-orange or ochre, close.
STALK (3) 5-12 cm long, (0.4) 1-1.5 (4) cm thick, more or less equal, colored more or less
like the cap, smooth or fibrillose, dry. VEIL yellowish, fibrillose, often scanty, leaving an
evanescent zone of hairs near top of stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty to rusty-orange or rusty-
cinnamon; spores 6-9 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT In groups or clusters on stumps, logs,andsawdust of both hardwoods and
conifers; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific Northwest. I have seen large
fruitings in the fall, winter,andspring in wood chip mulch.
EDIBILITY Hallucinogenic. The blue-green tones are indicative of psilocybin and/
or psilocin, as in Psilocybe.
COMMENTS The tendency of the cap to exhibit a blue-green tinge when young (often
variegated with pink, vinaceous-red, and/or other colors) plus the scaly cap, yellowish
gills, rusty-orange spores,andgrowth on wood make this species quite distinctive. G.
harmoge may be a synonym. A similar unidentified species (perhaps the same?) with
vinaceous-red fibrils on the capandstalk when young (see photo) is common on wood
chips. Its cap often shows bluish or blue-green stainsandit is hallucinogenic. G. puncti-
fol;us is colored like G. aeruginosus, but has a nearly smooth (bald) capandno veil.
Gymnopilus luteofolius
CAP 2-12 cm broad, convex or obtuse becoming nearly plane; surface dry, at first covered
with dense, dark red to purple-red or reddish-brown, fibrillose scales, these fading slowly
to pinkish-red or yellowish-red; surface finally yellowish in old age as scales disperse;
margin inrolled at first. Flesh thick, reddish to lavender, then fading to yellowish; taste
bitter. GILLS notched to adnate or slightly decurrent, fairly close, yellow becoming bright
rusty-orange or rust-colored as spores mature. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.3-2 cm thick,
fleshy, equal or enlarged below (or tapered downward if clustered); solid, dry, fibrillose,
more or less colored like cap, becoming yellowish or rusty-stained. VEIL fibrillose to
somewhat membranous, yellowish; forming a hairy, superior ring on stalk which may
disappear or trap falling spores. SPORE_PRINT bright rusty-orange; spores 5.5-8.5 x
3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT In groups or clusters on decaying coniferous wood, sawdust,andhumus rich in
lignin (rarely on hardwoods); widespread, but not common. I have seen one fantastic
local fruiting, under pine at New Brighton Beach State Park, with Pluteus cervinus and
large clusters of Pho/iota terrestrisandNaematoloma fasciculare (all certified wood-
lovers) also present.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but the closely related G. aeruginosus is said to be hallucinogenic.
COMMENTS This distinctive mushroom can be told by the dark red fibrils or scales on
the cap (and often the stem), plus the yellow gills, rusty-orange spores,andrelatively
persistent veil. The much more common Tricholomopsis rutilans features the same at-
tractive color combination, but has white sporesandlacks a veil, while G. aeruginosusand
relatives have a transient veilandoften have bluish stains. G. pulchriJolius is a smallerspe-
cies with a pink to pale pink cap. Others with distinctively colored cap scales include: G.
Julvosquamulosus, with tawny to brown scales on a yellow background;andG.
parvisquamulosus, with dark brown to blackish-brown scales on an ochraceous-tawny
background. Both have a mild tasteandfibrillose to slightly membranous veil. I have
found them in our area, but they are rare.
Gymnopilus spectabilis group Color Plate 99
(Big Laughing Mushroom; Giant Gymnopilus)
CAP 5-40 em or more broad, convex becoming broadly convex or nearly plane; surface
dry, smooth to silky or fibrillose, often breaking up to form small scales; bright yellow-
orange to yellowish-buff when young (or at times nearly whitish from overlaid fibrils),
often somewhat darker in age (rusty-orange to golden-tawny to orange-brown or reddish-
brown); margin at first incurved, sometimes wavy, sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh
thick, firm, yellowish; taste bitter. GILLS notched to adnate or slightly decurrent, close,
ochre-buff or pale yellow becoming more or less rusty-orange to rusty-brown in age.
STALK (3) 5-25 em long, 1-6 (10) em thick, usually swollen in the middle or below, the
base often narrowed; solid, firm, dry, rusty-orange to rusty-yellow or paler, fibrillose below
the ring. VEIL pallid to pale yellowish or rusty-stained, membranous or fibrillose,
sometimes disappearing, but usually forming a superior ring on stalk; ring soon stained
with rusty-orange spores, often collapsing or disappearing in age. SPORE_PRINT bright
rusty-orange; spores 7-10.5 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened or wrinkled.
HABITAT Usually in clusters (occasionally solitary) on or around stumpsandtrees;
widely distributed. This species "complex" favors conifers on the west coast, hardwoods
in eastern North America. In our area it is quite common on old pine stumps in the fall,
winter,andearly spring,andoccasionally turns up on eucalyptus also.
EDIBILITY Inedible due to the bitter taste. Forms in Asiaandeastern North America
apparently contain psilocybin and/or psilocinandare hallucinogenic (hence the Japanese
name, "Big Laughing Mushroom"). On the west coast, however, it is apparently "in-
active." An Ohio woman had an unforgettable experience after inadvertently nibbling on
one. She found herself in an alien world offantastic shapesandglorious colors,andwhile
concerned friends were rushing her to the hospital, she was heard to mutter, "If this is the
way you die from mushroom poisoning, then I'm all for it. . ."
COMMENTS This species "complex" is easily recognized by its overall yellow-orange
to rusty-orange color, rusty-orange spores, robust size, bitter taste,andfrequent presence
of a ring formed by the veil. Several Pho/iota species are similar, but have duller spores and
viscid caps; the honey mushroom (Armi/lariella mellea) is also somewhat similar, but has
white sporesandwhitish or flesh-colored gills, while the jack-o-lantern mushrooms
(Omphalotus) have white or yellow-tinted spores, lacka veil,andgrow only on hardwoods.
"Typical" G. spectabilis grows on both hardwoodsandconifersandhas. a somewhat
fibrillose veil. It was originally called Pholiola spectabilisandis also known as G.junonius
(probably its ..correct" name). The large, non-hallucinogenic, conifer-loving western form
with a swollen stalkandmembranous veil is called G. venlricosus (if truly distinct). It is
one of our largestandmost spectacular mushrooms, commonly attaining pizza size(more
than one foot in diameter) with clusters weighing 10 pounds or more. Young specimens
present an entirely different appearance: squatandcompact with hard, very thick, yellow
fleshandvery narrow (shallow) gills. Other species in the G. spectabilis..complex" include:
G. subspectabilis, with larger spores;andG. validipes of eastern North America, a hallu-
cinogenic species with a mild to only slightly unpleasant tasteanda fibrillose veil.
Rozites caperata (Gypsy Mushroom) Color Plate 10]
CAP 5-15 cm broad, oval becoming somewhat bell-shaped to broadly convex, plane, or
obscurely umbonate; surface dry, usually distinctly wrinkled or corrugated radially, at
first covered with a thin white to grayish coating of silky fibrils (especially at center); warm
tan to yellow-brown or orange-brown, margin often paler. Flesh thick, white, firm. GILLS
adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first pallid, soon dull tawny or brown, sometimes
transversely banded with darkerandlighter zones. STALK 5-13 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick,
equal or slightly enlarged at base, solid, firm, white to pale tan or pale ochre; apex often
striate or scurfy, base sometimes with an obscure volvalike zone. VEIL white, membran-
ous, forming a more or less median ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores
11-15x 7-10 microns, elliptical, roughened or warty. Some cystidia present on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed in northern
regions. It favors mossy, old-growth coniferous forests but alsD grows under hardwoods,
especially when huckleberry is in the vicinity. I have seen large fruitings in Washington
and Idaho in the late summerandfall. It also occurs in northern Californiaandthe Sierra
Nevada, but I have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible,andin my humble fungal opinion, the best of the Cortinariaceae.
I t is especially good with rice after a long, hard day of backpacking. The tough stems should
be discarded.
COMMENTS Originally called Pholiota caperata, the gypsy mushroom is easily told
by its warm brown or yellowish, wrinkled cap that has a hoary sheen when young, plus
the membranous veil which forms an annulus(ring)andthe rusty-brown spores. Agrocybe
praecox is somewhat similar, but does not have a wrinkled capandusually grows in culti-
vated ground; Phaeo/epiota aurea differs in its powdery-granulose capandstem, while
similarly-colored Cortinarius species do not have a membranous veil.
Phaeolepiota aurea
CAP 6-20 (30) cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming broadly convex, plane, or broadly
umbonate; surface dry, granular to somewhat powdery (the granules sometimes wearing
away in age), orange to orange-tan, tawny-yellow, or golden-brown, often somewhat paler
in age; margin usually hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pallid or yellowish. GILLS
adnate to notched or free, close, pallid or pale yellowish becoming tawny to orange-
brown. STALK 5-15 (25) cm long, (1) 24 (6) cm thick, thicker toward base, orange to buff
or colored like capandgranulose or powdery below the ring. VEIL membranous, colored
like cap, sheathing the stalkandbreaking to form a superior flaring or funnel-like ring
which eventually collapses or becomes skirtlike; ring smooth on upper surfaceandgranu-
lose on underside. SPORE_PRINT pale yellow-brown to orange-buff; spores 10-14 x 5-6
microns, elliptical, smooth to minutely roughened.
HABITAT In groups or clusters in rich humusandsoil under both hardwoods and
conifers; known from the Pacific NorthwestandAlaska (also Europe), fruiting in the
late summerandfall. It is rather rare, but when it fruits it often does so in large quantities.
An ideal place to look for it is under alder along roadsandtrails.
EDIBILITY Edible for most people, but mildly poisonous to some. It is a tempting
specimen, but try it cautiously if you must.
COMMENTS Also known as Pho/;ota aureaandTogar;a aurea, this large, beautiful
mushroom is as distinctive as it is rare. No other large, brownish-spored mushroom is
golden-brown to pale orange with a granulose coating on both the capandstem.
Cystoderma species are granulose but much smallerandhave white spores; Agaricus
augustus is similarly colored but has chocolate-brown sporesandan almondy odor, while
Pho/iota species, Rozites caperata.andAgrocybe praecox lack the granulose coating.
Phaeocollybia olivacea (Olive Phaeocollybia)
CAP 3-11 cm broad, obtusely conical or convex becoming plane or uplifted, but usually
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, hygrophanous: deep green
to olive-green when moist, fading as it dries (to olive-buff, etc.). Flesh thin, olive; odor
cucumberlike or radishlike when fresh. GILLS pallid becoming pale brown, then rusty-
brown; adnexed or free, close, edges often eroded or wavy. STALK 10-22 cm long or more,
(0.5) 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal above or swollen at ground level, then tapering below
the ground to form a "tap root"; cartilaginous, smooth, stuffed with a pith; watery olive
to yellowish above, rusty-orange to reddish-brown below or occasionally overall. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns. elliptical with snoutlike apex, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious, often in large rings. on ground in mixed
woodsandunder conifers; fruiting in the fallandwinter, known only from the west coast.
I t is said to be common in southern Oregonandnorthern California, but is rare in our area.
Budding boletivore Craig Mitchell has located one very prolific fairy ring near Big Basin
State Park.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This striking mushroom is easily recognized by its slimy olive-green cap,
rather thick rooting stem, rusty-brown spores,andabsence of a veil. It is somewhat
unusual among the Phaeocollybias in that it often fruits in mixed woods (i.e., it mayor
may not be associated with conifers). There are three other Phaeocollybias with an olive
cap when fresh: P. fest;va, P. pseudofest;va,andP. fallax. All are considerably slimmer,
smaller,andmore conical (cap 1-6 cm broad, stalk less than 1 cm thick at apex) than P.
olivacea.andall have slightly smaller spores. P. fal/ax is easily told by its violet or lilac
gills when young, but the other two can only be differentiated microscopically. Also
worth mentioning are two species which have grayish-toned caps: P. scates;ae, with a
slim (3-7 mm) stalk, dingy yellowish gills when young,anda dull cinnamon cap that fades
to grayish-brown, often fruiting in massive clusters of up to several hundred fruiting
bodies;andP. gregaria, with a thicker (8-15 mm) stalkanda yellowish-gray to brownish-
gray or grayish-buff cap. All of the above species occur with northern conifersandare
very rare or absent in our area.
Phaeocollybia californica Color Plate 100
CAP (2) 3-7 (10) cm broad, conical with an inrolled margin when young, often expanding
in age to plane but retaining a distinct umbo; surface smooth, viscid when moist, hygro-
phanous: amber-brown to cinnamon-brown or orange-brown when moist, fading as it
dries, but in age often rusty-spotted or darkening to reddish-brown. Flesh thin; odor
pungent (somewhat radishlike). GILLS adnate to adnexed or even free, pallid or tinged
cap color, darkening to brown or rusty-brown in age; close. STALK 10-20 cm long or
more, 4-10 mm thick, equal above, gradually tapering below the ground to form a "tap
root"; cartilaginous, hollow, smooth, colored more or less like cap or paler, or more often
dark reddish or reddish-brown belowandpaler (apricot-buff) above. SPORE_PRINT
rusty-brown; spores 8-11 x 5 microns, elliptical with a small"beak" at apex, roughened.
HABITAT Densely gregarious or in large loose clusters on ground under conifers, often
forming arcs or fairy rings; known only from the west coast, not common. In our area it
is quite rare, but one large fairy ring under redwoodandDouglas-fir fruits in colossal
quantities every winter.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The presence of a ""tap root," absence of a veil, rusty-brown spores, and
amber-brown to orangish or reddish-brown color are the distinctive features of this
speciesandits look-alikes (see below). Caulorhiza umbonata also features a "tap root,"
but is much more commonandhas pallid gills, a non-viscid cap,andwhite spores. Other
dark cinnamon to orangish Phaeocollybias include: P. piceae, with a bitter taste and
more or less mild odor, favoring Sitka spruce; P. dissi/iens, also fond ofSitka spruce, but
with distinctly smaller sporesanda thicker stalk that easily splits lengthwise;P. /ilacifo/ia,
with violet gills when young;P. attenuata, with a thinnerstem(3-6 mmthickatapex)anda
viscid, amber-brown to yellowish-buff cap; P. /aterarius, also slender but with a salmon
to pale salmon-ochre cap when moist (known from Michigan); P. similis, with a very
thin stalk (1.5-3 mm)anda non-viscid or only slightly viscid cap; andP. deceptiva, with
a cinnamon to yellowish-brown, non-viscid capanda thicker (8-15 mm) stalk that does
not markedly redden with age. Finally, there is a group of species (e.g., P. rad;cata, P.
jennyae, P. chr;st;anae, P. s;pei) with a slender (3-6 mm) stem, small cap,andsmaller
spores (less than 8 microns long) that are best differentiated from each other microscopi-
cally. Nearly all of the above occur in the Pacific Northwest; a few are more widely dis-
tributed or have counterparts (e.g., P. ruf;pes) in eastern North America. None are as
large as P. kauffmaniiandnone show the olive or grayish tones of P. o/ivaceaandthe
species listed under it.
Phaeocollybia kauffmanii (Giant Phaeocollybia)
CAP 7-25 cm broad, obtuse or convex when young becoming broadly umbonate to nearly
plane in age; surface smooth, viscid to very slimy; cinnamon to pale reddish-cinnamon
or reddish-brown becoming more or less liver-colored in age, but fading to reddish-orange,
rusty-reddish, or apricot as it loses moisture; margin remaining inrolled for a long time,
not striate. Flesh thick, firm, colored like cap or paler; odor usually farinaceous, at least
when crushed. GILLS close or crowded, free or adnexed, buff becoming brown to rusty-
brown in age. STALK (15) 2040 cm long, 1.54 cm thick at apex, tapered downward to
form a long ""tap root" below the ground; pinkish-brown to pinkish-buff above, reddish-
brown to dark purplish-brown belowanddarkening with age (sometimes nearly black);
smooth; stuffed with a pith, the outer rind toughandcartilaginous. SPORE_PRINT
cinnamon-brown; spores 8-11)< 4.5-7 microns, elliptical with an apical beak, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers (particularly Sitka spruce)
in the late summerandfall; known only from the west coast. It is fairly common during
some seasons, particularly in Oregonandnorthern California, rare during others. I have
not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Its large size is tempting but the glutinous cap is not.
COMMENTS This giant of the genus can usually be recognized by its size alone. The
colors are quite variable depending on ageandmoisture, but are usually darker and
redder than those of P. californicaandthe species discussed under it. No other Phaeo-
collybia has a stalk so consistently thick nor a cap so broad. The obtuse rather than conical
shape of young caps is also distinctive. Other species: P. oregonens;s is a very similar but
slightly smaller species with smaller spores; P. spad;cea is a fairly large species (cap 4-12
cm broad, stalk 1-2 cm thick) with a dark brown to umber cap when moist. Both occur in
the Pacific Northwest.
C ortinarius vibratilis (Bitter Cortinarius)
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped to convex to nearly plane; surface smooth, viscid
or slimy when moist, yellowish to tawny, fulvous, orange-brown, or yellow-orange (or in
one form brown) when fresh, fading as it ages or dries (sometimes to pale tan). Flesh thin,
whitish; odor mild, taste bitter (especially cap surface). GILLS close, notched to adnate
or slightly decurrent, at first whitish, soon becoming dull ochre or ta wnyandfinally cinna-
mon-brown. STALK 3-7 cm long, 3-10 mm thick at apex, usually clearly thickened below
(club-shaped) but sometimes equal; viscid or slimy when moist, but in age sometimes viscid
only at the base; white, smooth or nearly so. UNIVERSAL_VEIL slimy, colorless.
CORTINA scanty, sometimes leaving a few hairs on stalk which trap falling spores.
SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9x 4-5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in forest humus; widely distri-
butedandfairly common, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It usually occurs with
conifers, but in our area I have collected it under manzanita, madrone,andhuckleberry,
in December.
EDIBILITY Inedible due to the bitter taste. (If Russula brevipes is "better kicked than
picked," then C. vibrati/is is "better kicked than licked!")
COMMENTS The small size, viscid tawny cap,andviscid white stalk plus the bitter taste
-which can usually be detected by pressing your tongue to the surface of the cap-are
the hallmarks of this petite Cortinarius. It typifies a group of species within the subgenus
Myxacium which have a club-shaped (thickened) stalk, at least when young. Other species:
C. crystallinus is similar in size, shape,andbitter taste but is whitish to buff or pale tan
overallandhas a non-viscid stalk. See also C. citrinifolius (under C. percomis).
Cortinarius mucosus (Slimy Cortinarius)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to plane or broadly umbonate, or even uplifted in age; surface
smoothandvery slimy when moist, chestnut-to reddish-brown or bright orange-brown,
often paler (tawny or ochre) in age. Flesh whitish; odorandtaste mild. GILLS close,
usually more or less adnexed, whitish to grayish when very young, becoming pale ochra-
ceous or tawny, then cinnamon-brown from ripening spores. STALK 4-15 cm long, 1-2
(2.5) cm thick, more or less equal, slimy or viscid when moist, white or whitish but some-
times rusty-stained from spores; not breaking up into conspicuous scaly belts. UNI-
VERSAL VEIL whitish, slimy, disappearing or leaving indistinct remains on stalk.
CORTINA usually forming a superior, hairy-fibrillose zone on stalk which is stained rusty-
brown by spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 11-18x 5-7.5 microns, elongated-
elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in mixed woodsandunder conifers (parti-
cularly pineandspruce); widely distributed, but especially common in the West in the late
summerandfall,andin the southern United States. I have seen large fruitings in Wash-
ington, New Mexico, Arizona,andnorthern California, but not in our area. Cortinarius-
classifier Joe Ammirati says it has been found under birchandwillow in the Brooks Range
in northern Alaska; it also occurs with hemlock.
EDIBILITY Better eschewed than stewed. It is too slippery to be worthwhile,andits
edibility is unknown.
COMMENTS The smooth, viscid, tawny to orange-brown or reddish-brown cap and
viscid, whitish, equal stalk are the distinguishing features of this "slimy sucker." The cap
color is reminiscent of C. collinitus, but the stalk lacks the scaly belts characteristic of that
species,andthe taste is not bitternorthe stalk club-shaped as in C. vibrati/is. Phaeocollybia
species are somewhat similar, but lack a cortinaandhave a long, rooting stalk. C. turma/is
(see comments under C. multiformis) is also similar, but has a dry stalk.
Cortinarius cylindripes group (Slimy Purple Cortinarius)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex or broadly bell-shaped becoming broadly umbonate to plane
or with an uplifted margin; surface smooth or in age sometimes wrinkled, viscid to ex-
tremely slimy when moist, at first lavender or violet, but fading quickly or slowly (often
from center outward) to yellowish, brownish-ochre, tawny, brown, or paler. Flesh
rather thin, violet-tinged becoming whitish; taste mild. GILLS at first lavender or grayish-
lavender, soon grayish or grayish-cinnamon with whitish, finely scalloped edges. finally
rusty-cinnamon; adnate to adnexed or notched, close. STALK 5-15 cm long, 1-2.5 (3) cm
thick, equal or at times spindle-shaped when young (swollen slightly in the middle); viscid
or slimy throughout or at least over lower portion; violet to silvery-violet or lavender in part
or throughout, but often fading somewhat (like cap) in age; smooth or with whitish to
violet scales above. UNIVERSAL_VEIL slimy, violet, forming a slime sheath on stalk.
CORTINA obscured by slime, evanescent or leaving a few hairs on stalk. SPORE_PRINT
dark cinnamon-brown; spores 12-17 x 5.5-8 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in woods; widely distributedandlocally
abundant (along with similar species) in the late fallandwinter. Like C. balteatus, it tends to
fruit with ericaceous shrubsandtrees, e.g., manzanita, madrone, and/or huckleberry.
EDIBILITY Better eyed than fried; the snotlike universal veil will deter most.
COMMENTS This species may not be the most distinctive or desirable of our local
Cortinarii, but it unquestionably qualifies as the slimiest. The yellowish to brownish or
lavender cap, slimy universal veil,andviscid, more or less equal, violet or lavender stalk are
the principal diagnostic characters of C. cy/indripes, but there are numerous look-alikes,
including: C. stillatitius, with only slightly roughened spores; C. salor, with smaller, round
spores; C. pseudosalor, similarly colored in age, but without a purplish cap when young;
C. splendidus, with a small (3-5 cm) liver-brown to tawny cap, also found with conifers;
C. iodes (=c. heliotropicus)andC. iodioides, with a purple cap that doesn't fade much plus
a club-shaped to spindle-shaped stalk when young (the latter also has bitter-tasting slime);
C. griseovio/aceus, a small violet-tinged conifer-lover whose capandstalk are only thinly
viscid (if at all);andC. griseo/uridus, with a club-shaped stalk when younganda violet
to olive or ochre cap, found under conifers in the Rocky Mountains. All of these have
viscid, violet-tinged stalks that lack the distinctive belts characteristic of C. co/linitus.
and none have caps as dark or as wrinkled as those of C. vanduzerensisandC. elatior.
Other violet-tinged Myxaciums include: C. castaneic%r, found under northern conifers,
with a whitish to tawny, club-shaped stalk, pale violet gills when very young,anda buff
to tawny to chestnut-brown (darker at the center) cap;andC. de/ibutusandC. sphaero-
sporus (two very similar if not identical species), with a bright yellow to ochre or straw-
colored cap, violet-tinged gills at first,andan equal to club-shaped whitish stalk that
often has yellowish veil patches (or slime) below nd often has a violet-tinged apex.
Cortinarius collinitus group Color Plate 104
(Belted Slimy Cortinarius)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly umbonate to plane; surface
smooth, slimy or viscid, color variable: yellowish to orange-yellow, orange-brown, tawny,
ochre, fulvous, or even reddish-brown, the margin often paler or yellower (or in one form
bluish-violet)andsometimes striate. Flesh firm, whitish to yellowish-buff. GILLS close,
adnate to adnexed or notched, pallid or pale grayish (or violet-tinged in one form) when
young, becoming brownandfinally rusty-brown in age. STALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-2 cm
thick, equal or tapering downward, usually rooting somewhat in the humus; viscid or slimy
when moist, color variable but usually whitish above,andlower portion usually breaking
up into irregular whitish, yellowish, ochre, and/or rusty-brown (or in one form violet or
bluish-violet) bands, patches, or scaly rings (but these sometimes obscure). UNIVERSAL
VEIL fibrillose beneath a layer of slime, leaving bands or patches on stalk. CORTINA
pallid, usually forming a ring of hairs near top of stalk which turns rusty-brown from falling
spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-15 x 6-8.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under both hardwoodsandconifers;
widespread in the northern hemisphereandfairly common in our area in the late fall and
winter under tanoakandmadrone at higher elevations in the coastal mountains (often
mingling with C. cotoneusandC. infract us). It is also abundant under aspen in the southern
Rocky Mountainsandthe Southwestandwith conifers in the Pacific Northwest.
EDIBILITY Better neglected than collected. In spite of the slime it is said to be edible,
but it is a species "complex,"andsome of the variants are poorly known or untested.
COMMENTS This species "complex" is relatively easy to recognize by virtue oftheslimy-
viscid capandbelted or scaly, viscid stalk. It is a very confused group taxonomically,
however,andnames like C. trivia/isandC. mucif/uus have been used to describe some of
the variants which differ in colorandspore size. Our local version, which might be C.
trivialis, does not show violet on the stem,andneither does the common aspen-loving
form. C. e/at;or is a similar species that is not so strikingly banded. It has a dark brown to
olive-brown or yellow-brown cap that is often radially wrinkled or grooved at the margin
in age, violet or bluish-tinged gills when young,anda tapered, rooting stalk that is also
bluish-or violet-toned (and slimy). It favors conifersandis fairly common in northern
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest. Other species: C. pa//;difo/;us has pallid gills
when younganda viscid club-shaped stalk with ochre-brown patches or zones; it is also
found under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, especially fir. C. croco/;tus (=c. tr;um-
phans?)andclose relatives have a yellowish to brown viscid capanda dry stalk marked
with yellow-brown to ochre belts or patches (see photo on p.419); they favor hardwoods.
Cortinarius vanduzerensis
CAP 4-10 cm broad, somewhat conical becoming broadly conical or convex; surface
smooth, very slimy when moist, deep chestnut-brown to nearly black when young, be-
coming paler chesnutandfinally cinnamon-brown in age, often wrinkled radially or
corrugated at maturity, especially toward margin. Flesh pallid to cinnamon-buff; odor
mild. GILLS close, adnate or adnexed, pallid or buff becoming pale brownandfinally
dull cinnamon-brown. STALK 8-20 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, equal or often tapered slightly
toward the base, often deeply rooted, viscid to very slimy, bluish-violet to violet to dark
lavender above, paler below, often fading in age. UNIVERSAL_VEIL slimy, sheathing at
least the lower half of the stalkandoccasionally breaking up into concentric zones.
CORTINA forming a ring of hairs near top of stalk or disappearing. SPORE_PRINT
rusty-brown; spores 11-15 x 7-9 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers; known only from northern
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest, where it is fairly common in the fallandearly winter.
I have found it several times under Sitka spruce.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too slippery to be of value.
COMMENTS The dark slimy cap, slimy violet or bluish-violet stalk,andpallid to brown
gills when young form a distinctive combination offeatures. It closely resembles C. etatior
(see comments under the C. col/initus group) in shape, size,andthe wrinkled cap at
maturity, but does not have the bluish-violet immature gills of that species. The stalk
often roots deeply in the ground, but the presence of a veil distinguishes it from Phaeo-
collybia. The stalk occasionally shows concentric ring-zones, but not to the extent of
C. col/initus. (Violet-stalked forms ofthe latter also have a brighterorpalercap.) For other
similar ..Myxaciums" with paler caps, see C. cylindripes group. Also see photo on p. 433.
Cortinarius ponderosus (Ponderous Cortinarius)
CAP 10-35 cm broad, convex becoming nearly plane in old age; surface viscid to slimy
when moist, brown to cinnamon or russet at the center, with small, flattened, spotlike,
russet to rusty-brown or brown scales; margin usually yellow or ochre-yellow to yellow-
olive or tawny, remaining inrolled for a long time. Flesh very thickandfirm, whitish or
buff; odor mild to somewhat spermatic (Inocybe-like). GILLS close, slightly decurrent
to adnate or sometimes adnexed, lilac-tinged when young( at least near margin), becoming
dingy ochreandfinally rusty-brown as spores mature; often with rusty or russet spots or
stains in age. STALK 8-20 cm long, (3) 4-7 cm thick, equal or slightly enlarged below or
tapered at the base; solid, very firmandhard; viscid below when moist; apex pallid or
colored like gills, lower portion with yellow-ochre to rusty-brown or russet stains and/or
fibrils or fibrillose patches. UNIVERSAL_VEIL slimy, yellow, disappearing or leaving
slime on stalk. CORTINA often leaving a hairy zone on upper stalk. SPORE_PRINT
rusty-brown; spores 8.5-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious or in arcs on ground in mixed woods (oak,
ponderosa pine, etc.) in northern Californiaandsouthern Oregon in late fallandwinter;
not common, but often prolific when it fruits. A very similar if not identical species occurs
under oakandmadrone (see comments).
EDIBILITY Better chucked than plucked. It is certainly large enough to be tempting,
but its edibility has not been determined,andseveral Cortinarii are very poisonous.
COMMENTS This massive Cortinarius can almost be identified by its size alone. The
stalk is exceptionally hardandthickandthe fruiting bodies develop gradually over a con-
siderable length of time. An equally ponderous but possibly distinct Cortinarius occurs
in our area. It differs in several minorrespects: the stalk is dry or only slightly viscid (tacky),
the intermediate color phase of the gills is grayish rather than ochre, the cap is viscid but not
usually slimy (and the slime on the cap, when present, is not yellow),andthe upper half of
the stalk is slightly different in color. In size, shape,andoverall aspect, however, it is
remarkably similar (see photograph). Whether it is just a variation of C. ponderosus or a
distinct species is uncertain, but collectors should have no trouble recognizing it. For other
large species without a pronounced basal bulb, see C. balteatus.
C ort;nar;us balteatus
CAP (3) 6-20 (25) cm broad, broadly convex with an inrolled margin becoming plane in
age; surface viscid when moist but soon dryandoften shiny, smooth, without scales but
sometimes appearing streaked or blotched; dull violet or lavender to lavender-gray when
young (but sometimes whitish while still covered by humus), soon becoming tawny to
tawny-olive or brown from the center outward, the margin usually remaining lavender
until old age. Flesh thick, firm, whitish to grayish to buff or slightly violet-tinted under the
cuticle; odor mild. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, whitish or tinged violet
to violet-gray when young, gradually becoming brown as spores mature. STALK 5-12 cm
long, (I) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal above, often slightly narrowed at base (but sometimes
thicker); firm, solid, dry, pallid or lavender becoming brownish-stained in age, especially
below (or staining yellow in one form). CORTINA disappearing or leaving hairs on stalk
which trap falling spores.-SPORE_PRINT dull cinnamon-brown; spores 9-11 x 5-6
microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under hardwoodsandsometimes
conifers, usually with members of the Ericaceae (huckleberry, manzanita, madrone, etc.)
also present; widely distributed. In our area it is sometimes common in the fallandearly
winter under madrone. Usually only one crop is produced but the fruiting bodies develop
and decay slowly,andso may be found over a period of several weeks. I have also seen it in
the Oregon Cascades (near Crater Lake) in both the springandfall.
EDIBILITY Unknown. As Alexander Smith points out, it is firmandmeaty enough to
warrant experimentation-but in light of the recent rash of poisonings caused by species
of Cortinarius, who wants to be the one to try it?
COMMENTS This cumbersome Cortinarius can be recognized by its violet-tinged
gills when young, violet-tinted cap margin,andhard thick stem which is not abruptly
bulbous. The cap is only thinly viscidandmay not seem so at all in dry weather. In wet
weather our form is often full oftiny springtail beetles (columbalids). Other cumbersome,
viscid-capped Cortinarii without an abrupt basal bulb include: C. largus, very similar but
with violet-tinged fleshandan ochre to reddish-brown cap in age; C. balteato-cumatilis,
also quite similar but with an odor "like overripe pears" (Stuntz);andC. crassus, with a
yellow-brown to russet or reddish-brown cap, short thick stalk,andpallid to buff gills
which gradually darken to cinnamon. The latter is fairly common under western conifers,
especially at higher elevations (I have seen it in the Rockies).
Cortinarius subfoetidus
CAP 2.5-10 cm broad, broadly umbonate to convex or plane in age; surface viscid or slimy
when moist, smooth or appearing fibrillose, bright lavender or violet or at times bluish-
lavender, in age sometimes fading at the center to buff or paler. Flesh tinged cap color, paler
in age; odor distinctly fragrant, but with a fetid (nauseating) component. GILLS close,
adnexed or notched to adnate, at first lilac or violet, but becoming pale to dull brown and
finally rusty-brown in age. STALK 5-8 cm long, O.7-2cm thick, more or less equal, colored
like cap or paler (often fading), the apex often whitish; not viscid. UNIVERSAL_VEIL
fibrillose, forming a pale lavender to violet sheath over lower portion of stalk. CORTINA
transient, sometimes leaving a few hairs at stalk apex which trap falling spores. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 x 5-5.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in duffandmoss under conifers;
known only from the Pacific Northwest, fruiting primarily in the fall, especially with
hemlock and/or fir. I have seen it in northern Idaho, where, according to Alexander Smith,
it is more common than anywhere else.
EDIBILITY Better wasted than tasted.
COMMENTS The sickeningly sweet odor (which has been likened to that of overripe
pears)andbright lavender to violet color combine to make this one of the easiest of all
Cortinarii to recognize. Alas, the casual hunter may not get a chance to recognize it
because it is not a very common species. The viscid cap distinguishes it from C. traganus,
C. camphoratusandother "Sericeocybes," while the stalk is neither viscid as in the C.
cylindripes group nor bulbous as in C. olympianusandother purplish "Bulbopodiums."
Although uncommon, it attracts more than its shar:e of attention because of its beautiful
color. C. balteato-cumati/is (see comments under C. balteatus) in similar in odor and
color but is much more robust (stalk typically at least 2 cm thick).
Cort;nar;us ;nfractus (Sooty-Olive Cortinarius)
CAP 4-13 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming broadly umbonate or plane; surface
viscid when moist, dark olive to sooty-olive becoming slightly browner (dingy yellow-
brown) in age or sometimes mottled with tawny shades; margin sometimes wavy and/or
faintly zoned. Flesh thick, firm, whitish or tinged violet or ochre-buff; taste bitter (at least of
the skin). GILLS notched to adnexed or ad nate, close, dark olive to sooty-olive or olive-
brown, or in some forms tinged violet at first, becoming dark cinnamon-brown in old age.
STALK 3-13 cm long, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, equal or more often enlarged slightly below; solid,
fibrillose, dry, whitish or tinged capcolor( or in some forms tinged violet at apex),andoften
dingy olive-brown toward the base. CORTINA pale grayish, usually forming a hairy
median or superior zone on stalk which turns rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 x 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground under both hardwoodsandconifers; widely
distributedandcommon. In our area it fruits in the fallandwinter, usually under tanoak
and madrone (often accompanied by C. collinitus, C. cotoneus,andEntoloma species).
EDIBILITY Better overlooked than cooked-it is probably bitter-tasting.
COMMENTS A distinctive Cort;nar;us by virtue of the sooty-olive color of its cap and
gills. The cap is viscid when moist, but there is no abrupt bulb at the base of the stalk as in
the C. scaurus group. A number of varieties have been recognized, some of which show
violet in the stalk apexand/or immature gills. The common version in our area, however, is
violet-less. C. immixtus is a similar species with brighter (yellowish-olive-green) immature
gills, a mild taste,andlarger spores; it has been reported from the Pacific Northwest.
Cortinarius percomis (Fragrant Cortinarius)
CAP 4-8 cm broad, convex to broadly convex with an inrolled margin when young, ex-
panding in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, bright to dull yellow to bright ochre
or at times tinged fulvous or greenish-yellow. Flesh yellow; odor strongly aromatic and
sweet (see comments); taste mild to slightly unpleasant. GILLS close, adnexed or notched
to ad nate, pale yellow to sulfur-yellow when young, becoming browner( dingy olive-brown
to rusty-cinnamon) as spores mature. STALK 4-8 cm long, 0.7-1.5 (2.5) cm thick at apex,
equal or more often club-shaped (thicker below), but lacking a sharply-defined bulb;
bright yellow to yellowish-white, dry, fibrillose, solid, firm. UNIVERSAL_VEIL sulfur-
yellow, fibrillose, often leaving remnants (fibrils) on stalk. CORTINA usually collapsing to
form a ring of hairs on upper stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-13 x 5-6.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers; widely
distributed. It is fairly frequent in western North America in the late summerandfall, but
seldom in quantity. In our area a similar fragrant species (see comments) occurs with oak.
EDIBILITY Unknown. I have cautiously sampled our local variety (see comments), and
found its flavor to be a distinct disappointment (it didn't live up to the odor).
COMMENTS The strong, remarkably sweet odor (best detected by breaking open the
flesh)andyellow color are the outstanding characteristics of this attractive Cort;nar;us.
The odor is difficult to describe but is reminiscent-to different people-of citrin ella,
toilet bowl cleaner, or papaya. In our area C. /uteoarmi//atus (?), with a similar odor, is
common in the fallandwinter under live oak. It has a pale ochre to pale tan, buff, or pale
yellowish cap, white flesh,anda white stalk with or without yellowish universal veil zones.
C. citrinifo/ius looksandsmells like C. percom;s, but has a viscid stalk; it occurs in the
Pacific Northwest. C. odorifer has an aniselike odoranda rimmed basal bulb(at least when
young)anda greenish-yellow to cinnamon to vinaceous-brown cap. C. osmophorus is
a fragrant European species that closely mimics our local variety in color, but it also has
a rimmed bulb. None of these are worth eating.
Cort;nar;us mutab;l;s group (Purple-Staining Cortinarius)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or undulating; surface smooth, viscid when
moist, at first violet or grayish-violet, but usually suffused in age with buff, ochre, or brown,
especially toward the center (margin often remaining violet). Flesh thick, pallid or pale
violet becoming dark purple when bruised or cutandthen rubbed (sometimes staining
slowly); odor mild. GILLS adnate or more often adnexed or notched, close, dull violet
or grayish-lilac when young, slowly becoming pale brownish as spores mature; turning
deep lilac or purple when bruised. STALK 4-10 cm ong, 1-2 cm thick at apex, thicker or
swollen at base but without an abrupt bulb; pallid to pale violet or colored like ca p, staining
deep lilac or purple when bruised. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2 cm thick at apex, thicker or
swollen at base but without an abrupt bulb; pallid to pale violet orcolored likecap, staining
which traps falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 x 4.5-5.5 microns,
elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps on ground or very rotten wood
under conifers, western North America; especially common at higher elevations in the late
summerandfall.l have seen it in the Rocky Mountainsand Cascades, but not on the coast.
EDIBILITY Unknown, like most of us.
COMMENTS This species "complex" is variable in a number of respects, but can be
recognized by the purple-staining gillsandstalk surface. The flesh also stains purple, but
the reaction seems to vary somewhat in brightnessandduration. Other species: C. pur-
ascens is a purple-staining species with a purple-brown to reddish-brown, often
variegated capandmore sharply defined basal bulb on the stem; C. occidental is stains
purple, but has a bluish cap that becomes grayish in age; C. subpurpurascens has purple-
staining gills, but the flesh does not stain. All of these grow mainly with conifers.
Cort;nar;us glauco pus group
CAP 4-12 (17) cm broad, convex becoming plane or with margin slightly uplifted; surface
smooth, viscid or tacky when moist, color extremely variable: rich greenish-brown to
olive-black, greenish-gray, steel-gray, bluish-gray, etc., often streaked or mottled with
yellowish or ochre fibrilsandoften becoming fulvous, cinnamon, or rusty-colored in age
(typically from the center outward); margin sometimes yellowish-oliveandoften wavy.
Flesh firm, thick, pallid to grayish or tinged violet-blue, becoming ochraceous in age; also
ochraceous in base of stalk. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, bluish-violet to
bluish-gray or sometimes gray when young, darkening to rusty-brown as spores mature.
STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, more or less equal above, but with a bulb at
base, the bulb abruptandrimmed when young but often oblique or poorly defined in age;
color variable but usually violet, blue, or green at apexandvariously colored (often paler)
below, often browner in age; dry, solid, firm. CORTINA pallid or pale bluish-violet,
usually leaving hairs on stalk which are stained rusty-brown by falling spores. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 6-10 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, slightly roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or in small clumps or sometimes in troops,
associated with both hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributed but particularly common
in western North America. Our members of this "complex" fruit prolifically in the fall and
winterandare the most common "Bulbopodiums" of our live oak woodlands. In the Rocky
MountainsandPacific Northwest, however, it favors conifers, especially spruce.
EDIBILITY Better drownedandbeaten than brownedandeaten. Many members of
this group have not been adequately testedandsome are apparently bitter.
COMMENTS This species "complex" is extremely variable in color, but can be told in the
button stage by its conspicuous bulbandblue-gray to bluish-violet gills. In age it becomes
cinnamon-or rusty-coloredandis easily confused with dozens of other Cortinarii.
Younger specimens can resemble the blew it (Clitocybe nuda), but have a cortinaandrusty-
brown spores. C. pseudoarquatus is a similar species with a more buff or brownish cap
and significantly larger spores. For other bluish-violet "Bulbopodiums" (most of which
are more violet than blue and/or have differently colored caps), see comments under the
C. sodagnitus groupandC. olympian us.
Cortinarius sodagnitus group
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid when moist, at first bright
violet or lilac overall, but soon becoming brown to ochraceous or buff from the center
outward ( or becoming somewhat silvery in dry weather), the margin retaining violet tones
well into maturity. Flesh thick, firm, whitish with a violet tinge at top of stalkandochre tint
in basal bulb; not staining appreciably; taste bitter (at least of the skin). GILLS violet when
young, becoming dullerandsuffused with brown or cinnamon-brown, but the edges
usually remaining violet until old age; close, adnate to adnexed or notched. STALK 2.5-8
cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, with a small but sharply defined, rimmed bulb at the base (1-3 cm
broad); violet like the cap or pallid when young, discoloring brownish or rusty from the
base upward, but usually retaining distinct violet zone at apex even in old age; solid, not
viscid. CORTINA violet-tinged, leaving a median to superior zone of hairs on stalk, the
hairs often rusty-stained by spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 10-12 x 5.5-6.5
microns, elliptical, roughened. Cap surface staining red or wine-red in KGH or NaGH.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground under hardwoods; distribution
uncertain. This species "complex" is quite common in our live oak woodlands in the fall
and winter. It was originally described from Europe, where it favors beech.
EDIBILITY Better tossed than sauced-it is probably bitter.
COMMENTS This beautiful member of the subgenus Bulbopodium can be told by its
rather small but well-defined, abrupt, rimmed bulb at the base of the stem (see photo at
top of p. 439), by its violet colors when young,andby the tendency of the cap margin and
stem apex to remain violet even in old age. Fresh specimens mimic the blewit (Clitocybe
nuda) in size, shape,andcolor, but have a cortinaandrusty-brown spores. Closely related
species include: C. d;baphus, with a slightly pinker or more lilac capandgills which turn
brown more quickly (but otherwise very similar, if not the same);andC. caes;ostram;neus,
with a slightly grayer cap. There are dozens of other purple or violet "Bulbopodiums"-
see comments under C. olympianus for some of them.
Cortinarius olympianus
CAP 3-7 (10) cm broad, convex becoming plane, the margin inrolled at first; surface
smooth, slimy or viscid when moist, pale violet or lilac, sometimes fading to lilac-white,
or sometimes tinged yellowish at center. Flesh fairly thick, white to grayish. GILLS pale
lilac to pinkish-lilac when young, becoming browner in age but usually retaining a lilac
tinge for a long time; notched or adnexed to adnate, close, not staining when bruised.
STALK 3-7 cm long, 0.7-1.2 cm thick at apex, solid, firm, not viscid, with a distinct basal
bulb that is rimmed, at least when young; lilac or pale violet above, often brownish-stained
at base. CORTINA scanty, lilac-white, often leaving a few hairs on stalk which trap falling
spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, slightly
roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers, fairly common in the
Pacific Northwest in the late summerandfall, especially where there is fir, spruce, and/or
hemlock. I have seen large fruitings in Mt. Rainier National Park in late September.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several viscid-capped Cortinarii with a rimmed bulb and
overall lilac to violet-white color. There are several similarly colored species that favor
hardwoodsandare especially prominent in eastern North America. These include:
C. m;ch;ganens;sandC. caes;ocyaneus, both larger with conspicuous bulbsandpale violet
to pale bluish-violet overall color (when fresh), the latter with a whitish universal veil;
C. vel;cop;a, similar to the previous two species but discoloring ochre to buff or tan on the
capandbasal bulb with age (often rather quickly) C. aggregatus, with darker violet gills
when youngandonly a small. oblique bulb at the stem base C. caerulescens, with adarker
blue or violet-blue cap when young;andC. cyanites (see couplet #72 of the key to
Cortinarius). There are also several species that are very similar in size, shape,andcolor
but do not have viscid caps, e.g., C. argentatusandC. subargentatus (see comments under
C. a/bovio/aceusandphoto On p. 448).
Cortinarius cedretorum
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin when young, becoming broadly con-
vex or plane surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, at first yellow but darkening
slowly to cinnamon-brown, orange-brown, or reddish-brown from the center outward,
the margin often remaining yellowish. Flesh thick, firm, pallid to pale yellow with distinct
lavender or violet areas near cap cuticleandin stalk; often ochraceous-yellow in base of
stalk; odor mild. GILLS close, adnate to adnexed, yellow or sometimes greenish-yellow
when young, dull cinnamon-brown in age, but often with an intermediate lavender to dull
purple phase. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1.5-3 cm thick at apex, with a conspicuous, abrupt
basal bulb which is rimmed, at least when youngandis 3-7 cm broad; solid, not viscid,
color variable: pale lavender or yellow at apex or throughout, becoming dingy or often
rusty-stained in age, the bulb usually yellow. CORTINA pale yellow to greenish-yellow,
usually leaving hairs on the stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown;
spores 11-14 x 6.5-8 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, mainly in western
North America. It is sometimes common in our area under oak in the late fallandwinter; in
the Pacific Northwest it favors conifersandin the Southwest I've seen it in mixed woods of
aspen, spruce,andfir.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The yellow gillsandviscid yellow cap when young plus the beautiful violet-
tinged flesh (see color plate!)andbulbous stalk form a distinctive set of characteristics.
In our local form the purplish phase of the gills is often transientanddifficult to detect.
C. aureoJulvus is a similar oak-loving species which may show violet in the flesh but not
in the gills. C. atkinsonianus shows the same transient violet gill phase as C. cedretorum,
but has an olive-yellow to yellowish to deep reddish-brown capandgrows with hard-
woods in eastern North America. C. montanus has violet-tinged gills with olive or yel-
lowish-olive edges when young, anda rusty-brown to olive-brown, yellow-brown, orvarie-
gated/ streaked cap. It is often common under old-growth conifers in western mountains,
particularly the Cascades.
Cortinarius scaurus group
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex with the margin inrolled somewhat at first,
expanding in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist, color variable: usually olive-green
to dark olive-brown, but in some varieties brownish at the centerandgreenish to greenish-
yellow at the margin,andin others bright grass-or citrine-green, often with a browner
center or brownish spotsandfibrils. Flesh pallid to yellowish, thick, firm; odorandtaste
usually mild. GILLS close, notched or adnexed to adnate, typically olive to greenish-
yellow (in some forms with a fleeting initial lavender or bluish-violet stage), but in some
forms yellow when young, all forms becoming browner or rustier as spores mature.
STALK 4-10 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick at apex, equal above, the base with a more or less
rimmed, abrupt bulb when young that may become oblique or obscure in age; usually
greenish like the cap or yellower or even pallid (in age), the apex sometimes bluish, the
bulb often sulfur-yellow; solid, not viscid. CORTINA olive to yellow, usually leaving
hairs on stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown;
spores 9-13 x 6-7.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed.
Some members of this group (see comments) favor conifersandare fairly common in the
Pacific Northwest; others grow under oakandother hardwoods, including one uniden-
tified variety that is common in our area in the fallandwinter with live oak (see comments).
EDIBILITY Due to difficulty in identification, this entire group should be avoided. The
group as a whole is probably edible, but I wouldn't bet my life on it-and that's just what
you do when testing a Cortinarius!
COMMENTS The above description has been broadened to include a number of bright
green to greenish-yellow species with a viscid capandwell-defined bulb (at least when
young). Mycologists prefer to refer to them collectively as the C. scaurus group (when
they refer to them at all, which is seldom), for they are a confusing lot, both in the field
and in the literature. They are readily distinguished as a group, however, by their color.
The "true" C. scaurus of Europe is said to have a spotted cap, slender stalk (less than 1 cm
thick),andgrow with conifers. Some of the other species in the group include: C. herpe-
ticus, very similar but with a thicker stalkandoften with violet-tinged immature gills and
fleshanda whitish basal bulb; C. prasinus, with an olive-colored cap, olive to olive-yellow
gills,andyellowish or olive-tinged stalk, fairly common in the Pacific Northwest under
conifers; C. virentophyllus, with a deep green cap that fades to yellow as it ages, green gills,
and a pale bluish stem, found under hardwoods in eastern North America; C.Jlavovirens,
with a farinaceous odor, greenish-yellow gills,andyellow stalk, reported from southern
California; C. orichalceusandC. ruJo-olivaceus, with a reddish to reddish-brown cap (at
least at center),andgreenish to yellowish stalk (the latter species is quite largeandrobust,
the former is smallerandcan have an oranger cap);andfinally, a distinctive but
unidentified species which is sometimes common under live oak in California. It has a
bright citrine-green cap (sometimes shaded with brown at the center), yellow gills when
young,anda yellowish stalk with a bulb at the base. Whether it is one of several similar
European species, or is unnamedandendemic to California is unclear, but it is definitely a
member of the C. scaurus group, which should satisfy all but the most hardcore Cortinarius
-categorizers. See also C. montanus (under C. cedretorum).
Cortinarius Julmineus
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane, the margin at first incurved; surface viscid
when moist, entirely yellow or with only the margin yellowandthe center fulvous to ochre
to orange-brown, sometimes with small spotlike scales. Flesh thick, firm, yellow to
yellowish-white or buff; odorandtaste mild or radishlike. GILLS close, adnate or
notched, yellow to yellow-brown or ochre, becoming ochre-cinnamonandfinally rusty-
brown as spores mature. STALK 3-7 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, often rather short and
stout, with a large rimmed bulb at the base; solid, firm, not viscid; yellowish-white or
yellow, sometimes becoming ochraceous in age. CORTINA pallid or yellowish, often
leaving hairs on stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-
brown; spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods; widely
distributed. It is not uncommon in our area in the fallandwinter in mixed woods and
under live oak.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species typifies a number of yellowish to rusty-orangeCortinarii with
a viscid cap, yellowish to orange gills,anda distinctly rimmed bulb when young. The
rimmed bulb places it in the colorful subgenus Bulbopodium,andthe yellowish or pallid
flesh separates it from another "Bulbopodium," C. cedretorum. Other species: C.Julgens
is similar but brighter orange in color; C. elegantior is also similar but has larger spores
(12-16 microns long), while C. elegantioides has even larger sporesanda decidedly bitter
taste. There are also several beautiful "Bulbopodiums" with a bright yellow cap (or yellow-
margined with a redder, browner, or oranger center)andlilac to violet gills at first. These
include: C. metarius, common under spruceandfir in western North America, with a
fairly broad basal bulb; C. calochrous, widespread under both hardwoodsandconifers
and very similar to C. metarius. but with a smaller bulbandslightly shorter spores; C.
citrinipedes, cap yellowish with a darker brown margin;andC. cyanopus (=c. amoene-
lens), widespread, with an ochre cap, bitter-tasting cap cuticle,anddeep violet gills when
young.
Cortinarius multijormis
CAP 4-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate, the margin at first
inrolled; surface smooth, viscid when moist, ochre to ochre-buff to tawny or yellow-brown
or occasionally more reddish or fulvousandsometimes becoming rustier in age, often with
a whitish silky bloom when young. Flesh thick, firm, pallid; odor mild or slightly pungent.
GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first whitish, then tan or watery brown,
finally rusty-cinnamon. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-2 (2.5) cm thick at apex, usually with a
bulb at the base that is abrupt when young but often obscure or even absent in age; dry,
solid, firm, white or discoloring tan or ochre. UNIVERSAL_VEIL disappearing or leaving
a thin whitish film on cap. CORTINA scanty, white, disappearing or leaving a few hairs
on stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-brown; spores 7-11 x 4-6
microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods (mainly under coni-
fers); widely distributed. It is common throughout much of the West, but infrequent or
absent in our area. I have seen large fruitings under spruce near Santa Fe, New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Unknown. It is eaten in Europe, but I can find no information on the North
American version,andthere are too many similar species for me to recommend it.
COMMENTS The viscid, ochre to tan capandpallid to tan immature gills serve to dis-
tinguish this species from most other Cortinarii. The capandgill color suggest a Hebe/oma,
but the spores are cinnamon-brownandthe odor is not radishlike. The hoary white film on
young caps is reminiscent of the gypsy mushroom (Rozites caperata), but the veil is not
membranous. There are many similar Cortinarii with non-viscid caps that sometimes
mingle with C. mu/tiformis (see C. /aniger). Other viscid-capped species with an equal to
club-shaped (but not abruptly bulbous) stalk include: C. turmalis, with a tawny to fulvous
or yellow-brown to darker brown capanda well-developed white veil that usually leaves
a distinct fibrillose sheath and/or ring on the stalk; C. cliduchusandC. latus, without
such a copious veil but otherwise similar to C. turmalis (the latter with a paler cap); C.
crass us, a stout, thick-stemmed species (see comments under C. ba/teatus); C. varius,
a widespread species with a fulvous to bright yellow-brown or ochre capandviolet gills
when young plus a white stalk; C. variicolor, with a purplish to brownish cap, lilac gills
when young,anda fibrillose, whitish or lilac-tinged stalk;andC. claricolor, with bluish-
gray to brownish gills, a yellower cap,andmore copious universal veil. All but the last
species favor conifersandoccur fairly commonly in the Pacific Northwest and/or Rocky
Mountains.
Cortinarius magnivelatus
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex becoming plane or irregularly undulating; surface moist or
dry but not viscid, smooth orfibrillose, entirely white or white at marginandochre toward
the center, often stained buff or ochraceous in age or in bruised areas; margin incurved.
Flesh thick, firm, white to buff; odor mild. GILLS close, slightly decurrent to adnate or
adnexed, whitish when very young, becoming buffandthen tawny-brown to brown; often
forked near the stalk. STALK 4-6 cm long, 1-3 cm thick at apex, often (but not always)
enlarged below, colored like cap or whiter, solid. VEIL thick, tough, membranous, elastic,
whitish, typically covering the gills through maturity or shredding radially but not
normally detaching from the capandstalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 9-14
x 6-8 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under mountain conifers (especially firandpine),
usually buried in the duff; fairly common throughout the higher mountains of California,
particularly in the late springandsummer, but probably more widespread.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The whitish color, underground growth habit,andtough, thick, persistent
veil distinguish this Cortinarius from most others. Presumably the latter features are adap-
tations to the pendulum-like changes of weather that occur in our western mountains.
Many Cortinarii (particularly "Bulbopodiums") tend to fruit under the duff in dry
weather, but they do not have the persistent membranous veil ofthis species. That the veil
does not break suggests that this species is on its way to becoming "gastroid." The spores,
however, are forcibly discharged (hence a spore print is obtainable), unlike the truly
gastroid genus Thaxterogaster (see p. 734). The membranous nature of the vei can
lead to confusion with other brown-spored genera, but the overall aspect is clearly "cor-
tinarioid." Several other semi-gastroid Cortinarii occur in western North America. Like
C. magniveialUs. they have a persistent veilandtend to grow under the duff, although
the mature caps may surface if conditions are wet enough. These species include: C.
wiebeae, discovered in the Cascades, similarly colored but larger with thin, fragile gills
that are brown or rusty (not whitish) when young; C. verrucisporus, fairly common in
the Sierra Nevada, with a yellow to yellow-brown or rusty-stained capanda thinner
yellowish veil that stretches from the stalk or stalk base to the cap marginandusually tears
radially (see above photo), plus broad gills, a frequently underdeveloped stalk,andvery
coarsely warted spores; C. bigelow;;, fairly common in Idaho, with a pale yellow-brown
to yellowish cap, whitish veil,anda short, fat bulbous stalk;andC. velatus of the Sierra
Nevada, easily distinguished by its purplish to lavender-tinged capandsomewhat thinner,
semi-cobwebby (but persistent) veil. Other semi-gastroid species undoubtedly occur in the
West but have yet to be described.
C ortinarius regalis
CAP (4) 6-15 cm broad, convex with an inrolled margin, becoming broadly umbonate to
plane or with margin slightly uplifted in age; surface dry or very slightly tacky, usually with
a large patch or patches of white fibrillose universal veil tissue at first; background
brownish to dingy flesh-colored to dull brown with a vinaceous tinge, often appearing
somewhat streaked. Flesh thick, pallid or tinged vinaceous or cap color; odor mild to some-
what musty or sometimes fruity. GILLS usually adnexed or notched, pallid in button
stage, becoming grayish-brown to dull watery-brownandeventually dark brown. STALK
6-16 cm long, (1) 2-3.5 cm thick at apex, with a large, abrupt and/or rimmed bulb at base
(3-6 cm thick); dry, solid, firm pallid or tinged cap color, fibrillose. UNIVERSAL_VEIL
whitish, felty-fibrillose, often leaving remnants on capandfibrils or hairs on stalk which
become rusty-stained. CORTINA white, disappearing or also leaving hairs on stalk.
SPORE_PRINT dull rusty-brown; spores 7-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, finely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; known only from Cali-
fornia, where it usually grows with oak. I find it regularly in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The fairly large size, thick bulbous stalk, absence of distinct violet hues,
and whitish veil material on the cap combine to distinguish this Cortinarius. The bulb is
typical of the subgenus Bulbopodium, but the cap is not truly viscid, making this species
something of an anomaly. Viscid-capped species with conspicuous whitish veil remnants
on the capanda prominent bulb at the base of the stalk include: C. calyptratus, medium-
sized, with violet gills when young, occurring under conifers in northern California; and
C. calyptrodermus, larger, with deep violet gills when young, occurring under hardwoods
in eastern North America. Another viscid-capped species with purplish ( or purplish-blue)
gills when young, C. volvatus, has a universal veil which forms a whitish sheath or"volva"
on the basal bulb, but does not normally leave conspicuous remnants on the cap.
Corlinarius genii/is (Deadly Cortinarius)
CAP 1-5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped at first, expanding somewhat in age but usually
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, not viscid but somewhat hygrophanous, tawny to
ochre to orange-brown or rusty-yellow, fading in age or as it dries. Flesh thin, yellowish.
GILLS fairly well-spaced, adnexed to adnate, ochre-yellow to cinnamon-brown becoming
browner in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 3-5 (7) mm thick, more or less equal, colored like
the cap or more cinnamon-colored; often (but not always) with traces of the yellow veil
when young; not viscid. UNIVERSAL_VEIL yellow, disappearing or leavinga few patches
or hairs on stalk. CORTINA also yellow, disappearing or leaving hairs on stalk. SPORE
PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9x 5.5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in troops in moss or duffunderconifers; widelydis-
tributed. It is sometimes abundant in the summerandfall in the Rocky Mountains and
Pacific Northwest, but is not likely to be collected by the average mushroom hunter.
EDIBILITY DEADLY POISONOUS! Fortunately, it is seldom eaten because of its
small size. Along with several other Cortinarii in the subgenus Leprocybe (notably C.
orel/anusandC. speciosissimus), it contains toxins which destroy the liver. Symptoms
are greatly delayed (it may be two weeks before they appear!), making the culprit difficult
to pinpoint.
COMMENTS This species would be just another"LBM" were it not for the fact that it
is deadly poisonous. The yellow-brown to dull orange-brown overall color, somewhat
hygrophanous cap, small size, yellow veil,andrusty-brown spores form a distinctly
undistinguished set of distinguishing features. It is most likely to be confused with the
C. cinnamomeus group, which is more brightly colored, does not have a hygrophanous
cap,andcontains different pigments (anthraquinones). Related species thought to be
deadly poisonous include C. ra;n;erens;s, C. orellanus,andC. spec;os;ss;mus. The latter
two species have caused a rash of deaths in Europe. They are somewhat larger (cap 3-9 cm
broadandtawny-brown to orange-brown, fulvous, or cinnamon-colored) than C. gen-
ti/is; C. speciosissimus has an umbonate cap, C. orel/anus has an un-umbonate cap
and a yellowish stem. They may well occur in North America, but their presence has not
yet been definitely established. C. rainierensis, on the other hand, was originally described
from the Pacific Northwest (under conifers). It is rusty-orange to tawny or brownish-
orange,andits cap is covered with small, more or less erect or protruding scales.
Cort;nar;us cotoneus group (Scaly Cortinarius)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming plane; surface dry, covered with small,
dark, fibrillose scalesandappearing blackish to olive-brown at the center where the scales
are densest,andgreenish to olive-brown, olive-yellow, or yellow-brown toward the margin
(sometimes paler overall inage). Flesh brownish to pale olive-yellow; odor often somewhat
radishlike. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, rusty-yellow to olive-yellow to dull
yellowish or yellow-brown, becoming dull orange to dark cinnamon-brown in age.
STALK4-15 cm long, 0.8-3 cm thick, equal or thicker at base; dry, solid, pale olive-yellow
or yellowish above, tawny to olive or colored like cap below, often dingier or browner
throughout in age. UNIVERSAL_VEIL yellow or olive-yellow, often leaving hairy fibrils
or patches on lower stalk. CORTINA disappearing or leaving a zone of hairs on upper
stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-9 x 5-7.5 microns,
elliptical to nearly round, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, widely distributed.
Our representative of this group is fairly common in tanoak-madrone woods in the late fall
and winter, often mingling with C. col/initusandC. infractus. In the Pacific Northwest,
however, it is common under conifers.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but possibly very dangerous! It belongs to the same group (sub-
genus Leprocybe) as the deadly poisonous C. gentilis. C. orellanus.andC. speciosissimus.
COMMENTS The dry cap with small blackish scales on an olive-yellow to yellow-brown
background distinguishes this Cortinarius "complex" from most others. It is one of several
distinctive Cortinarii with a hairy and/or scaly cap. Others include: C. clandestinus, prac-
tically identical but with pallid gills when very young; the deep violet C. violaceus (see
description);anda striking trio of easternandnorthern hardwood-lovers: C. bolaris.
C. pholideus.andC. squamulosus (see the latter species for more details).
Cort;nar;us squamulosus Color Plate 108
(Bulbous Scaly Cortinarius)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface dry, fibrillose, soon
breaking up into dense fibrillose scales, brown tinged with purple at first, usually more
or less chocolate-brown in age, the background paler (yellower or more cinnamon).
Flesh rather thick, whitish to grayish or pinkish-tinged; odor often somewhat spicy, espe-
cially in age. GILLS sometimes adnate at first but usually deeply notched by maturity,
close, dark purplish or purplish-brown soon becoming brown to cinnamon-brown or
chocolate-brown. STALK 6-15 cm long, 1-2 cm thick at apex, with a conspicuous basal
bulb 3-6 cm broad; smooth to fibrillose or slightly scaly, at first purplish-tinged, becoming
more or less cap-colored, often with a median bandlike ring (from universal veil?). COR-
TINA whitish to brownish, disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE
PRINT dark rusty-brown; spores 6-8 x 5-7 microns, elliptical to nearly round, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under hardwoods (especially oak), often in low wet
woods; not uncommon in the late summerandfall in northeasern North America. I have
seen impressive fruitings in MinnesotaandWisconsin, but have yet to find it on the west
coast. One source reports it from California but does not mention the habitat.
EDIBILITY ..Consistency very pleasantandflavor fairly good," says McIlvaine, who ate
almost anything. However, several relatives are either poisonous or haven't been tested.
COMMENTS Like C. violaceus. this species is one of the few truly distinctive Cor-
tinarii (i.e., one that beginners can recognize in the field), but like that species it is not
particularly common. The dry, purplish-brown to brown, densely scaly cap plus the
radically bulbous stem are its main features. Another scaly-capped species, C. phol;deus,
is common under birch in the Northeast, often on or near rotten logs,andalso occurs
rarely in the Pacific Northwest. Its stalk is equal or only slightly thicker at the base and
is decorated with distinctive brown to cinnamon-brown scales like those on the cap (see
photo on p. 424)andthe fruiting body is slightly more cinnamon-colored overall than
C. squamulosus. It might be mistaken for a Pho/iota because of the brown scales on the
stemandtendency to grow on or near rotting logs, but the dry scaly cap, violet-tinged
stalk apex (when young),androughened, cinnamon-brown spores distinguish it. Still
another distinctive hardwood-loving easterner, C. bolar;s, is quite different: its cap and
stalk feature reddish scales, fibrils, and/or streaks on a whitish to yellowish background
(see photo on p. 425andcouplet #89 of the key to Cortinarius).
Cortinarius violaceus (Violet Cortinarius) Color Plate 109
CAP 3.5-12 (I5) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex, broadly umbonate, or
plane; surface dry, densely covered with minute erect, tufted hairs or small scales, giving it
a rough, somewhat velvety appearance; deep violet to nearly black, often with a metallic
luster in age; margin often somewhat palerandfringed or ragged. Flesh thick, deep violet
becoming grayish-violet; odor mild or cedarlike. GILLS adnate becoming adnexed or
notched, fairly well-spaced, deep violet or colored like cap, then dusted with cinnamon-
brown spores. STALK 6-18 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal or more often thicker
below, dry, fibrillose or woolly, deep violet, solid, firm. CORTINA violet, soon disap-
pearing or leaving a few indistinct hairs near top of stalk which may catch falling spores.
SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 13-17 x 7-10 microns, broadly elliptical to oblong,
roughened. Cystidia present on both the facesandedges of the gills.
HABITAT Solitary or in twosandthrees under conifers, sometimes next to rotting logs;
widely distributed but quite rare except in certain localities, such as the old-growth
coniferous forests of M 1. RainierandOlympic national parks in Washington. In our area
it shows up occasionally in the late fallandwinter in mixed woods; in northern California
it is sometimes quite common under Sitka spruce; in Europe it is said to favor hardwoods.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice. Its principal appeal is its beauty.
COMMENTS There are dozens upon dozens of violet Cortinarii, but none are as deeply
colored as this one. Its hue alone makes it as unique as it is unforgettable-the color
photograph hardly does it justice. The cap is dryandrough due to the presence of many
small scales or tufted fibrils, another distinctive feature. The color is at times so deep that it
borders on black, making it difficult to pick out in the shade of the forest. Its only rivals
for color are some of the deep blue or violet Leptonias (see L. carneaandL. nigroviolacea),
but they lck a cortinaandhave pinkish spores. Several colorful Cortinarii make wonder-
ful dyes (e.g., C. sanguineus. C. semisanguineus), but C. violaceus, despite its intense
color, is not one of them.
It is ironic to note that C. violaceus. the species chosen to typify the immense genus
Cortinarius. is perhaps the least typical of the 1000+ species! Besides its unique color it is
practically the only species to possess sterile cells (cystidia) on both the edgesandfaces
of the gills. This is the kind of difference to which the "splitters" (see p.lO)owealiving,and
C. violaceus might indeed have its own little genus by now, were it not that under the
existing rules of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, the "new" genus
would have to be Cortinarius (since C. violaceus is the type species or "model" of Cor-
tinarius),andall of the other 1000+ Cortinarii would have to be placed in a new genus
(or genera), thus compounding the confusion that already exists. Noteven the most ardent
"splitter" wants to be responsible for a mess like that! Perhaps as compensation, C. vio-
laceus is itself split by some "splitters" into two species: C. violaceus. with oblong-elli ptical
spores,andC. hercyn;cus, with rounder spores.
Cort;nar;us traganus (Lilac Conifer Cortinarius) Color Plate 106
CAP 4-13 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface
smooth, dry, finely silky or fibrillose, violet to lilac, sometimes with white wedge-shaped
sectors, occasionally also with rusty or ochraceous stains; margin often hung with veil
remnants. Flesh rusty-brown to tawny-or yellow-brown (often marbled) in the stalk,
usually paler in the capandyellower in the stalk base; odor often faintly pungent or sweet.
GILLS pale cinnamon or ochre-buff becoming cinnamon-or rusty-brown in age; fairly
well-spaced, adnexed to adnate. STALK 5-12 cm long, 1-3 (5) cm thick, usually enlarged
below, solid, dry, finely fibrillose, lilac or purplish, sometimes also with white areas.
CORTINA pale lilac, leaving hairs on upper stalk which turn rusty-brown from falling
spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (sometimes in clumps) under conifers;
widely distributed. It is a common late summerandfall mushroom in the mossy, old-
growth forests of the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but does not seem to
extend south into our area. I have often found it growing with the gypsy mushroom,
Rozites caperata.
EDIBILITY Not firmly established (like so many of us!), but poisonous according to one
sourceandmerely "indigestible" according to another.
COMMENTS This characteristic inhabitant of northern coniferous forests is easily
recognized by its beautiful lilac or lavender color, rusty-brown gillsandspores,andrusty
to tawny-brown flesh in the stalk. The latter feature distinguishes it from most other
members of the subgenus Sericeocybe of Cortinarius (see C. alboviolaceus),andthe
sweetish odor ("like overripe pears") that is frequently present is also distinctive. The cap
is not viscid as in C. olympianus, C. sodagnilUs,andothers,andthe presence of a cortina
separates it from the edible blewit (ClilOcybe nuda). Some authorities consider the Ameri-
can variant to be a distinct species, C. pyr;odorus, while reserving the name C. traganus
for the European version, which is said to smell "like goats:' Other species: C./ragrans
also smells like overripe pears, but has a slightly paler capandwhitish or lavender-tinged
flesh in the stalk. C. caes;ifo/;us has a buff to brownish cap, bluish gills when young, and
a fleeting, disagreeable odor. C. camphoratus has a lavender to lilac-white cap (fading to
buff), violet or bluish-lilac gillsandstalk when young,anda powerful, remarkably raunchy
odor of rotting meat or vegetables. The stench alone distinguishes it from other lilac
Cortinarii, although a more deeply colored species, C. amethyst;nus, is said to smell "like
burnt hair." C. camphoratus grows almost exclusively with conifersandis widely distri-
buted. I have found it in northern California under Sitka spruce, in November.
Cort;nar;us albov;olaceus (Silvery-Violet Cortinarius)
CAP 3-8 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped becoming convex or broadly umbonate to nearly
plane; surface dry, silky-shining, pale violet soon becoming pale silvery-violet, lilac-white,
or even whitish. Flesh pallid to pale violet; odor mild. GILLS adnate or adnexed or
notched, fairly close, pale violet to purple-gray, then eventually cinnamon-brown as spores
ripen. STALK 4-12 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick at apex, usually club-shaped or enlarged
at base, dry, silky, violet or pale violet above, clothed with whitish silky fibrils below(but
pale violet underneath the fibrils). UNIVERSAL_VEIL white, silky, usually forming a
thin, soft, silky sheath over lower half of stalk. CORTINA white, evanescent or leaving
hairs at top of stalk which trap falling spores. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10
x 4-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps in forest humus, associated mainly
with hardwoods; widely distributed. It turns up occasionally in our area in the late fall and
winter under tanoakandother trees, but I have never seen it in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The beautiful silvery-violet to lilac-white overall color plus the dry silky
cap, mild odor,andwhitish universal veil sheath on the stem distinguish this attractive
mushroom from its close relatives in the subgenus Sericeocybe (a closely-knit group of
dry-capped Cortinarii with violet to pale lilac pigments). The flesh is never rusty-brown or
tawny as in C. traganus,andthe gills are violet-tinged when young. Inocybe li/acina is
somewhat similar but smallerandmore umbonate, withdull brown sporesanda spermatic
odor. Similar species include: C. argentatus, lilac-blue to violet-gray but with a thicker,
stouter, prominently bulbous stalk (see above photo) that lacks a silky white sheath and
with a radishlike odorandtendency to turn ochre in age, found mostly under hardwoods
(especially eastern); C. subargentatus, favoring hardwoods, very similar to C. argen-
tatus, but lacking the odor; C. subpulchrijolius, with a grayish-buff cap that often
develops ochraceous or rusty stains inage, dull purplish immature gills,anda dull purplish,
equal or club-shaped stalk that is sheathed by veil remnants, found under hardwoods in
eastern North America; C. malachius, favoring conifers, violet-tinged at first but its cap
soon becoming ochre or brownish;andC. caninusandC. anomalus,.growing under both
hardwoodsandconifers, the former with a violet-tinged cap that becomes reddish-brown
and buff to tan universal veil zones on the stalk, the latter with a violet-tinged to gray or
brown cap, distinctly violet fleshandviolet stalk apex,andochre veil zones on the stalk.
For more odoriferous and/or brightly colored "Sericeocybes," see C. lraganus,andfor
violet or violet-tinged hygrophanous Cortinarii, see C. evernius.
Cortinarius armillatus (Bracelet Cortinarius)
CAP 5-13 cm broad, obtuse to broadly bell-shaped or convex, becoming nearly plane or
broadly umbonate; surface smooth or sometimes with small scales in age, not viscid and
only slightly hygrophanous (if at all); dull tawny or yellow-brown to rusty-brown, orange-
brown, or reddish-brown; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pallid
or brownish; odor usually radishlike. GILLS fairly well-spaced, broad, adnate toadnexed
or notched, pale or dull cinnamon becoming rusty-brown as spores mature. STALK 7-15
cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, club-shaped ( thicker below), dry, whitish to brownish with
one or more (usually 2-3) dull red bands or "bracelets" below the cortina. UNIVERSAL
VEIL fibrillose, forming reddish bands on stalk. CORTINA whitishandcopious, often
leaving hairs on upper stalk that turn rusty-brown from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT
rusty-brown; spores (7) 9-13 x 5.5-7.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary or more often scattered or in groups on ground in woods; associated
primarily if not exclusively with birchandfound throughout the range of birch (therefore
absent in California). It is especially common in northeastern North America in the late
summerandfall, but I have also seen it in northern IdahoandBritish Columbia.
EDIBILITY A good edible-as I can personally attest. It is one ofthe most distinctive
of the Cortinarii, but you should be very cautious nevertheless!
COMMENTS The hallmarks of this common eastern species are the reddish bracelets
on the stalk, yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown cap,andassociation with birch. In the
Pacific Northwest a slightly smaller conifer-lover, C. haematochel;s, occurs. It also has
reddish bracelet(s) on the stem, but its spores are much smallerandnearly round. A third
species with reddish (or vinaceous) fibrillose patches or "bracelets," C. boulderens;s, is
even smaller (cap 2-5 cm broad, stalk 3-7 mm thick at apex), with a violet-brown to reddish-
brown or brownish capandviolet-tinged immature gillsandstalk apex. It also grows under
conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but I have found something very similar-if not the
same-in our area in mixed woods (see photo above). C. subtestaceus is a similar but
smaller easterner with reddish-brown to brown "bracelets:' Also see C. anomalus
(under C. alboviolaceus)andC. crocolitus (under the C. col/initus group), both of which
have more ochraceous-colored bands or patches on the stalk.
Cortinarius rubripes (Red-Footed Cortinarius)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, obtuse to convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface
hygrophanous but not viscid, watery cinnamon to reddish-brown fading to tawny, ochra-
ceous, or ochre-buff, sometimes tinged with pink or sometimes with concentric zones;
finely silky-fibrillose in age, the margin sometimes tinged violet when young. Flesh thin,
reddish-brown or pallid; odor mild. GILLS fairly well-spaced, adnate to adnexed or
notchedandseceding; often tinged violet in button stage, but soon tawny to cinnamon, and
finally cinnamon-brown. STALK 4-9 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick at apex, enlarged below,
dry, pallid or brownish above, the baseandmycelium fiery orange to red-orange or peach-
colored. UNIVERSAL_VEIL red-orange, leaving remnants at base of stalk. CORTINA
disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores
7-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious under hardwoods; originally described
from Michigan, but it-or something very much like it-also grows in our oak-tanoak-
madrone woods in DecemberandJanuary. In eastern North America it is sometimes
abundant after late summer rains.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The bright orange to fiery red stalk baseandoverall brown to reddish-
brown color combine to distinguish this Cortinarius from most others. A European
species, C. bu;ll;ard;, is probably the same, in which case that would be the "correct" name
for our species. C. armi//atusandC. haematoche/is are somewhat similar, but normally
show one to four dull reddish bands on the stalk rather than having a bright red-orange
base. C. m;n;atopus is a small species (cap 1-3 cm broad) with orangish gills when young
and a slender stalk that is wholly or partially sheathed by vermillion fibrils (densest at the
base); it is not uncommon under conifers in the Pacific Northwest.
C ortinarius evernius
CAP 3-10 cm broad, conical to bell-shaped at first (and scarcely wider than the stalk), then
becoming convex or obtusely umbonate to plane; surface smooth, markedly hygro-
phanous: violet or brown with a purple tinge when moist, quickly fading to vinaceous or
reddish-brown or paler as it loses moisture; margin atfirst with whitish silkiness. Flesh thin,
at first violet or violet-tinged, butfadingas it dries or ages. GILLSat first violet with whitish
edges, but quickly fading to brownandthen darkening to cinnamon-brown; adnate or
becoming notched, well-spaced. STALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or
narrowed toward base, usually rather longandoften extending deep into the humus or
moss; not viscid; pale to deep violet when fresh (darker below), but often covered with veil
material at first,andfading as it dries. UNIVERSAL_VEIL whitish or violet-tinged,
forming fibrillose patches or zones on stalk which may disappear in age. CORTINA
whitish, often disappearing. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 8-10 x 5-6 microns,
elliptical, slightly roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under conifers, often in moss; widely distri-
buted but mainly northern. It is not a common species, but several difficult-to-distinguish
look-alikes (see comments) are quite ubiquitous, including at least two species in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS This species has been included to represent a large number of medium-
sized, hygrophanous Cortinarii in the subgenus Telamonia that are violet or violet-tinged
when freshandmoist. They are very difficult to identifyandsome are so markedly hygro-
phanous that they lose their original color in an hour or two-or in the time it takes to bring
them home! Other "Telamonias" showing violet shades when freshandmoist include:
C. lucorum, a fairly common conifer-lover that differs from C. evernius only in having
a more or less club-shaped stem; C. saturn;nus, with a brown capandmore or less equal
stalk that is violet aboveandwhitish below; C. brunneus, which sometimes shows violet
at the stalk apex (see comments under C. /aniger)andhas an equal to club-shaped stalk;
C. subpurpureus, with yellow or yellowish-buff veil patches on the lower portion of the
stalk; C. adustusandC. ;mpenn;s, with little or no veil remnants on the stalk;andC.
plum;ger, with a grayish-violet to watery violet or grayish-blue-tinged stalk that quickly
fades to whitishanda cap that is brownish to buff beneath a white to grayish-white,
fibrillose-hairy layer. All of these are partial to conifers, but another species, C. torvus,
favors hardwoodsandis the most distinctive of the lot. It has broad, widely-spaced gills
that are deep purplish when young, a brownish to deep purplish cap, sweetish odor, and
club-shaped or bulbous stalk that often has a well-formed annulus (ring)-an unusual
feature for a Cortinarius! It is fairly common in eastern North America but I can find no
mention of it being found in the West. Another species that tends to form an annulus,
C. urb;cus, does occur in the West, but it has a much paler cap than C. torvus.
Cortinarius laniger (Brown Cortinarius)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, broadly bell-shaped or convex becoming broadly convex or some-
times plane; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid, dark reddish-brown or chest-
nut-brown to reddish-brown or cinnamon-brown when moist, fading as it loses moisture
to pale reddish-brown or tan; often covered with a white silky coating when very young,
especially at margin. Flesh whitish or colored like cap. GILLS fairly close or rather well-
spaced, adnate to adnexed or notched, pale rusty-brown becoming a beautiful cinnamon-
brown. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, enlarged at base (at least when young), dry,
solid, firm; cinnamon to brown (like cap) beneath a coating or patches of fibrillose whitish
veil remnants. UNIVERSAL_VEIL fibrillose or slightly cottony, white, usually leaving a
whitish silky coating or patchesandzones of white fibrils on stalk and sometimes even a
slight annulus (ring). CORTINA disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk.
SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 7-10 x 5-6 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers; widely distributed. I have
seen large fruitings under spruce in the Rocky Mountains,andhave also found it in the
Pacific Northwest. In our area similar species (see comments) are common under oak.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS This medium-sized brown Cortinarius with the hygrophanous cap is one
of a multitude of medium-sized brown Cortinarii with hygrophanous caps that belong to
the baffling subgenus Telamonia. C. laniger is best recognized by its cinnamon-brown
colorandclub-shaped stalk that is covered by whitish veil remnants,andby the complete
absence of violet shades on the fruiting body. Similar "BUM's" (Boring Ubiquitous
Mushrooms) are legion. Some have an equal to club-shaped or bulbous stalk like that of
C. laniger. These include: C. bulbosus, with a paler or duller brown, swollen stalk and
slightly smaller spores, found under both hardwoodsandconifers; C. bivelus, especially
common in the southern Rockies, with a cinnamon-brown to tawny-brown capandlarger
spores; C. triJormis, with a strongly hygrophanous cap (dark reddish-brown when moist,
yellow-brown or tan as it dries out), but with a transient veil that leaves only slight traces
(if any) on the stalk, found under both hardwoodsandconifers but favoring oak in Cali-
fornia; C. distans, with minute branlike scales on the capandwidely spaced gills, found
under oak, ponderosa pine, etc.; C. armeniacus, with a swollen or bulbous stalkanddeep
yellow-brown cap that fades to orange-buff or pale yellow-orange as it loses moisture;
C. brunneus, a widespread nondescript conifer-lover with an equal to club-shaped, dull
brown stalk whose apex sometimes has a slight violet or vinaceous tinge; C. dilutusandC.
biJormis, both smaller with a more or less equal stalkanddeep reddish-brown (moist) to
buff (dry) cap, favoring northern conifers (the former with nearly round spores);andC.
pinetorum, a fungal feature of western coniferous forests with a fibrillose, white to silvery-
gray to pale brownish-gray cap that maybe slightly tacky when wet, plus brownish gills and
a whitish, more orless club-shaped stalk. Other species ha ve a stalk which is spindle-shaped
and/or tapered below (or occasionally equal). These include: C. privignusandC. cacao-
color, with a dark or dull vinaceous-brown to cocoa-colored cap when moist (the former
developing a silky whitish sheen as it loses moisture)andstalk which lacks persistent veil
remnants; C. damascenus, similar to the previous two species but with an equal or tapered
stalk that is covered with a persistent coating of white veil fibrils;andC. duracinus, which
has a whitish stalkanda cinnamon-brown cap that fades to buff or pale tan as it dries out.
The above species are but a few of the hundreds of brownish "Telamonias." As already
pointed out, recognition of these fungi is very difficultandnone should be eaten. For
medium-sized "Telamonias" with a violet tinge when moist, see C. evernius,andfor
smaller species, see the C. obtusus group.
452
CORTINARIACEAE
Cort;narlus obtusus group (Little Brown Cortinarius)
CAP 1-4 cm broad, bell-shaped to conical at first, expanding in age but usually retaining
a blunt umbo; surface smooth, hygrophanous but not viscid, brown to reddish-brown to
tawny-brownandfaintly striate when moist, fading to tan or paler as it loses moisture.
Flesh thin, brownish; odor usually radish-or iodine-like (but often faint). GILLS light
to dull brown becoming cinnamon-brown in age, close, adnate to adnexed. STALK
4-8 cm long, 2 mm thick, equal or often slightly thicker in the middleandtapered below;
dry, hollow in age, fragile; colored like the cap or often yellower or paler, whitish or pallid
as it loses moisture. UNIVERSAL_VEILandCORTINA scanty, pallid or whitish, disap-
pearing or leaving a few fibrils on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown to rusty-brown; spores
8-10x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under conifers, especially pine
and spruce; widely distributed. This speciesandits numerous look-alikes(see comments)
are common in most regions, including ours.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment!
COMMENTS The above description encompasses several small boring, brownish
Cortinarii ("LBM's") sometimes referred to as the C. obtusus-c. acutus complex. (c.
acutus is slightly slimmer, smaller,andpaler than C. obtusus, with a more acute umbo;
another species, C. scandens, is bluntly umbonate like C. obtusus, but has smaller spores.)
The "true" C. obtususandC. acutus both have rather pale stems (usually paler than the
cap or even whitish). Because of their small size, they might be confused with Inocybes
or Galerinas. The former, however. have duller brown spores while the latter usually have
a yellower fruiting bodyandtypically grow in moss or on wood. Other small..T elamonias"
are legion, especially under northern or mountain conifers. Even experts have difficulty
differentiating them from each otherandthere is absolutely no reason for the amateur to
even try. Nevertheless, I will mention a few of them for the categorically-inclined: C.
subcusp;datusandC.fasc;atus resemble C. acUlUS, but the first has yellowish veil material
on the stalk, or if not, can be told by its dark cinnamon-brown gills when young,andthe
latter has a darker stalkandtends to grow in clusters. C. stemmatus is a slightly larger
species with a blackish-brown cap that fades to reddish-brown or reddish-cinnamon as it
loses moisture plus a mild odorandwhitish veil material on the stalk (see photograph);
it is common under conifers (especially pine in our area). C. n;gTocusp;datus can usually
be told by its dark cap with a prominent black umbo,andC. ;nc;sus by its minutely scaly,
brownish to reddish-brown capandwhite veil remnants on the stalk. C. psammocephalus
has tawny-brown fibrillose scales or patches on both the capandstalk. C. paleaceus has
a blackish-brown cap that fades to dingy brown in age, whitish veil remnants on the cap
marginandstalk (at least when young),anda geranium-like odor; it grows in mossy bogs
or other wet places under spruce. C. decipiens also has a dark cap (vinaceous-brown or
darker when moist), but it lacks white veil remnants on the stalk, while C. washingtonensis
can easily be told by its black-staining gills. All of the above species are especially common
under northern conifers, but some may also occur with hardwoods. Finally, there are a
number of small "Telamonias" that are distinctly violet or violet-tinged when fresh and
moist, including: C. pulchellus, violet overall when youngandespecially fond of alder;
and C. subflexipes, which has a rusty-brown to ochraceous cap but shows violet in the
gillsandstalk apex when young. For larger "Telamonias," see C./anigerand C. evernius.
C ortinarius cinnamomeus group
CAP 1.5 cm broad, obtusely conical becoming convex to more or less plane or often with
an umbo; surface dry, finely fibrillose, yellowish to olive-yellow to tawny, ochre-buff,
yellow-brown, or olive-brown, becoming more cinnamon-colored in age. Flesh thin,
yellowish or olive-yellow. GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, yellow to olive-
yellow becoming tawny, then rustier in age as spores ripen. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 3-5
(10) mm thick, more or less equal, often curved, dry, finely fibrillose or with small fibrillose
scales, yellow to yellow-brown or ochraceous, often browner toward baseandduller in age.
CORTINA yellow or yellow-olive, disappearing or leaving inconspicuous hairs on upper
stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 6-9.5 x 4-5 microns, elliptical, minutely
roughened.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground under conifers, especially pine;
widely distributed,andcommon in our area from late fall through early spring.
EDIBILITY To be avoided! It is said to be edible, but some very similar species (see C.
gentilis) are deadly poisonous!
COMMENTS Also known as Dermocybe cinnamomea, this contrary little Cortinarius
and its numerous look-alikes are not cinnamon-colored at all. Rather, the dominant colors
are yellow, yellow-olive,andochre. The color plus the slender stem, dry cap,andevan-
escent fibrillose veil (cortina) are characteristic of a large complex of species in the
subgenus Dermocybe which are best left to the specialist. It may actually be that the "true"
C. cinnamomeus does not occur here, but a number of very similar species certainly do,
including: C. cinnamomeo-Iuteus, said to be" very common in the Pacific Northwest;
C. humboldtensis(from northern California)andC. olivaceopictus, the latter with reddish
to orange fibrils on the stalk; C. raphanoides, olive-yellow, with a radish odor;andC.
thiersii, with larger spores, especially common under mountain conifers. Another group of
species, typified by C. croceofol;us, have saffron to rusty-yellow or orange gills when
younganda browner or more cinnamon-colored cap. They are just as common as the C.
cinnamomeus group,andtheir ranks include: C. aurant;obas;s, with larger spores; C. zak;;,
with deep orange gills when youngandstalk coated with brown tovinaceous-brownfibrils;
and C. aureifol;us, a very distinctive species that usually grows in sand (often partially
buried!) under pines,andhas orange to brownish-orange ( orin one form, yellowish) gills, a
cinnamon-brown to dark reddish-brown cap,andlarger spores. Finally, there is C. callis-
teus, a bright yellow to orange-ochre species with a thick club-shaped stem (at least I cm
thick at apexand2.5 cm or more thick at base). None of these species should be eaten.
(Note: some authorities have a concept of C. cinnamomeus which more closely fits the
C. croceofo/ius of this book,andvice-versa, at least insofar as gill color is concerned.)
Cortinarius phoeniceus var. occidentalis
CAP 2.5-8 cm broad, convex becoming plane or broadly umbonate; surface dry, finely
fibrillose or silky, maroon-red or dark red to reddish-brown; margin sometimes lobed.
Flesh thin, reddish near cuticle, olive-brownish near gills; odor mild or slightly radishlike.
GILLS deep red, vinaceous-red, or blood-red, becoming rustier as spores ripen; adnate to
adnexed or notched. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.4-1.2 cm thick, more or less equal, dry,
fibrillose, yellowish or ochre or sometimes brownish in old age. CORTINA scanty, yel-
lowish, disappearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown;
spores 6-8 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups under conifers in the Pacific Northwest and
California; sometimes common in the fallandearly winter. In our area it also grows with
madrone and/or huckleberry, but never in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Not recommended, but an excellent choice for dyeing (not dying!).
COMMENTS The beautiful deep red gillsandmaroon-red to reddish-brown cap are set
off nicely by the yellowish stem, making this Cortinarius (or Dermocybe) relatively easy to
identify. Other species: C. sem;sangu;neus also has red gills, but has a slender yellow stem
and yellowish to ochre or olive-brown cap; it occurs in California, but is more common in
eastern North Americaandthe Pacific Northwest. Another species, C. californ;cus, has a
smooth, hygrophanous cap that is dark. rusty-red when moist but fades as it loses moisture.
It has orange-red to rusty-orange or "burnt sienna" gills,anda rather long(7-15 cm) stalk
that is paler than the cap (dull orange or even paler, often with orange fibrils from the
cortina). It is known only from west coastandoccurs in a variety of habitats, but seldom in
large numbers. For completely red species, see C. sanguineus.
Cortinarius sanguineus (Blood-Red Cortinarius)
CAP (I) 2-5 cm broad, obtusely bell-shaped becoming convex to plane or broadly umbo-
nate; surface dry, silky or finely fibrillose, colored evenly deep carmine-red to blood-red
or deep red. Flesh thin, blood-red to reddish-purple; odor mild or faintly pleasant. GILLS
close, adnate to adnexed, blood-red to dark blood-red, but in age dusted with cinnamon-
colored spores. STALK 4-10 cm long, 3-5 (8) mm thick, equal or slightly thicker below,
same color as cap or slightly darker, dry, base with yellowish to yellow-orange or some-
times pinkish downy hairs. CORTINA red or at least tinged red, often scantyanddisap-
pearing or leaving a few hairs on upper stalk. SPORE_PRINT rusty-to reddish-brown;
spores 6-9 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups, mainly under conifers and
often in beds of moss; widely distributed but generally rare. In favorable years it fruits in
the fall under spruceandfir along the northern California coast, but never in large num-
bers. I have found it as far south as Mendocino County in California.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Do not experiment! Like many species in the subgenus Dermo-
cybe, it can be used to dye wool or yarn, yielding a brilliant array of pinks, reds,andpurples.
COMMENTS Also known as Dermocybe sangu;nea, this beautiful mushroom is easily
recognized by its blood-red to dark red color, small size,andevanescent cortina. It might
be mistaken for a brightly colored Hygrocybe, but the spores are not whiteandthe gills
are not waxy. There is no yellow in the ca p and/or stalk as in C. phoeniceus var. occidenta/is
and C. semisanguineus.andthe cap is not hygrophanous as in C. californicus (see
comments under C. phoeniceus var. occidenta/is). Other completely red Dermocybes
include: C. pun;ceus, said to differ by its ochraceous to golden-brown cortina, dark red to
purple-red color,andpreference for hardwoods;andC. cinnabar;nus, also favoring
hardwoods (but not limited to them), with a slightly larger, cinnabar-red to rusty-red
or dark red fruiting bodyandlarger spores. The latter species has often been reported from
eastern North America, but according to Cortinarius-experts Alexander Smith and
Joseph Ammirati, American material differs slightly from the European version. (At least
one common hardwood-lover has been recognized as a "new" species, C. marylandensis.)
Inocybe sororia (Corn Silk Inocybe)
CAP 2-8 (10) cm broad when expanded, sharply conical or bell-shaped when young, often
expanding in age but retaining a prominent umbo, the margin usually uplifted or splitting
in old age; surface dry, silky, radially fibrillose, creamy to pale yellowish, honey-yellow,
or straw-colored, often somewhat browner at the center or in age. Flesh thin; odor usually
strongly pungent, like freshly husked or green corn. GILLS close or crowded, pallid
becoming yellowish, then olive-yellowandfinally brownish-gold or brown, the edges
usually paler; adnate to adnexed, often seceding to free. STALK 3-14 cm long, 2-5 ( 10) mm
thick, equal or with a slightly enlarged base, white or tinged cap color, fibrilloseandoften
scurfy. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 10-13 (17)x 5-8 microns, elliptical or
bean-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills thin-walled.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in woods; widely distributed.
In our area it is common in the fallandwinter under live oakandpine; farther north it
favors conifers. I have seen large fruitings locally as well as in Oregon.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! It contains high concentrations of muscarine.
COMMENTS A commonandprominent Inocybe, easily recognized by its sharply
conical to umbonate, creamy to yellowish, fibrillose capandodor of fresh green corn. The
stem is often quite longandslender. I. Jast;g;ata is a very similar, widespread species with a
strongly spermatic odoranda slightly darker (yellow-brown to brownish-ochre) cap, at
least at the center. Other species: I. cooke; has a silky yellowish cap, small but prominent
bulb at the base of the stem, slight odor,andsmaller spores; I. nap;pes has a blunter
brownish cap, a cortina (cobwebby veil) when young, a turniplike bulb at the base of the
stem,andwarty (nodulose) spores; I. mixtilis also has warty spores, but is smaller than
I. napipesandlacks a cortina. The latter two species are fairly common under conifers in
the Pacific Northwest, but I have not seen them locally. All of the above are poisonous.
Inocybejurana (Reddish Inocybe)
CAP 2-8 cm broad when expanded, conical or bell-shaped, expanding in age but usually
retaining an umbo; surface dry, radially fibrillose, buff or brownish with darker brown
fibrils, but soon flushed carmine, reddish-brown, or wine-red (vinaceous); center some-
times with small scales, margin often splitting in age. Flesh tinged pinkish or vinaceous,
thin; odor mild to somewhat fruity or unpleasant. GILLS pallid becoming grayish-brown
or dull brown, close, adnate to adnexed or even free. STALK 2-8 cm long, 4-10 (15) mm
thick, equal or slightly enlarged at base, dry, white or flushed cap color below. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 9-15 x 5-8 microns, elliptical or bean-shaped, smooth.
Cystidia on gills thin-walled.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground in woodsandat their edges;
widely distributed. In our area I have found it twice under live oak in the winter.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. According to some sources it is edible, but why tempt
fate? Several similar species are poisonous.
COMMENTS The deep reddish or vinaceous-toned cap is the hallmark of this illustrious
Inocybe. In other respects it rather resembles I. sororia, but does not smell like fresh
green corn. Other species: I. laetio, has a bright salmon-pink stemanddark reddish-brown
centered cap with a yellowish margin; it occurs under conifers in the Pacific N orthwestand
is one of numerous Inocybes "discovered"andnamed by Daniel Stuntz. I. oblectabilis
has a pale pink stalkandreddish-brown cap.
Inocybe macu/ala (Brown Inocybe)
CAP 2-8 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, becoming convex or plane with an obtuse
umbo; surface dry, radially fibrillose, dark brown to chestnut-brown, at first with whitish
down (at least at center) which may break up into small scales or wear away; margin often
lobed, splitting in age. Flesh thin, whitish; odor mild or slightly aromatic. GILLS pale
grayish becoming grayish-brown to olive-brown or dull brown, close, adnate to adnexed
or seceding. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.5-1.2 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base,
fibrillose-striate, white or flushed cap color (brownish). VEIL absent except for whitish
down on cap. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 9-12 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elliptical or bean-
shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills thin-walled.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woodsandunder trees; widely distributed.
Occasional in our area in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Poisonous; it contains muscarine.
COMMENTS Any medium-sized to large Inocybe with a dark brown fibrillose or hairy
capandsmooth spores can be referred hereandconveniently forgotten about. I have
encountered forms with an obnoxious odor, others which were mildandstill others with a
slightly aromatic or truffle-like smell. Undoubtedly more than one species is involved.
Another fairly large species, I. serot;na, has a brown cap with a whitish to yellowish-buff
centeranda bulb at the base of the stem. I. napipes( see comments under I. sororia) also has
a basal bulbandcan be quite large. There are also several smaller species that feature
white universal veil tissue at the center ofthe cap. These include: I. /anatodisca, cap brown
to yellow-brown with a moldy-looking patch of whitish fibrils at the center which may
disperse in age, a whitish stalk (at least when young),andcystidia only on the edges of the
gills plus a pungent to sweetish odor, fairly common in our area under oak but also
occurring with conifers;andI. s;ndon;a, similar to I. lanatodisca, but with cystidia on
the faces of the gills as well as the edges. Another species, I. a/bod;sca, has a lilac-gray
to pinkish-brown ( or sometimes whitish) cap with a smooth whitish urn bonate centeranda
basal bulb on the stalk; it is common in northern latitudes under both hardwoods and
conifers. None ofthe above species should be eaten.
Inocybe pyriodora (Fragrant Inocybe)
CAP 2-7 cm broad, bell-shaped or obtusely conical becoming broadly umbonate; surface
dry, at first silky-smooth but often fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly (especially at center) in age
(or with torn-up appearance); white, the fibrils becoming dingy ochre to yellow-brown or
brownish, sometimes pinkish-or reddish-stained in age. Flesh thin, white, slowly staining
pinkish or reddish when cut; odor fragrant, usually spicy (cinnamon-or matsutake-like)
but sometimes like overripe pears or unpleasant in old age. GILLS adnate to adnexed or
notched, close, whitish becoming dull cinnamon, brown, or reddish-tinged. STALK 4-10
cm long, 3-15 mm thick, more or less equal, white throughout or colored like cap except for
very apex, sometimes developing pinkish stains; smooth or finely fibrillose. VEIL fibril-
lose or cobwebby, evanescent. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 7-10 (12) x 4.5-7.5 microns,
elliptical to bean-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills with slightly thickened walls.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in woods or at their edges, under brush,
along trails, etc., favoring hardwoods but also occurring with conifers; widely distributed.
It is not uncommon in our area in the fallandwinter in mixed woodsandunder oak.
EDIBILITY To be avoided-despite the enticing odor it is probably poisonous.
COMMENTS This is one of several nondescript Inocybes with a spicy or fruity fragrance.
The odor is often reminiscent of the matsutake (Armillaria ponderosa), but is sometimes
fruity. Other fragrant species include: I. bongardii, cap scaly, odor fruity, spores larger;
I. coryda/;na, cap whitish with brownish fibrilsandan olive to olive-brown center and
a strongly pungent or sickeningly sweet odor (like rotting fruit); I. godey;, a reddening
species with a slight fruity odorandabrupt bulb at the base of the stem; I. cooke;, which
has a slight fruity odorandabrupt basal bulb but does not redden; I. hute//a, with an
almond extract or cyanide odor when fresh;andI. suaveo/ens, which smells like sweet
peasandhas nodulose-angular sporesandis fairly common in the Pacific Northwest.
Inocybe pudica (Blushing Inocybe)
CAP 2-6 (8) cm broad, conical or bell-shaped when young, becoming convex to nearly
plane at maturity, but usually retaining an umbo; surface dry or tacky, silky-fibrillose to
nearly smooth, white at first but developing pinkish to reddish or orange stains as it ages.
Flesh thin, white; odor unpleasant or spermatic. GILLS pallid or flushed pinkish or
orange, becoming grayish-brown or dull brown as spores mature, close, adnate to
adnexed, notched, or free. STALK 4-8 cm long, 0.4-1 cm thick, equal or enlarged at base,
smooth or silky-fibrillose, firm; white, but discoloring like the cap. VEIL fibrillose or
cobwebby, whitish, evanescent. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 7-10 x 4-6 microns, ellip-
tical or bean-shaped, smooth. Gills typically with both thick-and thin-walled cystidia.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or troops on ground under conifers; widespread,
but especially common on the est coast. In our area it is often abundant in the late fall,
winter,andearly spring under pineandDouglas-fir. It seems to favor brushy areas or
immature second-growth stands.
EDIBILITY Poisonous; like most Inocybes, it contains muscarine.
COMMENTS This is one of the most common Inocybes of the western United States
as well as one of the most easily recognized. The tendency of the white fruiting body to
"blush" pink, red, or orange plus the growth under conifersandrelatively smooth cap are
the principal fieldmarks. The cap may be slightly tacky or slippery in wet weather, but is
not truly viscid. I. pyriodora is somewhat similar but has a fragrant or spicy odor.
Inocybe geophylla (Little White Inocybe)
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, conical to bell-shaped, expanding in age to plane but often retaining
an umbo; surface dry, white or sometimes with a slight yellow tinge in age; smooth to silky
or finely fibrillose; margin sometimes uplifted or split in age. Flesh thin, white; odor disa-
greeable (spermatic). GILLS adnate to adnexed or notched, close, at first pallid, then
grayish, finally dull brown. STALK 2-6 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or slightly thicker
at base, firm, white or grayish-white, finely fibrillose. VEIL fibrillose, whitish, evanescent
or leaving a slight hairy zone on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 8-10 x 5-6 microns,
elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground (or occasionally very rotten wood) in
woods; widely distributedandcommon. It is abundant in our area throughout the
mushroom season, especially under live oak, pine,andDouglas-fir.
EDIBILITY Poisonous; it contains muscarine.
COMMENTS The small size, white umbonate cap,anddull brown gills at maturity
characterize this ubiquitous little Inocybe. It might be mistaken at first glance for a smal1
waxy cap (Camarophyllus), Mycena, or AlboleplOnia, but the sporesandmature gills
are brown. It also resembles l. pudica, but does not "blush."
Inocybe lilacina (Lilac Inocybe)
CAP 1.5-4 (5) cm broad, obtusely conical or bell-shaped, expanding in age but often
retaining an umbo; surface dry, silky-fibrillose to nearly smooth, pale to deep lilac, but
often with pinkish, gray, or brownish tones (or ochre at center),andoften paler or whiterin
age. Flesh thin, white Or tinged lilac; odor disagreeable (spermatic). GILLS adnate to
adnexed or notched, close, pallid or tinged lilac, then grayish to dull brown, the edges often
whitish. STALK 2.5-6 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker at base, finely
fibrillose, firm, colored more or less like cap or with white areas; base whitish. VEIL
fibrillose, evanescent or leaving a very slight hairy zone on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown;
spores 7-9x 4-5 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in woods; widely distributed. In our
area it can be found in the late fallandwinter under pineandDouglas-fir, but is not as
numerous as its close relative I. geophylla.
EDIBILITY Poisonous; like most Inocybes it contains muscarine.
COMMENTS Also known as f. geophylla var. lilacina, this species is about the only
common Inocybe that is the least bit colorful, although faded caps can be so pale that they
resemble I. geophy//a. The umbonate cap, relatively small size,andbrown spores distin-
guish it from the blewit (ClilOcybe nuda)andmost other purple or lilac mushrooms.
Several species of Cortinarius resemble it, but are generally largerandhave brighter(rusty-
brown) spores. There are also several other Inocybes which are violet or violet-tinged
when fresh.f. obscurioides, for instance, is one of several species with a violet stalk or stalk
apexanda brownish cap that typically shows violet only at the margin (if at all).
Inocybe lanuginosa (Woolly Inocybe)
CAP 1.5-3 (4) em broad, convex to bell-shaped becoming umbonate, plane, or with an
uplifted margin; surface dry, densely woolly or scaly, dark brown to brownish, the scales
smallandoften erect. Flesh thin, watery brownish; odor mild to slightly unpleasant
(spermatic). GILLS adnate, adnexed, or notched, fairly close, pallid becoming grayish,
then dull brown or cinnamon-brown. STALK 2-5 (8) em long, 24 (7) mm thick, more or
less equal, fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly, colored more or less like cap except for paler apex.
VEIL cobwebby, pallid, evanescent. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 8-10.5x 5-7 microns,
elliptical with blunt warts (nodulose). Cystidia on gills typically thin-walled.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on very rotten wood or in forest humus; widely
distributed. It favors conifers but also grows with hardwoods; I have not seen it in our
area, but there are dozens of similar species.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but do not experiment-it may very well contain muscarine!
COMMENTS There are innumerable little brown Inocybes with hairy or minutely scaly
caps. They are differentiated largely on microscopic characters such as the shapeandsize
of their cystidiaandspores. Most have an unpleasant or spermatic odor,andnone should
be eaten. This one is distinctive because it often grows on very rotten wood-highly
unusual behavior for an Inocybe! Other brownish species-all typically terrestrial-
include: I. lacera, widespread in a variety of habitats but especially common under aspen,
with a torn-up or raggedly scaly capandlong, nearly cylindrical, sometimes warty spores;
I. Jlocculosa, one of dozens of species with a hairy cap, smooth (bald) stalk,andsmooth
spores;andI. agardh;;, one of several species with a woolly-scaly cap that hang out with
alderandwillow. For still other species, see the key to Inocybe.
Inocybe calamistrata (Scaly Inocybe)
CAP 14 em broad, bell-shaped to convex, expanding only slightly in age; surface dry,
breaking up into densely-arranged scales, dark brown to coffee-brown; margin not typi-
cally splitting. Flesh thin; odor spermatic or fishy. GILLS adnatetoadnexed or free, close,
brown to dull cinnamon-brown or colored like cap, the edges whitish. STALK 4-10 em
long, 3-5 mm thick, equal or tapering upward, firm, covered with recurved scales (like cap)
which may be obliterated or wear away in age; brown to dark brown (1ike cap), the base or
lower portion dingy greenish-blue to olive-green (both insideandout). VEIL disappearing
(not forming a distinct ring on stalk). SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 9-13 x 4.5-6.5
microns, elliptical-oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under conifers or some-
times hardwoods; widely distributed, but not common. I have seen it in several localities,
but have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown. A recent study revealed the presence of psilocybin.
COMMENTS The blue-green to olive-green stem baseandscaly convex cap which does
not split radially in age are the main features of this uninteresting agaric. It is included here
as a representative of those Inocybes with scales on both the capandthe stem. Others
include: I. hystr;x, with small, brown to dark brown scales on both the capandstalk; I.
terr;gena, largerandfleshier (in fact, somewhat reminiscent of a Pholiota), with golden-
brown to cinnamon scales on the capandstalk and sometimes a slight annulus( ring), wide-
spread but especially common under aspen in the southern Rocky Mountains;!. caesar-
;ata, somewhat similar in color to I. terrigena but with smaller scales, fairly common in
eastern North America;andfinally, a very robust, unidentified local species with a dark
brown scaly capandseveral zones of concentrically-arranged dark brown scales on the
stem (cap 5-12 em broad, stalk 0.5-1.5 em thick!). None ofthese have the blue-green or
olive-green stem base of 1. calamistrata.
Hebeloma crustulinijorme (Poison Pie)
CAP 3-11 cm broad, convex or broadly convex with an inrolled margin, becoming plane
to obtusely umbonate or with an uplifted margin in age; surface viscid when moist, smooth,
whitish to buff, pale tan, or crust-brown (usually darker toward centerandpaler at
margin); margin naked. Flesh thick, white; odor distinctly radishlike. GILLS crowded
(often appearing to slightly overlap one another), adnate or notched, pallid when young,
becoming watery brownandfinally dull brown; edges whiteandminutely scalloped, often
beaded with water droplets in wet weatherandbrown-spotted when dry. STALK 4-13 cm
long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, usually equal except for an enlarged base; solid, fibrillose; white
or tinged cap color; apex powdered or with flakes or granules; base sometimes with white
mycelial threads. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 9-13 x 5.5-7.5 microns,
elliptical or almond-shaped, smooth or minutely roughened. Cystidia abundant on edges
of gills.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or troops on ground in woods or at their
edgesandon lawns or cemeteries near trees; widely distributedandcommon. In our area
it is usually abundant from late fall through early spring under pine,andto a lesser extent,
oak. It is by far our most common Hebeloma.
EDIBILITY Poisonous-it causes mild to severe gastrointestinal distress.
COMMENTS In spite of my general disdain for Hebelomas, I must admit this is a most
attractive mushroom when fresh. The smooth, viscid, pallid to pie-colored cap, attached
(usually notched) brown gills, absence of a veil,andradishlike odor( which is usually quite
pronounced but sometimes slight) are the important field marks. You will undoubtedly
encounter several subtlely different species which more or less fit the above description,
but they can only be differentiated microscopically. Other species: H. hiemale is smaller
(cap about 3 or 4 cm broad), with only a slight radish odorandgills not beaded with drop-
lets. H. sacchariolens is distinguished by its strong sweet or fruity odor. H. albidulum is
one of several species with a white or whitish capandlittle or no odor. H. sarcophyllum
is an unusual but distinctive mushroom with a chalk-white cap that may become reddish-
gray or brownish-tinged in age, deep flesh-colored gills,andreddish-brown spores. It
resembles Pluteus pellitus, but has attached gillsandgrows on the ground. It could also
be mistaken for an Entoloma. but does not have angular spores. None of the above species
should be eaten.
Hebe/oma s;nap;zans group (Scaly-Stalked Hebeloma)
CAP 4-13 (20) cm broad, convex to broadly convex with an inrolled margin, becoming
plane or with an uplifted, often wavy margin; surface slightly viscid when moist, smooth,
brown to cinnamon, ochre-brown, pinkish-tan, or dark reddish-brown, but often shaded
with gray or overlaid with a pallid sheen toward margin, which is at first minutely cottony.
Flesh thick, whitish; odor usually distinctly radishlike. GILLS close, usually adnexed or
notched, pallid becoming pale brown, then dull brown or dull cinnamon, the edges
minutely serratedandoften beaded with droplets in wet weatherandbrownish-dotted
when dry. STALK 4-13 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually swollen at base, whitish, with distinct
pallid to brownish flakes or protruding scales; apex usually powdered with small white
granules; firm, solid. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT dull brown; spores 10-13 x 6-8
microns, elliptical, obscurely roughened. Cystidia present on gill edges.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, sometimes in rings, on ground under both hard woods
and conifers or near planted trees on lawns; widely distributed. This species "complex" is
fairly common in our coastal pine forests in the late fall, winter,andearly spring. Elsewhere
it often grows with oakanda related species (see comments) is fond of aspen.
EDIBILITY Poisonous-it causes nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, etc.
COMMENTS This large, sturdy species or species "complex" is best recognized by its
brown to reddish-brown cap, thick stem adorned with small scales, absence of a veil, and
dull brown, usually notched gills. It is our largest Hebeloma. more robust than H. crustu-
liniforme.andnot nearly as attractive. It might be mistaken for a dull colored Cortinarius
were it not for the absence of a cortina even in small buttons. It is sometimes found growing
with Tricholoma imbricatum. which has a brown cap, white to flesh-colored gills, and
white spores. Other species: H. insigne is a robust, scaly-stemmed species that occurs
commonly under aspenandconifers in the mountains of ColoradoandNew Mexico.
H ebe/oma mesophaeum group
(Veiled Hebeloma)
CAP 2-6.5 cm broad, convex or umbonate, expanding to broadly umbonate, plane, or
with margin uplifted in age; surface smooth, viscid when moist but soon dry, color variable
but usually dark brown to vinaceous-brown or reddish-brown at the centerandpaler
(grayish, pinkish, buff, or even whitish) at the margin, often fading in age to dingy brown
or tanandoften adorned with thin filmy or fibrillose patches of veil material at or near the
margin, which is inrolled when young. Flesh watery brownish or whitish; odorandtaste
typically radishlike (but in some variants mildandin others pungent and/or bitter).
GILLS close, adnate to adnexed or notched, whitish or grayish becoming brown, finally
dull brown; edges usually whitish. STALK 3-8 cm long, 3-8 (10) mm thick, more or less
equal, fibrillose, whitish to dingy brownish, slowly become dark brown from base upward;
apex often mealy. VEIL cobwebby-fibrillose, white to grayish or buff-colored, thin,
disappearing or forming a slight fibrillose zone on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores
7-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened. Cystidia present on gill edges.
HABITAT Widely scattered to densely gregarious on ground in woodsandneartrees;
widely distributed. In the northern United States this speciesandits numerouslook-alikes
are common under conifers, especially in cool weather (fall, spring). In our area they occur
only sporadically, but I have seen thousands of specimens in a cottonwood-willow
woodland adjacent to a small reservoir, in FebruaryandMarch.
EDIBILITY To be avoided-several Hebelomas are poisonousandall are difficult to
identify.
COMMENTS The presence of a cortina (cobwebby veil) in young specimens distin-
guishes this speciesandits close relatives from the larger, more prominent members ofthe
genus such as H. crustuliniformeandH. sinapizans, but leads to confusion with Inocybe
and Cortinarius. The former, however, usually has a silky to fibrillose or scaly cap, while
the latter has a brighter (rusty-brown) spore printandlacks cystidia on the gill edges.
There are dozens of equally drab veiled Hebelomas which are best differentiated from
H. mesophaeum microscopically. (A recent monograph by Alexander Smith, Verna
Stucky Evenson,andDuane Mitchell recognizes nearly 100 veiled species in the western
United States alone!) Among them are: H. strophosum, very similarandwidespread,
with a thicker, more persistent veil that forms a woolly sheath on the stem below the fibril-
lose annulus (ring);andH. jastibi[e, one of several larger, fleshier species with a reddish-
brown cap with paler inrolled marginanda thicker (1-1.5 cm) stalk.
Agrocybepediadesgroup (Common Agrocybe)
CAP 1-3 (4) cm broad, hemispherical (rounded) to convex, or sometimes broadly convex
to plane in age; surface dry or slightly viscid, smooth or sometimes fissured (with cracks)
in age, usually ochre to golden-brown or yellow-brown, but varying to yellowish-buff,
creamy, or even rusty-brown; margin not striate, but sometimes with whitish veil rem-
nants. Flesh thin, pallid; odor mild or farinaceous. GILLS close, at first adnate but often
seceding; pallid, soon becoming brown to rusty-brown dr cinnamon-brown. STALK 2-5
(7) cm long, 1.5-3 (6) mm thick, more or less equal, dry, pallid or buff to yellow-brown (often
paler at apex, darker below); often longitudinally striate. VEIL absent, or if present then
evanescentandfibrillose (not membranous)andeither disappearing or leaving slight
remnants on the cap margin and/or stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 9-13 x 6.5-8
microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from an apical germ pore.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in grassandcultivated ground, dung or manure, or
in sand; widely distributedandcommon, flourishing in our area whenever conditions are
conducive. In warm weather it can often be found mingling with Marasmius oreades,
Panaeolus foenisecii,andConocybe lactea; in cool weather it associates with Psilocybe
coprophila, Stropharia semiglobata,andthe Panaeolus campanulatus group.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended; it is easily confused withpoisonous..LBM's."
COMMENTS The yellowish cap, brown spores, absence of a ring,andsmall size typify
this commonplace, lawn-loving "LBM"andits close relatives. The cap is not conical as in
ConocybeandPanaeolus,andthe spores are neither purple-brown nor purple-black
as in Stropharia, nor white as in Marasmius. Small Hebeloma species are similar, but
generally grow near trees orin the woodsandhave a filamentous cap cuticle. Other species:
A. pediades var. p/atysperma has larger sporesandfrequently has watery spots or streaks
on the cap; A. semiorbicu/aris (=Naucoria semiorbicu/aris) is said to have a slightly viscid
capandbroader spores, but is otherwise identical;A. arva/is(=A. tuberosa) is a rare species
that arises from a small, black, easily-overlooked ..tuber" (sclerotium); A. amara has a
bitter tasteandgrows indense grou ps in manure or greenhouses;A. sororia is a much larger
species (cap 5-15 cm broad, stalk 0.5-1.2 cm thick) with a tan to tawny capandbitter taste.
It resembles A. praecox but lacks a veil. I have found it fruiting abundantly on wood chips
in a garden. For another photo of the A. pediades group, see p. 43.
Agrocybe praecox group Color Plate 102
(Spring Agrocybe; Early Agrocybe)
CAP(2)3-10 cm or more broad, convex or broadly umbonate to plane, orat times withan
uplifted margin in age; surface dry or slightly tacky, smooth or in age sometimes cracked or
fissured; creamy to creamy-ochre, yellow-brown, tan, hazel-brown, or olive-brown;
margin often with veil remnants, not striate. Flesh white or pale ochre, soft; odor mild to
farinaceous; taste mild or more often somewhat bitter to farinaceous. GILLS close, broad,
adnate but often seceding; at first pallid, then light brown to grayish, finally dull brown or
ochre-brown. STALK 3-13 cm long, 0.3-1 or more cm thick, equal or tapered below (or
occasionally enlarged below), white or pallid, but often brownish-stained below in age;
fibrillose-striate, the base usually with white mycelial threads. VEIL membranous but thin;
forming a fragile, superior, skirtlike ring on stalk or leaving remnants on cap margin or
gills or disappearing entirely. SPORE_PRINT rich brown ("cigar-brown"); spores 8-12x 5-
7 microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from the apical germ pore. Cap cuticle cellular.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in grassy or cultivated areas, along roads, in
wood chips, gardens, woods, etc.; widely distributed, fruiting mainly in the spring. In our
area this species "complex" is among the very common early spring mushrooms mush-
rooms (February-April), but occurs at other times also. The largest fruitings I've seen
were in iceplant along a freeway offrampandon a parkway mulched with wood chips. It
also occurs fairly commonly under mountain conifers in the spring.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended. The taste is mediocre at best, disgusting at
worst,andthere are a number of variants in this group whose edibility is unknown.
COMMENTS Originally called Pho/iota praecox, this attractive fungus can be found
almost anywhere but is especially common in townsandalong rural roads. The creamy to
brownish cap, membranous veil (check young specimens!), brown spores,andhabitat are
the telltate traits. Both slenderandfairly robust forms occur,andboth are quite attractive
in their prime. Specimens with a well-formed ring are reminiscent of Agaricus, but the gills
are adnate (at least when young)andnever pink or chocolate-brown. Stropharia species
(e.g., Stropharia semiglobataandrelatives) are also very similar, but have a darker(purple-
brown to black) spore print an stickier cap. Confusion with Pho/iotaandRozites is also
possible, but the habitatandabsence of scales or fibrils on the capandstem should
distinguish it. In my experience, the veilforms a distinct ring on the stalk less than 50% ofthe
time, but usually leaves at least some vestiges on the cap margin or gills. The "typical"
form has a creamy cap (see color plate)andranges from slender to fairly robust. Another
common form (probably a distinct species) favors wood chips, is usually gregarious or
clustered, has a darker (hazel-brown to olive-brown) cap when young,andis fairly robust
(see photo above). Also similar are: A. acerico/a, with a yellow-brown cap when young
and better-formed ring, growing on decayed wood;andA. dura (formerly Pho/iota ver-
mif/ua), with a whitish to ochre-tinged, often cracked capandslightly larger spores, found
in cultivatedanddisturbed ground. Other species with a membranous veil include: A.
erebia, a terrestrial woodland species with a dark brown. often viscid cap and/or slightly
decurrent gills (see above photo);andA. aegerita (=A. cy/indracea), a medium-sized to
large edible southern species that usually grows in clusters on hardwoods (often living)
such as willow, poplar,andbox elder. The latter species is prized in Europeandgrown
there commercially. It has a yellowish to grayish-brown to fulvous-tinged, often wrinkled
capandtypically has a well-formed annulus (ring) on the stalk.
Conocybe Ii/oris group (Ringed Cone Head)
CAP 0.5-2.5 cm broad, conical or bell-shaped, expanding to convex or plane but usually
retaining an umbo; surface smooth, not viscid, tawny-brown to orange-brown or brown;
margin faintly striate when moist. Flesh thin, brown. GILLS pallid soon becoming brown-
ish to rusty-brown, close, adnexed or notched, sometimes seceding. STALK 1-6 cm long,
1-3 mm thick, more or less equal, fragile, yellow-brown to brown; smooth. VEIL mem-
branous, brown, forming a prominent but delicate, movable, median to superior ring on
stalk; ring often stained by sporesandsometimes falling off. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-
brown to rusty-brown; spores 7.5-13 x 3.5-6.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, with germ pore.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on lawnsandother grassy places, also in moss, on
decayed woodandwood chips, etc.; widely distributed, but most common in the Pacific
Northwest. In our area I ha ve found it only once, on a la wn in October, but a large number
of fruiting bodies were present.
EDIBILITY POISONOUS-potentially fatal! It will not tempt most mushroom hunters
because of its small size, but is dangerous to toddlers in the so-called "grazing stage,"
particularly because it grows on lawns. Analysis has revealed the presence of amanita-
toxins,and20-30 caps are equivalent to about half of one cap of Amanita pha//oides-
a compelling reason not to eat "LBM's!"
COMMENTS Also known as Pho/iotina fi/aris, this speciesandits close relatives are
distinguished from other Conocybes by the membranous ring on the stalk. Inage, however,
the ring may fall off or be otherwise obliterated. Several poisonous Ga/erina species have
a ring, but they usually grow on wood and/or have a somewhat viscid, translucent-striate
cap (see G. autumnalis). There are also several Conocybes withanannulus(ring) that grow
on dungandmanure (especially of horses), including C. stercoraria, fairly common,
with a yellow-brown to buff-colored cap.
Conocybe tenera group (Brown Dunce Cap; Common Cone Head)
CAP 1-2.5 cm broadandtall, conical to bell-shaped, sometimes expanding slightly in age;
surface smooth, not viscid, brown to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown, usually fading
in age or as it dries to tan, yellowish, or buff; margin finely striate when moist. Flesh thin,
brownish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, pallid soon becoming pale brown, then
cinnamon-brown or rusty-brown. STALK 4-9 cm long, 14 mm thick, equal or with a
swollen base, smooth or minutely mealy, colored like cap or paler, fragile. VEIL absent.
SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown or cinnamon-brown; spores 8-14 x 5-7 microns, elliptical,
smooth, with an apical germ pore.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on lawns, in gardens, fields, rich soil, dung,
and humus; widely distributed. This speciesandits close relatives occur practically year-
round in our area in a variety of habitats (including the woods), but are not particularly
numerous. I've seen more than 100 fruiting bodies crowded into a small planter box filled
with lettuce seedlings.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but do not experiment-the similar Cfi/aris is poisonous!
COMMENTS The above description will fit a large number of brownish Conocybes with
a cute (but not necessarily acute) conical to bell-shaped cap, thin fragile stem,andno veil
or ring (annulus). They are reminiscent of MycenaandPanaeo/us (with which they may
grow), but have rusty-brown gills at maturityandrusty-brown spores. The cap is darker
than that of C /acteaandnot as wrinkled,andis not viscid as in Bo/bitius. Other species:
C. coprophi/a has a slightly viscid convex capandgrows in dung or manure; C. smithiiand
C. cyanopus are two rather rare "pupil-dilating" species with a blue to blue-green stem
base, at least in age. The former grows in bogs, the latter ingrass or sometimes moss. Neither
should be eaten by "magic mushroom" hunters because of their close resemblance to
ringless representatives ofthe poisonous Cfi/aris.
Conocybe lactea (White Dunce Cap; White Cone Head)
CAP 1-2.5 cm broad and/or tall, narrowly to bluntly conical (like a dunce cap), then
bell-shaped or thimble-shaped, the margin usually flaring; surface typically not viscid,
radially wrinkled or striate when moist, white to creamy or tinged buff to pale cinnamon,
especially at the center. Flesh very thin, whitish. GILLS very narrow, adnexed or free,
close, pallid soon becoming cinnamon-brown to tawny-ochre or brown. STALK 3-11 cm
long, 1-2 mm thick, very thinandfragile, equal or with a small basal bulb, hollow, white or
whitish, often powdery or scurfy above. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT reddish-brown or
cinnamon; spores 11-16x 6-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an apical germ pore.
HABITAT Scattered or in troops on lawns, base ball fields,andother grassy places; widely
distributedandcommon in muggy weather. It usually appears in the early morning and
topples over or shrivels up by afternoon; it is one of our common summer lawn mushrooms.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but worthless as food-to say it lacks substance is a gross under-
statement. As Alexander Smith points out, toddlers would be the only ones tempted to
eat it,andif it were poisonous, we would probably know by now.
COMMENTS This frail mushroom is easily told by its pallid "dunce cap"andthin, fragile
stem. The striate or wrinkled cap is not as viscid as in Bolbitius,andis paler than that ofthe
C. tenera group. The stem is so feeble that it is practically impossible to bring home speci-
mens without breaking them. C. crispa is a somewhat similar widespread species with an
ochre-tinged capandcrisped, veined gills.
Bolbitius vilellinus (Sunny Side Up)
CAP 1.5-7 cm broad when expanded, oval to conical or bell-shaped when young, often
becoming plane in old age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, bright yellow to
pale yellow (the center sometimes yellow-orange), but often fading in age or as it dries to
whitish, brownish, grayish, etc.; margin striate, at times conspicuously grooved nearly to
the center. Flesh very thin, soft, yellowish. GILLS adnate to adnexed or free, close, soft,
dissolving somewhat in wet weather; pallid or pale yellow to pale brown, becoming rusty-
ochre to cinnamon-brown in age. STALK (3) 5-12 cm long, 2-8 (10) mm thick, equal or
thicker below, hollow, very fragile when thin (readily collapsing), whitish to pale yellow;
often delicately powdered or scurfy. SPORE_PRINT rusty-orange to rusty-brown; spores
10-16 x 6-9 microns, elliptical, smooth, truncate from the large apical germ pore.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious (or even tufted) on dung, manure, straw,
lawns, in tall grass, cultivated ground, etc.; widely distributedandubiquitous, fruiting
throughout the mushroom season in our area. The most luxuriant fruiting I've seen was in
a horse corral where dozens of large, robust specimens were interspersed with massive
clusters of Peziza vesicu/osa (a cup fungus). Greg Wright, who coined the common name,
says that in southern California it commonly occurs on decayed wood.
EDIBILITY Harmless, but fleshlessandflavorless.
COMMENTS This fragile ephemeral mushroom varies greatly in size, shape,andhabitat
but can generally be recognized by its viscid, yellow, striate cap, plus its rust-colored gills
(in age)andsoft, fragile texture. The stems often collapse of their own accord,andin wet
weather the capandgills tend to dissolve, much as in Coprinus (but not as the result of an
autodigesting enzyme). As a rule, those growing in grass tend to be quite slenderandfragile
(see photo), while those growing in a nitrogen-rich environment such as horse manure are
largerandmore robust. Other species include: B. coprophilus, with a grayish-pinkish-
cinnamon cap in age, usually found on dung;andB. lacteus, with a small whitish or buff-
tinged cap, found in dung, grass, straw, etc., but not nearly as common as B. vilel/inus.
Bolbitius aleuriatus
CAP 1.5-4 cm broad, soon broadly convex to broadly umbonate or plane; surface smooth,
viscid when moist, gray to grayish-brown, often with a purplish or lilac tint (center some-
times darker); sometimes fading in age; conspicuously striate, at least at margin. Flesh
very thin, whitish. GILLS adnexed to free, narrow, close, pallid soon becoming pinkish to
brown or cinnamon-brown. STALK 2.5-7 cm long, 2-3 mm thick, equal or thicker at base,
very fragile, smooth or minutely scurfy or powdery; entirely white or tinged yellow at base.
SPORE_PRINT rusty-brown; spores 9-12 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth, with an
apical germ pore.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups (rarely more than three) on rotting wood, sa wd ust,
and humus. It is fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter, mainly under oak and
madrone,andprobably has a much wider distribution.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Also known as Pluteolus aleuriatus, this species is a fairly frequent but
oft-overlooked fungal feature of our oak wondlands. When the gills are freeandpinkish,
confusion with P/Uleus is likely. However, its extreme fragilityandviscid, striate cap are
good fieldmarks. A form with a yellow stem-possibly distinct-also occurs in our area.
Other woodland species include: B. reticulatus, similarly colored but with a reticulate
(veined or netted) cap;andB. (=Pluteolus) callisteus, with a yellow stalkanda yellow-
olive to rusty-orange cap.
Paxillus panuoides (Fan Pax)
CAP 1.5-7 (10) cm broad, petal-shaped to mussel-or fan-shaped, attached laterally to
su bstrate or with a stemlike base; surface minutely hairy or downy becoming smooth, not
viscid; buff to dingy yellowish, yellow-brown, olive-yellow, or dingy ochre; margin often
lobedandat first incurved. Flesh thin, soft, whitish to ochraceous. GILLS radiating from
base of cap, close, pale or dingy yellowish to ochre or pinkish-buff, often crimped and
forked or connected by cross-veins, especially toward base. STALK absent or present
only as a small, narrowed, lateral base. SPORE_PRINT yellowish-buff to brown or dingy
ochraceous; spores 4-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth, many of them dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clumps on coniferous logs, stumps, debris,andhumus
rich in lignin; widely distributed but not particularly common. In our area I have found it
several times on dead pine in the fallandwinter. It is also said to occur on mine timbers,
causing a bright yellow discoloration in its host.
EDIBILITY Unknown-do not experiment!
COMMENTS The fan-shaped capandabsence or near absence of a stalk rescue this
listless little brown mushroom from the obscurity it so richly deserves. It might be mis-
taken for a Crepidotus or Phyllotopsis. but the gills are usually forked or veined. The latter
feature can lead to confusion with the chant ere lies, but the growth on wood, dingy color,
and poorly-developed stalk distinguish it. The false chanterelle (Hygrophoropsis
aurantiaca) is also somewhat similar, but has oranger gills, white spores,anda stalk.
Paxillus involutus (Poison Pax; Inrolled Pax)
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, at first broadly convex withastronglyinrolled margin, then plane
or centrally depressed with the margin eventually unfurled; surface viscid when moist but
otherwise dry; smooth or with soft matted hairs that wear a way, sometimes cracked (areo-
late) in age; brown to dingy yellow-brown, olive-brown, or dingy reddish-brown, often
with darker brown stains; margin often slightly velvety or obscurely ribbed. Flesh thick,
firm, pale buff to yellowish, but usually staining reddish to brown when cut. GILLS usually
decurrent, close or crowded, pallid to pale yellowish becoming dingy yellow to olive,
brownish, or yellow-brown, staining dark brown or reddish-brown when bruised or in old
age; often forking and/or forming pores near the stalk. STALK 2-7 (10) cm long, 0.5-4
cm thick, usually shorter than width of mature cap, equal or tapered at either end, central
to somewhat off-center, solid, firm, dry, smooth; colored like ca p or paler, often with dingy
reddish to dark brown stains. SPORE_PRINT brown to yellow-brown; spores 7-10 x 4-6
microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Usually scattered to densely gregarious on ground in woods, around the edges
of bogs,andin tree-studded parks or lawns; widely distributed,andby far the most
common member of the genus. Two possibly distinct forms occur in our area: the typical
one (shown in photo at bottom of p. 477) fruits mainly with planted birch trees in the fall,
while a larger form occurs with oakandpine in the late fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Dangerous! It is often eaten in Europeandby transplanted Europeans in
America, but it can cause hemolysis (destruction of red blood cells)andkidney failure if
eaten raw,andsometimes even when thoroughly cooked! (A pparently the human body can
develop a devastating sensitivity to it.) It often has a sour taste anyway, soitis best avoided
and should never be eaten raw. The one recorded instance of a bonafide mycologist dying
of mushroom-poisoning was attributed to this fungus!
COMMENTS The dingy brownish cap with inrolled margin when young plus the decur-
rent gills that stain brownandare usually forked or veined near the stem are the
unappealing features of this unappealing fungus. Actually, its symmetryandcompactness
are quite intriguing, but its choice of color is downright disastrous-an unbecoming blend
of dingy brownsandmurky yellows. The stature is reminiscent of a Lactarius or Russula,
but the gills do not exude a latex when brokenandthe flesh is not chalky or exceptionally
brittle. Other species: P. verna/is is similar but larger, with a paler cap when young and
reddish-brown to chocolate-brown spores. It grows mainly with aspen.
Paxillus atrotomentosus (Velvet Pax)
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry,
unpolished, velvety or with matted hairs, yellow-brown to rusty-brown to dingy reddish-
brown becoming dull brown, dark brown, or blackish-brown in age; margin at first in-
rolled. Flesh thick, rather firm or tough, pallid to ochre or buff. GILLS close or crowded,
usually decurrent, tan to dull ochre, dingy yellowish, or paler; often forked or veined near
stalk. STALK 2-9 ( 12) cm long. 1-3 (5) cm thick. often shortandusually off-center or even
lateral; solid, tough, densely velvety from a coating of brown to dark brown or blackish-
brown, often matted hairs; apex often paler or yellowish. SPORE_PRINT yellowish to
brownish; spores 5-6.5 x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, many of them dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or tufts on oraround conifers ( usually dead) or madrone;
northern in distribution. It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest in the late summer
and fall, but rare in our area. It causes a carbonizing decay (brown rot) in its host.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some people apparently collect it for the table, but the
same can be said of P. involUlus, which has caused several deaths! (See comments on
edibility ofthat species.)
COMMENTS The combination of brown cap, dark brown velvety stem, decurrent gills,
and growth on rotting conifers makes this one of the Pacific Northwest's most distinctive
agarics. It does not discolor as much as P. involuluS,andis quite attractive when fresh.
Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca (False Chanterelle) Color Plate 110
CAP 2-8 (14) cm broad, convex becoming plane or somewhat depressed, the margin at
first inrolled; surface dry, often somewhat felty or velvety, typically some shade of dark
orange, brownish-orange, brownish-yellow, yellowish-brown, olive-brown, or dark
brown (often darker or browner at centerandorange to yellowish-orange at margin),
but in one form whitishandin another blackish. Flesh thin, pallid or tinged orange or cap
color; odor mild. GILLS decurrent, close, fairly thinandnarrowat maturity(may be blunt
when young); usually forked dichotomously; typically deep orange to bright orange, but
sometimes pale orange or in one form yellowish. STALK 2-10 cm long, (0.2) 0.5-1 (2) cm
thick, central or off-center, equal or enlarged toward base, often curved; dry, yellowish
to orange or brownish-orange or colored more or less like cap. SPORE_PRINT white to
creamy; spores 5-8 x 2.5-4.5 microns, elliptical, smooth, often dextrinoid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in humusandon rotting wood,
usually under conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits from the fall through early
spring, but seems most abundant in cool, dry weather when there are few other fleshy fungi
outandabout. I usually find it under pine or redwood.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. In my experience it is edible-but far from incredible. Some
sources, however, list it as mildly poisonous (whether or not this is a result of confusion
with Omphalolus. as has been suggested, is unclear).
COMMENTS The typically bright orange, decurrent, dichotomously forked gills (see
color plate)andwhite spore print are the principal fieldmarks ofthis attractive but variable
fungus. In spite of its common name, it is difficult to confuse with the true chanterelle
(Cantharellus cibarius) if the following is kept in mind: the gills are thinner, crowded, and
bladelike at maturity (but often blunter when young),andare usually orangerthan those
of the chanterelle. In other words, the false chanterelle has "true" gills while the true
chanterelle has "false" gills. Also, Hygrophoropsis has flimsier flesh, a browner cap, is less
robust, differently shaped (not as wavy or frilled)andsometimes grows on rotten wood.
The jack-o-lantern mushrooms (Omphalotus species) are also similar, but have brightly
colored flesh, typically grow in clusters on or under hardwoods,anddo not have forked
gills. The false chanterelle was originally placed in Cantharellus,andis listed in many
mushroom books as Clitocybeaurantiaca, but the forked gills, frequently off-centerstalk,
and dextrinoid spores connote a closer kinship to Paxil/us. Other species: H. olida(=Cli-
tocybe morganii) is a small (cap 1-4 cm) species with a pinkish capandstalk (that may fade
to buff), whitish to pinkish gills,anda flagrantly fragrant odor that is reminiscent of root
beer or cinnamon candy. At least some of its gills are forked and/or have cross-veins, its
stalk can be central or off-center,andits spores are whiteanddextrinoid. Like H. auran-
tiaca, it favors conifersandis widely distributed, but seems to be rather rare. I have seen
it only once in California, near Mount Shasta, in June.
Phylloporus rhodoxanthus (Gilled Bolete) Color Plate III
CAP 2-5 (12) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or with uplifted margin in age; surface
dry, minutely velvety to nearly smooth, dull brown to olive-brown or yellow-brown in one
form, red to reddish-brown in another; sometimes developing pallid to yellowish cracks or
fissures. Flesh thick, pallid to yellowish. GILLS widely spaced, broad, fairly thick, adnate
to decurrent but sometimes seceding; sometimes forked or with cross-veins; bright yellow
to ochre, typically bruising green or blue (but often slowly, sometimes not at all), some-
times also staining brownish. STALK 3-10 cmlong, 0.4-1 (1.5) cm thick, equal or tapered
below, dry, solid, yellow to dingy yellowish-buff or reddish, often stained dingy brown or
reddish-brown below; smooth. SPORE_PRINT brown to yellowish-or olive-tinged;
spores 9-15 x 3-6 microns, narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups (usually twos or threes) on
ground in woods, widely distributed. The brown-capped form can be found nearly every
year in our area, but seldom in quantity. Like the related Boletus subtomentosus, it fruits
throughout the mushroom seaso, often along roadsandtrails.
EDIBILITY Edible, but rarely found in sufficient numbers to be more than just a curious-
ity. Some "bolete-your-meat'ers" rate it highly, but I've found it to be slimyandinsipid.
COMMENTS This evolutionary oddity is an adamant nonconformist. The dry, minutely
velvety brownish to reddish cap is an almost exact replica of Boletus subtomentosus and
relatives, yet the underside of the cap has gills! These are thicker than the gills of many
agarics,andare bright yellowandoften bruise blue like the tubes of many boletes (it may
take several minutes, however, for the color change to show). What's more, the spores
are "boletoid"-long, narrow,andspindle-shaped-causing some taxonomists to place it
in the Boletaceae. Thus Phylloporus, like many other mushrooms, has been denied a stable
familyandis at the complete mercy of the "authorities." Like baseball's itinerant tobacco-
chewing utility infielders of southern rural origin, its group affiliation is in a state of con-
stant flux as it is systematically shuttled backandforth between one "team"andanother.
Other species: P. arenicola is a very similar species with an olive-brown to olive-yellow cap
and adnexed (not decurrent) gills which don't blue when bruised. It was originally de-
scribed from coastal Oregon under pine, but I have not seen it.
Gomphidius oregonensis (Insidious Gomphidius)
CAP 2-15 (18) cm broad, at first peglike, then broadly convex to plane or depressed; sur-
face viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, color variable: whitish to salmon-buff to
ochraceous-salmon to dull pinkish when young, becoming dingier(brownish to purplish-
or vinaceous-gray to dark reddish-brown) in age, often spotted or stained smoky-gray to
black. Flesh rather soft, white or grayish ( or tinged cap color under cuticle), but brilliant
yellow in lower part of stalk or at base. GILLS decurrent, softandrather waxy, close to
fairly well-spaced, white or pallid, then grayandfinally blackish as spores ripen. STALK 5-
15 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, equal or tapered below( or occasionally swollen), solid, rather firm
or even tough, dryandwhite above the veil, whitish or dingy belowandviscid when wet,
sometimes with darker streaks; lower portion bright yellow. VEIL whitishandfibrillose
beneath a layer of slime; disappearing or forming a slight hairy-slimy superior ring on stalk
which is subsequently blackened by falling spores. SPORE_PRINT smoky-gray to black;
spores 10-14 (16) x 4.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground under Douglas-firandother
conifers, often in small clumps which originate deep in the soilandmay include one or more
aborted fruiting bodies; known only from western North Americaandvery common,
(along with G. glutinosus-see comments) on the Pacific Coast. In our area it grows with
Douglas-fir, often mingling with Suil/us species (S. caerulescens, S. lakei, S. ponderosus),
from the fall through early spring.
EDIBILITY Edible, but its sliminess makes it undesirable-except as a possible escargot
substitute. To clean the cap, simply peel off the slimy pellicle (skin).
COMMENTS The intensely yellow flesh in the lower stem plus the whitish flesh elsewhere,
viscid-slimy cap, soft decurrent gills,andsmoky-black spores immediately identify this
mushroom as a Gomphidius. However, distinguishing it from its brethren (see below),
especially when it is not growing in clumps, can be difficult unless the spores-the shortest
in the genus-are measured. In age the fruiting body is often quite murkyandinsidious-
looking, hence its common name. The cap is quite variable in color but is usually dingier
and dirtier than that of G. subroseus,andthe stalk is usually thicker-but not necessarily
slicker. Other species: The ..Glutinous Gomphidius," G. glutinosus, is probably the most
commonandwidespread member of the genus. It is mycorrhizal with a variety of
conifers, including spruce, fir,andin our area, Douglas-fir. It is quite similar to G. oregon-
ensis, but has longer spores (over 14 microns), does not often grow in clumps,andusually
has a darker cap when young (purplish to purple-brown, brownish-gray, purplish-gray,
etc.). Another western species, G. largus, is essentially a giant version of G. glutinosus. and
also grows with spruceandfir, mainly at higher elevations. Finally, there is the..Hideous
Gomphidius," G. maculatus, which has a pale cinnamon to reddish-brown to murky brown
or blackish-spotted capanddark-fibered stalk. It lacks the slimy veil characteristic of
other Gomphidiiandfeatures both robustandvery slender forms. It is a northern species
that grows mainly with larch, often in the company of Suil/us cavipesandS. grevil/ei.
Gomphidius subroseus
(Rosy Gomphidius)
CAP 2.5-7.5 cm broad, at first peglike, then broadly convex becoming plane or broadly
depressed; surface viscid or slimy when moist, smooth, dull to bright pink to rosy-red or
even red, often spotted grayish in old age. Flesh white (or tinged pink under cuticle), but
yellow in base of stalk and sometimes pinkish in extreme base. GILLS typically decurrent,
softandrather waxy, fairly well-spaced, white becoming pale gray to smoky-gray or even
blackish as spores ripen. STALK 3-7.5 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed
slightly at base, dryandwhite above the veil, usually viscid belowandwhite to dingy-
colored with a pale yellow to bright yellow base; smooth or fibrillose, solid. VEIL white
and fibrillose beneath a layer of slime; disappearing or forming an obscure hairy-slimy
superior ring on stalk which is blackened by spores. SPORE_PRINT smoky-gray to black;
spores (11) 15-21 x 4.5-7 microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious or occasionally tufted on ground under
conifers (especially Douglas-fir), northern North America. It can be found throughout the
range of Douglas-firandis fairly common in our area in the fallandwinter. Itis also said to
occur with spruce, fir,andhemlock.
EDIBILITY Edible, but rather bland; peel off the slimy pellicle (skin) before cooking it.
COMMENTS The beautiful rosy-red to pink capandmodest size separate this fungus
from other Gomphidius species,andmake it the most attractive member of its clan. It
typically shows less yellow in the stem than either G. oregonensisor G. glUlinosus, but more
than G. smithii(see below). It is often mistaken for a waxy cap (Hygrophoraceae) because
of its brightly colored capandsoft waxy gills. However, the smoky-gray to blacksporeprint
distinguishes it. Other species: G. roseus has a redder capandlonger spores, but has not yet
been recorded in North America; G. smithii can also be rather small, but shows little or no
yellow in the base of the stalkandhas a grayish to vinaceous-gray or brownish cap. The
latter occurs with Douglas-fir in coastal California but grows with other conifers as well.
Chroogomphus v;n;color (Pine Spike) Color Plate 113
CAP (I) 2-10 (13) cm broad, peglike to nearly conical or convex when young, becoming
somewhat top-shaped to plane or even shallowly depressed (but often with a slight umbo);
surface smooth to finely fibrillose (or sometimes scaly in age), viscid when'wet, often
lustrous or silky when dry; color variable: dull orange to ochraceous to grayish, brownish,
yellow-brown, olive-brown, bister, or reddish-brown, often wine-red to dark vinaceous-
brown in ageandtending to developing wine-red stains where rotten or when dried; mar-
gin at first incurved. Flesh thick, usually pale orange but varying to buff, salmon, or
ochraceous-buff( often somewhat yellower in lower portion of stalk); often becoming wine-
red in old age or where injured. GILLS broad, fairly well-spaced, decurrent or occasionally
adnate, pale to dull orange or ochraceous when young, then clouded gray with spores and
finally blackish in old age. STALK typically long, slender,andsometimes sinuous, but at
other times shortandrather thick; 2.5-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-2 (6) cm thick; equal or more
often tapered downward; dry, solid, firm; pale orange to yellow-orange to orange-buff,
ochraceous, or reddish-tinted when young, often more vinaceous-red in age and/or with
reddish fibrils. VEIL dry, fibrillose, ochraceous to orange, soon disappearing or leaving a
slight hairy ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT smoky-gray to smoky-black, sometimes with an
olive tinge; spores (14) 17-23 x 4.5-7.5 microns, more or less spindle-shaped, smooth.
Cystidia on gills large, thick-walled.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under conifers, particularly pine;
widely distri buted, but especially common in northernandwestern North America. Along
with C. ruti/us (see comments), it is a prominent fungal facet of our pine forestsandis also
frequent in yardsandlawns where pines have been planted. The major crop is usually in
the late fall or winterandis often accompanied by masses of mushy slippery jacks (Suillus
species), but it can be found most any time. It is quite sporadic in its fruiting habits-
overwhelmingly abundant some years, very sparse during others.
EDIBILITY Edible, but like all pine spikes, better dried than fresh (see comments on
p. 484). It is usually very clean,andunlike Suillus, is shunned by maggots.
COMMENTS Anyone who hunts our coastal pine forests will come across this common
mushroomandits equally edible look-alike, C. rutilus (see next page). The variable color
or mixture of colors (orange, gray, brown, and/or wine-red) plus the pale orange flesh,
decurrent gills,andsmoky-black spores make it as distinctive as it is attractive. The fruiting
body is often quite slenderandlong-stemmed, but robust forms also occur. C. rutilus
(formerly Gomphidius viscidus) is a very similar, widespread species with thin-walled
rather than thick-walled cystidia. It can often be told in the field by its slightly duller or less
vinaceous colorandbroader or flatter cap, but both species are so variable in shape and
color that a microscopic examination is often necessary to positively distinguish them.
Both differ from C. lomenlosusandC. pseudovinicolor in their smoother cap that is viscid
or slimy when wetandoften shiny when dry. Other smooth, viscid-capped species: C.
ochraceus, widely distributed, is closely related to C. ruti/us (i.e., it has thin-walled cyst i-
dia), but is smaller, with a yellow-orange to buff, ochre, orange, or grayish cap, at least
when young; it also occurs in our area with pine. See also C.j1avipes (in the key).
Chroogomphus pseudovinicolor (Robust Pine Spike)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex, sometimes becoming plane in age; surface dry to very slightly
viscid, orange-buffto dull orange to ochraceous-orange, sometimes flushed red in places or
often mottled with reddish or orangish patches of felty or woolly material,andoften be-
coming entirely dark dull red in old age; margin often fringed with veil remnants at first.
Flesh thick, quite firm, pale to dull orange or orange-buff (but often brighter or yellower
in base of stalk), reddening in old age or around maggot tunnels. GILLS fairly well-spaced,
decurrent or sometimes ad nate, often forked; pale orange to dingy ochraceous, then
clouded olive to gray or black by spores. STALK 6-12 cm long, 2-5 cm thick at (or near)
apex; usually tapered below, solid, firm, dull orange to orange-buff orochraceous, usually
with zones or patches of reddish to wine-colored fibrils or woolly-felty material; often
dingier, darker, or redder overall in age. VEIL scanty, fibrillose, soon disappearing or
leaving a slight zone of hairs at thickest part of stalk (just below apex). SPORE_PRINT
greenish to smoky-olive to blackish (occasionally lacking olive tinge); spores 15-20 x 5-7.5
microns, spindle-shaped to narrowly elliptical, smooth. Cystidia on gills thick-walled.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups (often in small clumps) on ground under
conifers; known only from western North America, not common. In our area it seems to
occur only with ponderosa pine-usually in the fallandearly winter.
EDIBILITY Edible. It is firmerandmeatier than other Chroogomphus species, but
unfortunately, not as numerous.
COMMENTS This robust but relatively rare Chroogomphus is a very beautiful mush-
room when fresh-easily distinguished from other Chroogomphus species by its dry,
convex (never conical or umbonate) capandthick, woolly-scaly stalk. Also, the spore
print is usually greener than that of its brethren,andit often grows in small clumps of
24 individuals rather than in the scattered fashion typical of other pine spikes.
Chroogomphus tomentosus (Woolly Pine Spike)
CAP 2-9 cm broad, peglike becoming broadly conical to convex, umbonate, or plane;
surface dry to very slightly viscid, covered with flattened woolly or felty fibrils or fibrillose
scales; pale buffy-orange to pale or bright ochraceous to ochraceous-orange, the fibrils
sometimes vinaceous-tinged; sometimes purple-stained in age. Flesh yellow-orange to dull
orange or pale orange-buff. GILLS well-spaced, usually decurrent but sometimes ad nate,
yellow-orange to ochraceous or colored like cap, becoming smoky-gray to smoky-brown
as spores mature. STALK 4-18 cm long, (0.3) 0.7-1.5 (2) cm thick; equal or more often
narrowed below; solid, dryandsomewhat fibrillose, colored more or less like cap. VEIL
dry, fibrillose, scanty, colored like cap; disappearing or leaving slight hairy remnants on
stalk near apex. SPORE_PRINT smoky-gray to blackish; spores 15-25 x 6-9 microns,
narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth. Cystidia on gills with fairly thick walls.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground underconifers(hemlock,
fir, Douglas-fir, pine); common in the mixed coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest
and northern Rocky Mountains from late summer through early winter; also common at
times in northern California. It does not seem to occur in our area, but has been found on
the University of California campus in Los Angeles.
EDIBILITY Edible, but better dried than fresh (see comments on p. 484).
COMMENTS The dry, woolly-fibrillose cap, overall dull orange to ochraceous color,
decurrent gills, smoky-black spores,andgrowth with conifers form a distinctive set of
characteristics. The cap is drierandwoollier than that of C. vinic%randC. rutilus, and
not as variable in color, while the stalk is not as thick as that of C. pseudovinic%r. Also, it
seems to favor mixed coniferous forests, whereas the others grow almost exclusively with
pine. Other species: C. leptocystis of western North America tends to have a grayer cap
and thin-walled cystidia, but is otherwise quite similar.
Sui/Ius cavipes (Hollow-Foot) Color Plate 122
CAP 3-12 em broad, convex or broadly umbonate becoming plane or slightly uplifted;
surface dry (not viscid), densely hairy-fibrillose, often with a suede-like or felty texture;
typically dark brown to reddish-brown to orange-brown or tawny (rarely paler), the
margin and/or tips of the fibrils often paler. Flesh firm, white or pale yellow, not blueing
when bruised. PORES arranged more or less radially, large, angular (elongated); pale
yellow becoming dark yellow or greenish-yellow, not blueing; tubes same color, usually
decurrent. STALK 4-9 em long, 0 .5-2 em thick, equal or swollen below, dry, lemon-yellow
above the ring, colored like cap or paler below; gland ular dots absent; lower portion hollow
inside, at least in age; not blueing when cut. VEIL fibrillose-cottony, white, forming a thin,
fragile, fibrillose ring on stalk and/or leaving remnants on cap margin. SPORE_PRINT
dark olive to brown; spores 7-10 x 3.5-4 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in late summerandfall, associated with
larch trees; common throughout the northern hemisphere wherever larch occurs. I have
seen it in OregonandIdaho, but not in California.
EDIBILITY Edibleand"choice" according to some sources, but I find it bland. Its one
saving grace is that it isn't as slimy as many slippery jacks.
COMMENTS Also known as Boletinus cavipes, this is the only Suilluswithaconsistently
hollow stemanddry, densely hairy, brown to tawny cap. Its growth with larch is alsodiag-
nostic. Fresh specimens ha ve an unusually clean, pristine appearance thatis readily notice-
able but difficult to describe (see color plate); the pale pores contrast strikingly with the
darker cap, making it one of our most beautiful boletes. Since larch does not occur in
California, S. cavipes probably doesn't either. However, it is a prominent feature of the
coniferous forests of Idaho, Montana,andthe Cascades, as well as the northeastern
United StatesandCanada. For other larch-loving boletes, see S. grevilleiandthe genus
Fuscobo/etinus(particularly F. ochraceoroseusandF. aeruginascens).
S uillus lake;
(Western Painted Suillus)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface covered
with reddish-brown to brick-red to pinkish or ta wny fibrils orfibrillose scales on a yellow
to dingy orange or tan background; dry, but in one form viscid in wet weather beneath the
fibrils; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, yellow, often discoloring
pinkish when bruised. PORES large (1-3 mm in length), sometimes radially arranged,
yellow when young becoming dingy yellow or ochreandusually discoloring reddish to
dingy reddish-brown where bruised or in age; tubes same color as pores, adnate to de-
current. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, more or less equal, firm, dry, solid;
yellow above the ring, usually with reddish to brown streaks below; glandulardotsabsent;
interior usually staining weakly blue or green when cut, at least near base. VEIL white or
becoming cap color, dry, usually forming a fibrillose ring or ragged zone on stalk, but
sometimes disappearing. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-11 x 34
microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; associated with Douglas-fir
and common throughout the West where its host occurs. In the Rocky Mountains it fruits
in the summerandearly fallandis the most common bolete associated with Douglas-fir.
In our area it is frequent in the fallandwinter, but is not as numerous as S. caerulescens
and S. ponderosus, which also grow with Douglas-fir. It prefers poor, exposed soil and
often fruits on road banks or in campgrounds.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice.
COMMENTS This is one "slippery jack" that is not slippery except in very wet weather.
The dark red to reddish-brown fibrils or scales on the cap plus the presence of a veil and
association with Douglas-fir set it apart. When young it is quite attractive, the scales often
being more pink then red. Heavy rain will wash them off, however,andgelatinize the cap
surface. Then the yellow to dingy orange-brown background color predominates, making
it resemble S. caerulescensandS. ponderosus. In the Pacific Northwest it can also be
confused with two larch-Iovers-S. cavipes, which has a hollow stalk,andFuscobo/etinus
ochraceoroseus, which is more brightly coloredandhas darker spores. The "Painted
Suillus" of eastern North America, S. pictus, is a similar but more brightly colored species
associated with white pine. It has a dry cap with pink to red fibrillose scales, a somewhat
longer stalk with similarly colored fibrils,anda soft, white, cottony annulus (ring). It is
edibleandhighly touted by some, mediocre according to others. Another dry-capped
eastern species, S. decipiens, has an orangish to dingy ochraceous to pinkish-orange,
fibrillose or fibrillose-scaly cap.
Sui/Ius caerulescens (Douglas-Fir Suillus)
CAP 5-18 cm broad, convex becoming plane or shallowly depressed; surface viscid when
moist, with scattered fibrils, scales, or streaks, color variable: dull cinnamon to yellowish,
but most often dull reddish-brown, orange-brown, or yellow-brown toward the center and
yellowish to buff near the margin, with dingy greenish stains sometimes developing in cold
weather; margin sometimes hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, pale yellow or dis-
coloring pinkish to vinaceous. PORES yellow when young, dingier in age, fairly large
(1 mm or more in diameter at maturity)andsometimes radially arranged, not blueing
when bruised but often discoloring dingy reddish-brown or brown; tubes same color,
adnate to decurrent. STALK 2.5-10 cm long, 1.5-3 (4)cm thick, equal or tapered at either
end, firm, solid, dry, yellow above the ring, fibrilloseanddingier belowandoften mottled
with reddish or brown stainsandusually staining brownish after handling; sometimes
spotted but not glandular-dotted; flesh near or at base usually staining blue or green when
cut (sometimes slowly). VEIL white or pallid when young, becoming colored like the cap
in age, not slimy, usually forming a slight to distinct ring on stalk; ring fibrillose or bandlike,
median to superior. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-11 x 3-5 microns,
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under Or near Douglas-fir; known
only from the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia, very common. In our area it is sporadi-
cally abundant, along with S. ponderosus (see comments), from the fall through early
spring. The largest fruiting is usually around Thanksgiving.
EDIBILITY Edible. It is generally listed as mediocre, but one collection I sampled had
a rather pleasing lemony flavor.
COMMENTS If you hunt Douglas-fir forests regularly, you will soon tire offinding this
mundane mushroom. The dull cinnamon to orange-brown or yellowish cap, presence of a
veil, tendency of the stalk base to stain blue when cut,andassociation with Douglas-fir are
key characteristics. A very similar species, S. ponderosus(COLOR PLATE 117), is just
as common in our areaandjust as mediocre an addition to a meal. It differs in having a
viscid, yellow to orange veil (before breaking)anda smoother, viscid to slimy cap which
ranges from reddish-brown to dull yellowish. Its name refers to its sometimes ponderous
size,andnot to the fact that it isn't associated with ponderosa pine. In fact, it is associated
with Douglas-fir just like S. caerulescens.andthe two sometimes mix company. A third
very similar species, S. ;m;tatus, has a smooth viscid capandshorter spores; it occurs
under conifers in the Pacific Northwest. A dark or dingy greenish variety (S. ;m;tatus var.
v;r;descens) also occurs,andboth S. caerulescensandS. ponderosus can develop greenish
stains on the capandstalk in cold weather. This in no way affects their edibility, however.
S uillus grevillei
(Tamarack Jack)
CAP 3-15 cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist,
often shiny when dry; color variable: deep red to reddish-brown with a yellow margin,
varying to gOlden-yellow throughout or yellow with a cinnamon-or rusty-tinged center;
margin sometimes with veil remnants. Flesh thick, yellow but often aging or staining pink-
ish to reddish; not blueing. PORES creamy when young becoming yellowandfinally dingy
ochre or olive-yellow, not blueing but usually turning brownish or rusty where bruised;
often somewhat radially arranged; tubes same color, adnate to decurrent. STALK 4-10
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or slightly thicker below, solid, firm, pale yellow when young
but soon mottled reddish to deep brown or cinnamon below the veilandoften staining
brown when handled; glandular dots absent. VEIL yellowish before breaking, the under-
side often viscid in wet weather; usuallyforminga median to superior, cottony, whitish ring
on stalk. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown to dull cinnamon; spores 8-10 x 3-3.5 microns,
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clusters in woods or bogs, associated
exclusively with larch (tamarack); common from late summer through early winter
throughout the northern half of the northern hemisphere wherever larch occurs. It i
very common in IdahoandMontanaandalso grows on the eastern slope of the Cascades
(frequently in the company of S. cavipes), but is not known from California.
EDIBILITY Edible, but like most slippery jacks, far from incredible.
COMMENTS Also known as S. elegans, this attractive slippery jack is easily told by its
smooth golden-yellow to deep red cap, presence of a veil, absence of glandular dots on the
stem,andmonogamy with larch. In the West the cap tends to be dark red to cinnamon,
while in Europeandeastern North America it is yellower. S. ponderosusandS. caeru-
lescens are somewhat similar but prefer Douglas-fir. Other species: S. prox;mus of
eastern North America is closely related, but its spore print is chestnut-brown when moist
and its stalk often stains greenish when cut open (at least below); it also favors larch.
Suillus umbonatus (Umbonate Slippery Jack)
CAP 3-9 cm broad, obtusely convex becoming convex or plane, often with a low umbo, the
margin sometimes uplifted in age; surface smooth, viscid or slimy when moist, often
streaked, olive-buff to dingy tan ord ull yellowish-brown, often more olive in age, especially
toward margin. Flesh soft, pale yellow to buff, bruising dingy pinkish-brown. PORES
large, more or less radially arranged, pale yellow when young, dingy greenish-yellow in old
age; sometimes staining dingy pinkish-brown when bruised; tubes same color. STALK 3-8
cm long, 4-9 mm thick, more or less equal, solid, usually slender; pale yellow or tan above
the ring, same color or paler below, with pallid to yellow-brown, often obscure glandular
dots; often brownish-stained where handled. VEIL viscid-gelatinous, pale brownish,
forming a median to superior gelatinous ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown toduH
cinnamon-brown; spores 7-11 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps under conifers, particularly lodge-
poleandbeach pines (Pinus contorta), often in large numbers; fruiting in the late summer
and fall or early winter, western North America. It is common in the Sierra Nevada and
on the California coast north of San Francisco; it has also been taken in eastern Canada.
EDIBILITY Too gooeyandgluey to be of value.
COMMENTS This species is one of our most distinctive slippery jacks, easily recog-
nized by its dingy yellow-brown to olive-buff color, frequently umbonate cap, viscid
annulus (ring),andrather small, slender stature. The glandular dots are quite obscure
when young bu t typically darken as the fungus matures. I t is closely related to S. sibiricus
and S. american us, which, however, are more brightly coloredandhave reddish scales on
the cap. Other species: S. flavidus is slightly yellower but otherwise similar if not the
same; S. helenae, found under lodgepole (beach) pine in coastal Oregon, is also very
similar but lacks a veil.
S uillus sibiricus
(Siberian Slippery Jack)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or broadly umbonate; surface viscid or
slimy when moist, bright yellow to dull yellowish, olive-yellow, ochre-yellow, or dark yel-
low, with scattered reddish to cinnamon-brown or dark brown spots, scales, streaks, or
patches of fibrils, especially toward the margin (but these sometimes washed off by rain);
margin incurvedandusually hung with cottony veil remnants. Flesh soft, thin, yellow, not
bl ueing but often staining vinaceous or pinkish when bruised. PO R ES large ( 1-2 mm wide)
when mature, often somewhat radially arranged, mustard-yellow becoming duller or
darker (ochre to yellow-brown) in age, not blueing when bruised (but may stain vinaceous
or pinkish); tubes same color or dingier. STALK 3-11 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, more or
less equal, often curved, solid or sometimes hollow in age, yellow to ochre-yellow, often
staining vinaceous or brown when handledandoften vinaceous-stained at or in the base;
gland ular dotsandsmears present, often inconspicuous when young but typically brown to
cinnamonandquite conspicuous in age. VEIL cottony, whitish to pale yellow or in age
sometimes brownish, usually remaining attached to margin of cap, but sometimes forming
a slight ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon-brown; spores8-12x 3.5-4.5
microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered under conifers, associated with white
(5-needle) pines; widely distributed, but especially common in the summerandfall with
western white pine in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California. It is also found in
the Southwest with southwestern white pineandlimber pine.The very similar S. ameri-
canus(see comments) replaces it in eastern North America.
EDIBILITY Edible but thin-fleshed, insipid,andslimy. Alexander Smith relates the case
of one person who cannot even touch it without suffering an acute allergic reaction.
COMMENTS The combination of viscid yellow cap with reddish to brown spots or
plaques, cottony veil,andglandular-dotted stalk make this one of the most distinctive of
all the slippery jacks. The cap is usually bright yellow in dry weatherandduller or dingier
when moist. The closely related S. amer;canus is often abundant with eastern white pine
and also occurs in the Southwest. Its cap is often more streaked than spottedandits stalk
is usually thinner (3-10 mm), plus it lacks an annulus because its veil normally doesn't come
into contact with the stalk (instead it extends in from the cap margin asa roll of cottony tis-
sue). In the Southwest the two species seem to intergrade; the color plate may represent one
such "hybrid." In the Sierra Nevada two somewhat similar species, S. ripar;usandS.
megapor;nus, are often common. Both have very large, irregular or even gill-like pores
(up to 5 mm longand3 mm broad)andyellow to brownish caps with brown to rusty-brown
scales, streaks, and/or fibrils. S. riparius usually has a well-developed stalk while in S.
megaporinus the stalk is often poorly developedandoff-centerandthe cap is usually small.
S uillus subolivaceus
(Slippery Jill)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex or obtusely umbonate becoming plane or broadly umbonate;
surface smooth but often streaked or with flattened darker fibrils, viscid or slimy when
moist; dull olive to olive-brown, grayish-olive-brown, dingy yellow-brown, or dingy tan.
Flesh pallid to yellowish or tinged olive-gray, not bruising blue. PORES fairly large at
maturity, grayish-olive to grayish-buff or olive-buff when youngandoften beaded with
clear droplets in wet weather, becoming dingy yellowish to brownish-yellow in age (and
droplets often drying blackish); not bruising blue; tubes same color or yellower. STALK
6-12 (17) cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick, equal or thicker below, solid, white or yellowish above
the ring, whitish to brownish below; densely covered throughout with prominent pinkish-
brown to blackish glandular dotsandsmears. VEIL membranous, whitish, with a gelatin-
ous olive to brownish underside; forming a large bandlike, median to superior ring on stalk
which may shrink considerably in age. SPORE_PRINT brown to dingy cinnamon; spores
8-11 x 34 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under conifers, particularly western white pine;
known only from western North America. In the Pacific Northwest it is often common in
the late summerandfall. It probably occurs in California, but I have not seen it south of
the Cascades. Similar species occur in eastern North America (see comments).
EDIBILITY Edible, but of poor quality.
COMMENTS The large bandlike ring, overall dingy olive-brown to yellow-brown color,
slimy ca p,andvery conspicuous gland ular dots on the stem which become blackish in age
make this slippery jack easier to identifythanitistogrip! Theglandulardotsareoftenquite
stickyandresinousandwill stain your fingers brown more quickly than those of other
slippery jacks. S. umbonalus is somewhat similar but grows with lodgepole pineandhas a
gelatinous annulus (ring)andpale yellowish pores when young. S. luteus is easily distin-
guished by its reddish-brown capandsheathing, purplish-tinged veiL In eastern North
America there is a group of "slippery jills" with a yellowish to olive-brown cap and
strikingly broad (1-2 cm high), thick annulus that is baggy (flares at both the bottom and
top edges) when youngandbandlike in age. The most common northern member ofthis
group is S. subluteus. Several species are common in the South, includingS. cothurnatus,
S. salmonicolor (with salmon-tinged pores),andS. pinorigidus. N one are worth eating.
Suillus luteus (Slippery Jack) Color Plate 118
CAP 5-12 cm broad, obtuse or convex becoming plane; surface smooth, viscid or slimy
when moist, often shiny when dry; typically reddish-brown to dark reddish-brown or
chestnut-brown, but ranging sometimes toward yellow-brown or rusty-brown, especially
in age,andsometimes streaked; margin often hung with veil remnants. Flesh thick, white to
pale yellow, not bruising. PORES minute, white at first, becoming yellowandfinally dark
yellowish, often brownish-spotted in age; not bruising blue; tubes same color. STALK 3-10
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, more or less equal, solid, white to pale yellow above, often purplish
below or with a purplish zone; prominent pinkish to brown gland ulardotsand smears soon
developing both aboveandbelow. VEIL sheathing the stalk, membranous, persistent,
white above, purplish to dull lilac belowandviscid when wet; usually forming a large, often
flaring or sleevelike ring that turns brown from falling spores. SPORE_PRINT brown to
dull cinnamon; spores 6-10 x 2.5-3.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in cool wet weather under conifers, particularly pine
but also spruce; widely distributed. It is abundant in pine plantations in northeastern North
America,andhas also been reported from the Pacific North westandSouth west. A fa vored
associate is Scots pine (Pinus sylveslris),andit may very well turn up in California where
Scots pine has been planted.
EDIBILITY Edibleandwidely collected, though some people are apparently"allergic" to
it. According to one source it is "the best of the slippery jacks"-a classic case of damning
with faint praise, if you ask me. As in most slippery jacks, the slimy skin peels off easily.
COMMENTS This species is the" original" slippery jack, i.e., the one from which all the
others take their name. It can be told by its reddish-brown cap, glandular-dotted stem,and
sheathing veil which typically forms a prominent annulus (ring) on the stalk. The dull
purplish color of the lower stalk or underside of the ring is also distinctive. S. borealis
(see comments under S. pseudobrevipes) is a closely related westerner with no annulus.
Suillus pseudobrevipes (Veiled Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface slimy or viscid
when moist, smooth or with a few patches of veil tissue near margin, but often appearing
fibrillose or streaked; dingy yellowish to yellow-brown, dark yellow-brown, or honey-
colored, often becoming darker or more cinnamon in age; margin often hung with whitish
veil remnants. Flesh thick, white to pale yellow, not blueing. PORESandtubes pale yellow
to yellow becoming dingy yellowish in age, not blueing. STALK 2-8 cm long, 1-3 cm
thick, often rather shortandthick, equal or tapered downward, solid, firm, white when
young, yellowish in age; glandular dots absent or obscure when young but tending to
become brownandmore visible in age. VEIL white to dingy lavender or lavender-brown,
usually forming a median fibrillose ring on stalk, but the ring often slight or collapsed;
sometimes forming a sheath over the base of stalk or merely leaving remnants on cap
margin. SPORE_PRINT brown to pale brownish; spores 7-9 x 2.54 microns, spindle-
shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious under pines (mainly ponderosaandlodgepole);
known only from western North America. In our area it fruits only in scattered localities
with ponderosa pine, in the fallandwinter. In the SouthwestandRocky Mountains it is
quite abundant, however,andI've also seen it in the Sierra Nevada.
EDIBILITY Edible.
COMMENTS This slippery jack tends to have a short, stocky stem like its namesake,
S. brevipes. but the presence of a veilandpaler ca p color distinguish it. Sometimes the veil
persists as a roll of cottony tissue on the cap margin instead offorming a distinct annulus
(ring), leading to confusion with several species that typically boast veil remnants on the
margin of the cap but not the stalk. These species include: S. volcanalis, glandular dots
obscure, cap yellowish or tawny (or often with pinkish to reddish-brown areas), growing
in volcanic soil (often buried) with Jeffrey pine in Mt. Lassen National Park, California;
S. brunnescens, cap white with the slime becoming chocolate-brown, glandular dots small,
associated with sugarandlodgepole pines; S. borealis, cap dark brown, veil dull lavender
or purplish (as in S. /ureus), stalk glandular-dotted in age, associated with western white
pine; S. glandulosipes, cap fibrilloseandpale ochre to cinnamon, glandular dots very
conspicuous, locally common in northern coastal California; andS. albidipes, whose cap
is whitish to buff, brownish, or dull cinnnamonandhas a roll of cottony veil tissue on the
margin when young. I have seen enormous fruitings of the latter species under lodgepole
pine in OregonandWashington.
Suillus brevipes (Short-Stemmed Slippery Jack) Color Plate 115
CAP 5-13 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane; surface smooth, viscid
or very slimy when moist, often shiny when dry; dark vinaceous-brown to dark brown
when young, often fading in age to reddish-brown, dull cinnamon, or even tan (or in one
form yellow-brown)andsometimes appearing streaked; margin naked. Flesh thick, white
or often becoming yellow in age, soft, not blueing when bruised. PORESandtubes pale
when young, becoming darker or dingier yellow in ageandfinally olive-yellow; not blueing.
STALK 2-7 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or slightly thicker belowandoften quite short;
firm, solid, white becoming pale yellow in age; glandular dots absent or sometimes barely
visible in age (never.prominent). VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon;
spores 7-10 x 34 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious under conifers (particularly 2-and 3-needle
pines, also spruce); very widespreadandcommon. In the West it is especially abundant
with lodgepoleandbishop pines. In our area it fruits in the fallandwinter but is en-
countered infrequently, perhaps due to the superabundance of S. pungens.
EDIBILITY Edibleandperhaps the best of our local slippery jacks-which is hardly a
compliment. Peel the slimy pellicle (skin) before cooking it.
COMMENTS This widespreadandoften abundant slippery jack is best recognized by
its smooth, slimy, dark brown to reddish-browncap(whichmayfade in age), absence ofa
veil,andabsence of obvious glandular dots on the stem. True to its name, the stalk is often
rather short, but it is a variable speciesandlonger-stemmed individuals are not unusual.
The viscid capandnon-reticulate, more or less equal stalk distinguish it from Boletus; the
cap is never olive-gray as in S. pungens,andthere is no veil as in S. pseudobrevipes, while
S. granulatusandits relatives have a distinctly glandular-dotted stem. Other species witha
smooth viscid cap, no veil,andabsent or inconspicuous glandular dots include: S. pallidi-
eeps of the Rocky Mountains, with a white cap when young that becomes pale cinnamon
or yellowish in age;andS. oeeidentalis, common under ponderosa pine in the Southwest,
with a paler (buff to light brown or pinkish-brown) cap that is not white when young.
Suillus granulatus (Granulated Slippery Jack)
CAP 3-15 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly wavy; surface smooth, viscid or very slimy
when moist, often shiny when dry; cinnamon-brown to brown, orange-brown, rusty-
cinnamon, or yellow-brown (but in some forms whitish when young), often streaked or
mottledandpaler or duller in old age; margin naked. Flesh thick, soft, white when young
but soon pale yellow. PORESandtubes whitish when very youngandoften beaded with
milky droplets, soon becoming buff or yellowandeventually dingy yellowish or brownish-
spotted when mature. STALK 3-8 cm long.O.7-2.5 cm thick, moreorlessequal, firm, solid,
whitish when young, becoming yellow aboveanddingy cinnamon-or reddish-stained
toward base; covered with pinkish to reddish-tan or brown glandular dotsandsmears in
age. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon or ochre; spores 7-10 x 2.54
microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under pines in the summer, fall,
and early winter; very widespreadandcommon, but replaced in our area by S. pungens.
EDIBILITY Edible, but bland (see S. pungens).
COMMENTS This widespread slippery jack can be found almost anywhere where there
are pines. It is closely related to S. pungens, but lacks the olive-gray tones so characteristic
of that species. The combination of gland ular-dotted stem, slimy or shiny cap,andabsence
of a veil are quite distinctive, but there are a number of closely related species which are
rather difficult to distinguish (fort unately, allare apparently edible). These variants, which
are especially numerousandconfusing in the pine forests of the Rocky Mountains and
Southwest, include: S.flavogranulatus of the Rockies, with a yellowish to dingy ochre cap
at maturityandlargerpores;S. kaibabensis, common in the Southwest, with a buff to pale
cinnamon or yellowish cap;andS. wasatehieus, with reddish pores when young that
become yellowish in age. In the Pacific Northwest another species, S. punetatipes, is quite
common under various conifers. It also has glandular dots or smearsandlacks a veil, but
is largerandthicker-stemmed with larger yellow pores that are often somewhat radially
elongated and/or decurrent. Its flesh is whiteandits cap color variable: orange-brown to
dark brown, dingy tan, pinkish-brown, gray, vinaceous-gray, or purple-tinged. S. mon-
tieolus of the Sierra Nevada resembles S. granulatus but has a swollen or bulbous stem.
S. plaeidus of eastern North America is very similar, but its cap remains whitish for a long
time before darkening or turning yellowish. Also see S. albidipes (under S. pseudobrevi-
pes), which differs in having veil tissue on the cap margin when young.
Suillus pungens
(Pungent Slippery Jack)
CAP 4-18 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or plane; surface smooth, slimy or
viscid when moist, often shiny when dry; color extremely variable: usually white when very
young but soon olive to gra yish-oliveandthen becoming yellow, ta wny-cinnamon, rusty-
brown, orange, reddish-brown, or often mottledandstreaked with various combinations
of the above colors; margin typically naked or with a slight roll of cottony tissue when
young. Flesh thick, white when young, soon becoming lemon-yellowandsoft, not blueing;
odor pungent or pleasant (somewhat banana-like). PORES white when youngandoften
beaded with white to pinkish droplets in wet weather, becoming yellowandfinally dark
yellow-brown or dingy ochre in age, not blueing when bruised; tubes same color. STALK
2-10 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or with a-slightly tapered or swollen base, firm, solid,
white when young becoming yellow in age, with conspicuous reddish to brown glandular
dotsandsmears. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown to dull cinnamon-brown;
spores 9-10 x 3-3.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on ground near or under M on-
terey pine; apparently endemic to our area, but also occurring where Monterey pines ha ve
been planted (it is a common "lawn mushroom" in our area, often growing with Chroo-
gomphus vinic%randHe/vella /acunosa). It is most abundant in the fallandwinter but
can be found whenever it's damp enough. It is also quite common under knobcone and
ponderosa pines-but apparently only within the geographical range of Monterey pine.
EDIBILITY Edible; disdained by some due to its"harsh, unpleasant, subna useous" taste,
but prized by others. In my opinion its soft fleshandslimy texture are much bigger draw-
backs than its flavor. Since it occurs in such large quantitiesandis easy to identify, it is
definitely worth experimenting with. To remove the slime, simply peel off the skin.
COMMENTS Locally this is our most prolific bolete, appearing in colossal numbers
wherever there are pines. The remarkable series of color changes it undergoes is apt to
baffle the color-conscious beginner. On the other hand, when several individuals are
present it affords an instant means of recognition! It is closely rela ted to S. granu/atus, but
that species is never grayish-olive when young. The glandular-dotted stemandmilky
droplets on the pore surface of young specimens are also distinctive.
S. pungens vies with Hygrophorus eburneusandthe "Insidious Gomphidius" (Gom-
phidius oregonensis) for the title of "SlipperiestandSlimiest Fungus Among Us." An
organic version of hockey or caroms can be played on a wet surface, using the caps of young
S. pungens for pucks. Overmature individuals, on the other hand, are more aptly called
S. "spongens" than S. pungens-they literally seethe with fat, agitated maggotsandsag
with so much excess moisture that they practically demand to be wrung out like a sponge!
SuillusJuscotomentosus Color Plates 119, 120
(Poor Man's Slippery Jack)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, or viscid in age or wet weather, at first
covered with olive-brown to dark brown or fuscous (deep grayish-brown) fibrils or small
fibrillose scales (in this stage usually dry), the scales often sparserinage, revealing the paler
(dull ochre to buff) background, sometimes more cinnamon-colored overall at maturity
or appearing streaked; margin naked. Flesh thick, yellow to pale orange or orange-buff,
not blueing when bruised; taste mild to slightly unpleasant. PORES typically orange-buff
when youngandsometimes beaded with droplets, becoming yellowish-buff to dark dingy
yellow or olive-yellow in old age, not blueing when bruised; tubes same color. STALK
4-12 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or somewhat thicker below, solid, firm, pallid to yellow
or brownish-buff or often pinkish-orange to pale orange, especially toward base; glandular
dotsandsmears presentandusually conspicuous at least in age, often elongated, same
color as stalk or darker (brown to cinnamon). VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown
to dull cinnamon-brown; spores 9-12 x 3-4 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on ground under pines, often in large num-
bersr; originally described from Santa Cruz County , California, but occurring in the Sierra
NevadaandCascades as well. In our area it is often abundant in the late fallandwinter
under ponderosa, knobcone,anddigger pine, while the very similar S. acerb us (see
comments) favors Monterey pine.
EDIBILITY Edible, but slimyandinsipid. In blind tastings of local edible boletes, it has
consistently placed last. Asked to rate each bolete on a scale of 1-10, several tasters gave
it a zeroandone, a minus five!
COMMENTS This common bolete resembles S. tomentosus but does not stain blue. The
pores are usually orange-buff when young, rather than white as in S. pungensandS.
granulatus.andthe brownish to grayish-brown cap fibrilsandabsence of a veil are also
distinctive. The "Starving Man's Slippery Jack," S. acerbus, is a very similar species with
a more viscid, less fibrillose-scaly cap. It is supposedly associated exclusively with Mon-
terey pine, but I wonder whether it is really distinct fromS.fuscolOmentosus. The degree
of viscidity seems to depend on ageandweather conditions,andI've found specimens
under Monterey, knobcone,anddigger pines which could be referred to either species.
Suillus tomentosus (Blue-Staining Slippery Jack)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, but in wet weather or age often
viscid, at first covered with a dense coating of minute hairs (fibrils) which break up to form
scattered scalesandare often quite sparse (or even absent) in age; fibrils or scales usually
grayish-brown to brown (reddish in one form), sometimes pallid or buff when young; back-
ground usually pale yellow to yellow-orange, orange-buff, or dark dull orange; margin
naked. Flesh thick, pallid to yellow, usually blueing(but sometimes slightly or slowly) when
bruised; taste mild or acidic. PORES dingy brown to dark cinnamon when young,
becoming dingy yellow to buff or olive-yellow in age; usually blueing at least slightly when
bruised (at least in age); tubes yellowish to olive-yellow. STALK 3-11 (15) cm long, 1-3 cm
thick, equal or thicker below, firm, solid, colored like background of cap ororanger, with
numerous small glandular dots which may be same colororbrownerand are often obvious
in age; base sometimes reddish-stained. VEIL absent. SPORE_PRINT dark olive-brown
to dull cinnamon; spores 7-11 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in troops on ground underpinesand other conifers,
late summer through early winter; widely distributed, but especially common in the West,
where it is one of the most common of all the slippery jacks. I have seenenormousfruitings
in Idaho, Washington, northern California,andthe Sierra Nevada, especially with lodge-
pole pineandin mixed forests of aspenandpine. In our area, however, it is largely re-
placed by the similar S.fuscotomentosus.
EDIBILITY Edible,andevery bit the equal of S. fuscotomentosus (see comments on
the edibility of that species).
COMMENTS The fibrillose to scaly cap, brownish pores when young, absence of a veil,
glandular-dotted stem,andtendency of the poresandj orthe flesh to stain blue or greenish-
blue when bruised form a distinctive combina tion of characters. It is one of the commonest
and most variable slippery jacks, with several slightly different color forms. Other species:
S. var;egatus of Europe is very similar if not the same; S. ret;culatus is a rare, reticulate-
stalked species that stains blue.
Fuscoboletinus ochraceoroseus
(Rosy Larch Bolete)
CAP 7-20 (25) cm broad, convex to plane or slightly umbonate, or in age the margin some-
times uplifted; surface dry, densely fibrillose or fibrillose-scalyandoften uneven or pitted;
rosy-red to bright pink, but often overlaid with whitish hairs (fibrils),andoftendarkerand
duller (brick-red) in age; margin sometimes yellowishandhung with veil remnants. Flesh
thick, yellow or tinged pink under cap cuticle, bruising slightly greenish-blue or not at all;
taste often slightly bitter or acrid. PORES large, elongated (2-5 mm long)andusually
arranged radially; yellow becoming dark yellow to olive-ochreandfinally dingy brown in
old age, not bruising blue; tubes shallow, same color, adnate to decurrent. STALK3-7 (10)
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or with an enlarged base (and often a flaring apex); solid,
firm, yellow ( colored like pores) or with reddish to brownish stains, base often whitish and
fibrillose; apex often slightly reticulate from tubes; glandular dots absent. VEIL
membranous, white or yellowish, thin, sometimes forming a slight ring on stalk but more
often clinging to margin of cap. SPORE_PRINT dark reddish-brown to dark vinaceous-
brown; spores 7.5-9.5 x 2.5-3 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups on ground under conifers, associated with
larch; known only from the northern Rocky MountainsandPacific Northwest. I ha ve seen
large fruitings in Idaho in September, but apparently it isn't common every year.
EDIBILITY Edible, but of very poor quality due to the slightly bitter taste.
COMMENTS The beautiful rosy-red to pink cap, radially arranged pores, presence of a
veil,andassociation with larch are the most distinctive characters of this most distinctive
bolete.lts color is somewhat reminiscent of Suil/us pictus, which grows with eastern white
pine,andS. lakei, which grows with Douglas-fir, but the spore print is darkerand the stalk
usually thicker. Other species: F. paluster of northeastern North America is somewhat
similar (cap deep red) but much smallerandmore slender, with even larger pores; it grows
in swampsandbogs. Another very striking bog-lover, F. spectabi/is(COLOR PLATE
126), is also restricted to the NortheastandCanada. One glance is usually sufficient to
identify it (as evidenced by the color plate), but see the key to Fuscoboletinus for details.
Fuscoboletinus aeruginascens (Grayish Larch Bolete)
CAP 3-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane or slightly umbonate; surface viscid or slimy
when moist, smooth or streaked with flattened fibrils, or at times with darker fibrillose
scales, sometimes cracking in dry weather; grayish-white to gray, grayish-brown, olive-
gray, or dingy yellowish, sometimes with darker scales or developing grayish to dingy olive
spots; margin usually hung with veil remnants. Flesh soft in age, white to yellowish,
typically turning bluish-green when bruised (but often slowly or only very slightly), at
least in the stalk. PORES smallandround when young but often ra ther largeandsomewha t
radially arranged in age; white at first becoming gray to grayish-brown at maturity, usually
staining blue to dingy greenish when bruised (but often only slightly or slowly); tubes same
color. STALK 4-6 (9) cm long, 0.7-1.5 cm thick, equal or tapering upward or sometimes
pinched at base; solid, pallid or tinged olive above the ring, gray to olive-grayish to
brownish belowandusually somewhat viscid; glandular dots absent, apex often reticulate
from tubes. VEIL membranous, white to gray or yellowish, usually forming a median to
superior ring on stalk. SPORE_PRINT dark reddish-brown or vinaceous-brown; spores
8-12 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in woodsandaround the edges of bogs, asso-
ciated with larch (or tamarack)andcommon wherever larch occurs-the most widespread
member of the genus. In the Pacific Northwest it is often common in the springand again in
the late summerandfall; it probably does not occur in California.
EDIBILITY Edible, but unappealing because of its sliminess, thin flesh,anddingy color.
COMMENTS The whitish to grayish to yellowish cap, white (never yellow!) pores that
become gra yish in age, presence of a veil,andtendency to bruise weakly bluish-green are the
distinguishing fieldmarks of this undistinguished larch-lover. It is likely to be mistaken for
a Sui/lus (and is even placed in that genus by some mycologists), but the spore print is
vinaceous-brown. In eastern North America it often grows with F. spectabilis, a very
striking species described in the key to Fuscoboletinusandshown in Color Plate 126.
F. serot;nus is a similar species with chocolate-brown slime on the cap; F. grisellus is
colored like F. aeruginascens but does not normally bruise bluish-green, has a more conical
and less viscid cap,andmore elongated pores. Both species are associated with tamarack
(eastern larch)andare fairly common in the northeastern U.S.andCanada.
Boletellus russellii (Jagged-Stemmed Bolete) Color Plate 125
CAP 3-9 (13) cm broad, convex to broadly convex or rarely plane; surface dry, yellow-
brown to buffy-brown or olive-gray, varying to brownish, reddish, or cinnamon-brown;
minutely velvety to obscurely scaly, often becoming areolate (breaking up into small
scales) in age, revealing the flesh beneath; margin at first incurved. Flesh yellow, not
blueing when bruised. PORES rather large (1 mm broad or more), yellow when young,
greenish-yellow in age, not blueing; tubes same color. STALK 10-20 cm long, 0.8-2 cm
thick, equal or slightly thickened downward, typically longandslender, often curved at
base; coarsely reticulate-lacerate (raggedanddeeply ridged) more or less throughout; dull
reddish to reddish-brown or cinnamon; solid, dry or with a viscid base when fresh. VEIL
absent. SPORE_PRINT dark olive to olive-brown; spores 15-20 x 7-11 microns, elliptical
to spindle-shaped, deeply ridged or wrinkled longitudinally, with a cleft at apex.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground under hardwoods (espe-
cially oak) or occasionally conifers; fairly common in the summerandearly fall in eastern
North America, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. It also occurs in southern Arizona,
like many other "eastern" species.
EDIBILITY Edible, but rather softandbland.
COMMENTS This distinctive bolete is easily recognized by its long, slender, lacerated
(ragged or jagged) stalk (see the color plate), dry cap that is frequently areolate, and
yellow to greenish-yellow pores that do not stain blue. Another species with a long, slim,
lacerated stalk, Austroboletus(=Boletus, Boletellus) betula, differs in having a smooth,
viscid, yellow-orange to reddish-brown cap, a more southern distribution,andpitted
spores. Another southerner, Boletellus ananas, is quite different. It has a fibrillose to
coarsely scaly or shaggy, purplish to reddish (or sometimes yellowish) cap plus a whitish
veil when young. The veil usually leaves remnants on the cap margin rather than forming
a ring. The stalk is whitish to tanandsmooth to slightly fibrillose,andthe fleshandpores
turn blue when bruised or cut. Neither ofthe above species is worth eating.
Pulveroboletus ravenelii
(Veiled Sulfur Bolete)
CAP 2-8 (12) em broad, convex or nearly round when young, becoming plane in age; sur-
face dry to slightly viscid if wet, bright yellow with orange, pinkish, or reddish-brown tones
developing at the center, especially in age; covered with yellow cottony or powdery veil
material, at least when young; margin often covered with veil remnants also. Flesh thick,
white to yellow, changing slowly to blue when exposed, then eventually yellowish to dingy
brown. PORESandtubes bright yellow when fresh, becoming dingier or olive-yellow in
age; usually bruising bluish-green,andthen sometimes turning dark brownish. STALK
6-15 em long, 0.5-1.5 em thick, equal to slightly irregular, often rather long; dry, bright
yellow, powdery or cottony at least when young, except at apex. VEIL bright yellow,
cottony-powdery to cobwebby, leaving remnants on capandcap marginandstalk (and
sometimes a slight ring on stalk). SPORE_PRINT dark olive-brown to brown; spores
8-12x 4-6.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in woods; widely distributed, but rather rare on
the west coast. In our area I ha ve found it in the fallandearly winter in mixed woods of oak
and pineandunder manzanita.
EDIBILITY Like myself, not firmly established.
COMMENTS I was dumbfounded by the sight of my first Pulveroboletus. As boletes go
it is an odd creature-a gaudy misfit, an audacious anomaly. The brilliant yellow cottony
veil which covers the capandstalk when young sets it apart from all other boletes. In old
age or rainy weather the veil remnants may be obliterated, but the colorandrelatively
long, slender stalk help identify it. Though rare in California, it is included here because
it is so bizarre.Uyou should be (un)fortunate enough to fall on top of one, as Idid, I would
like you to know what it was.
Gyroporus castaneus (Chestnut Bolete) Color Plate 148
CAP 2.5-7 (10) cm broad, convex to plane or shallowly depressed; surface dry, minutely
hairy to smooth, sometimes with a delicate whitish bloom when young; color variable:
chestnut-brown to brown, cinnamon-brown, orange-brown, or rusty-tawny. Flesh thick,
firm, white, not blueing when bruised. PORESandtubes white, becoming pale yellowish
in old age, not blueing. STALK 3-9 cm long, 0.5-1 (3) cm thick, often rather slender and
more or less equal (but a robust form also occurs), sometimes thicker or swollen below;
surface dry, uneven, brown to tawny (colored more or less like cap or slightly paler); hollow
or partially hollow at least at maturity (especially toward base). SPORE_PRINT pale
yellow to yellow; spores 8-12 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptical-oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups under oaksandother hardwoods; fairly common in
Europeandeastern North America, but extremely rare in the West. I have found it only
twice in our area, under a tanoak in July (while truffle-hunting)andunder a large live oak
in October. The slender form is the common one in North America.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly esteemed in Europe, but alas, hard to come by in our area.
One day I was picking fairy ring mushrooms (Marasmius oreades) on a lawn. A round
Polish woman came outandsaid the mushrooms I was picking were no good. Then she
invited me inside, where she proceeded to stuff me with sour cream cookies(she thought I
was too skinny). S he showed me a picture of herson, who was in the navy. Then she gave me
a necklace of dried Gyroporus castaneus. They were her last ones, she said,andthey came
from "the old country, where everything tastes better." They made a fabulous soup. Sodid
the M arasmius.
COMMENTS In the West it is unlikely to be confused with anything, as it is unlikely to
be found.
Boletus piperatus (Peppery Bolete)
CAP 2-8 cm broad (but usually less than 5 cm), convex to plane; surface slightly viscid to
dry, usually smooth, yellow-brown to buff, rusty-cinnamon, orange-brown. or reddish-
brown. Flesh thin, yellowish-buff to pinkish in cap, bright yellow in base of stalk; taste
distinctly acrid (peppery). PORES rather large (1-2 mm in diameter), yellow-brown to
cinnamon, reddish-brown, coppery or brick-red, darkening slightly when bruised but not
blueing; tubes tawny to reddish-yellow. STALK 2-8 (12) cm long, 0.4-1 (2) cm thick,
equal or tapered downward, often slender; smooth, solid, colored more or less like the
cap; base coated with bright yellow mycelium. SPORE_PRINT brown to dull cinnamon;
spores 8-12x 3-5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods, associated mainly
with conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits in the fallandwinter with pine and
Douglas-fir, but is not common (I find it only once or twice each year). Farther north.
however, it is sometimes abundant.
EDIBILITY Questionable. 1 t's not as bitter as some ofthe peppery RussulaandLactarius
species,andtherefore could be useful as a spice. However, according to one source the
peppery taste disappears when thoroughly cooked,andaccording to another it is mildly
poisonous unless thoroughly cooked.
COMMENTS Our smallest Boletus. this species is suggestive of a Suil/us (and was once
placed in that genus), but has neither glandular dots nor a veil. Some view it as a possible
"missing link" between Suil/usandBoletus. If you have any doubt as to its identity, just
chew a small piece ofthe cap for a couple minutes! The bright yellow myceliumandyellow
flesh at the base of the stalk are also characteristic. B. p;perato;des is a similar widespread
peppery species with blue-staining pores.
Boletus subtomentosus (Boring Brown Bolete)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, minutely velvety (subtomentose),
but may appear smooth in age; yellow-brown to drab olive-brown to dull brown, or
occasionally yellowish, but in age or especially in wet weather often redder (cinnamon-
brown); sometimes with pallid, yellow, or reddish-tinged cracks, especially near margin.
Flesh pallid to pale yellow, sometimes blueing slightly when exposed. PORES large (1-3
mm in diameter), dull yellow to bright yellow, blueing weakly or not at all when bruised.
STALK 4-14 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, equal or tapered either way, smooth or scurfy, the
apex often coarsely reticulate from downward-extending tube walls; firm, yellow to buff,
or often stained brown to dull cinnamon (especially below), but never red. SPORE
PRINT olive-brown; spores 10-16 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups on ground in woods; widely
distributedandvery common, but not often occurring in large numbers. In our area
it fruits throughout the mushroom season with a variety of tree hosts (oak, conifers, etc.).
EDIBILITY Edible, but definitely not choice. In blind tastings of local boletes it has
consistently placed near the bottom.
COMMENTS This boring but ubiquitous bolete with the boring brown cap does not
show red on the stem, in contrast to B. zelleriandB. chrysenteron. In addition, the cap
is not often as conspicuously areolate as that of the latter species,andthe pores are larger.
X erocomus subtomentosus is a synonym. B. spadiceus is an equally boring but ubiqitous
bolete. I t has the same general appearanceandgrows in the same places at about the same
time. True, its cap may be more reddish-brownandits pores may blue more readily, but
the only way to separate it with certainty is by applying a drop of ammonium hydroxide
to the cap surface. A fleeting blue-green to blue-black reaction means B. spadiceus;
otherwise, it's B subtomentosus. Since neither is worth eating, the distinction is academic.
Inundating boring brown boletes with ammonia may be your idea of fun. but it's not
mine!
Boletus zeller; (Zeller's Bolete) Color Plate 128
CAP 3-16 cm broad, convex to plane; surface dry, often wrinkled or unevenandwith a
frosted orfinely powdered appearance when young; black to dark gray or dark olive-brown
when fresh, often reddening somewhat in age or wet weather, especially toward the
margin; surface cracking only slightly or not at all. Flesh thick, white to pale yellow, some-
times blueing erratically when exposed. PORESandtubes yellow to dark yellow or olive-
yellow. often blueing when bruised (but often not blueing). STALK 4-12 cm long.0.5-3 (5)
cm thick. equal or slightly thicker at either end; firm. yellow to tan with delicate red
granules when young. usually dark red above or throughout in age. SPORE_PRINT
olive-brown; spores 12-16 x 4-5.5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical. smooth.
HABITAT Solitary. scattered. or in groups on ground or rotten wood; very common
along the Pacific Coast in woods of all kinds. In our area it fruits in the fall. winter. and
early springandis one of the few boletes with a tolerance for redwood (I have even found
it growing on a redwood stump!). It is also abundant under oakandfarther north. under
alder.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly rated by some sources. In my experience. however, it
cooks up slimyandtasteless.
COMMENTS The sensational combination of black, yellow. red,andoften blue makes
this our most colorful bolete. The color plate shows specimens whose caps have begun to
develop a reddish tinge. but perfectly fresh caps can be coal-black or deep gray. B. chry-
senteronandB. truncatus often have a more copiously cracked (areolate) cap that is
usually paler or duller in color. B. citr;n;porus has a dark cap. but its stem is not red.
In eastern North America, B. zeller; is supplanted by B. bad;us, a common edible species
with a dark yellow-brown to bay-red cap. Like B. zeller;, it grows on rotten wood (as well
as on the ground), usually under conifers.
Boletus chrysenteron (Cracked-Cap Bolete)
CAP 3-11 cm broad. convex to plane; surface dry, minutely velvety when young, in age
usually conspicuously cracked or fissured (areolate). especially toward the margin;
color variable: dark olive-brown to dark grayish-olive, grayish-brown, or brown; often
paler (tan to olive-bum in age, with pink to reddish tints usually visible in at least some of
the cracks (especially those toward the margin). Flesh fairly thick, whitish to yellow,
usually blueing slowly when exposed. PORES rather large (about 1 mm in diameter),
yellow to greenish-yellow or sometimes dingy brownish, usually (but not always) bruising
blue or greenish (sometimes slowly!); tubes also yellow. STALK 4-13 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm
thick, equal or tapering downward, smooth or minutely scurfyandoften longitudinally
ridged or striate, firm; color variable, but typically a mixture of yellowandred (yellow
with reddish fibrils or yellow aboveandred to dark rhubarb-red below). SPORE_PRINT
olive-brown; spores 10-15 x 3.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups under treesandin wooded areas, often near trails
or on road banks; widely distributedandubiquitous, but rarely fruiting in large numbers.
In our area it can be found throughout the mushroom season.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not choice. It is rather mushyandinsipid when cooked.
COMMENTS The conspicuously fissured (areolate) cap with pinkish-tinted cracks
plus the yellow pores that usually bruise blue are the hallmarks of this cosmopolitan
bolete. Also known asXerocomuschrysenteron, it is sometimes confused with B. zelleri.
which has a darker cap that is not usually areolate. There are several verysimilar"cracked-
cap" boletes that are difficult to distinguish in the field, including: Tylopilus amylosporus,
with dark reddish-brown, erratically amyloid sporesandpallid (not pink or red) flesh in
the cracks; B. mendocinensis, with pinkish to reddish pores; B. truncatus, with truncate
("chopped off') spores;andB. porosporus, with truncate sporesandno pinkish tints
in the cracks. The latter two species are particularly wides preadandcommon,andseem to
intergrade. A robust form (cap 5-15 cm broad, stalk 1-3.5 cm thick) of B. truncatusbears
special mention because it occurs commonly in our coastal forests. Its cap is often only
slightly areolateandshows little or no pink in the cracks. Since none ofthe above species
are worth eating, it hardly matters whether or not you identify them correctly, unless
you aspire to be a professional boletologist (or plan on entertaining a professional bole-
tologist). All of them, along with B. zelleriandB. dryophilus, are prone to attack by a
powdery white to bright yellow parasitic fungus (Hypomyces chrysospermum) which
eventually engulfs the entire fruiting body, making it look like a very sick puffball.
Boletus dryophilus
(Oak-Loving Bolete)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, minutely velvety
when young, often cracked or fissured in age, usually reddish to reddish-brown or pinkish,
but sometimes overlaid with minute olive-brown to olive-gray hairs. Flesh thick, yellow,
usually blueing when exposed. PORES often somewhat irregularly shaped, yellow to
olive-yellowandusually blueing when bruised; tu bes same color. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long,
1-2 (2.5) cm thick, often rather shortandstout, usually pinched or narrowed at the base and
often slightly swollen above it; sometimes nearly equal; firm, solid, usually distinctly
yellow at apexandred to dark reddish below. SPORE_PRINT brown to olive-brown;
spores 12-16 x 5.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in grou ps in humus under live oak, fall through early spring, known
only from California. It is rather rare in our area, but sometimes abundant in southern
California. In fact, it is one of the most common boletes in Los AngelesandSan Diego
counties.
EDIBILITY Edibleandfairly popular in the above-mentioned region. Collections I have
sampled were mediocre,andin our area they are more readily parasitized by Hypomyces
chrysospermum than any other bolete!
COMMENTS This interesting endemic species is closely related to B. chrysenteron. but
is somewhat stouterandapparently grows only with oak. The reddish tones usually present
in the cap plus the distinct yellowandred zones on the stalk help identify it. The abruptly
tapered or "pinched" stem base is also distinctive when present. Other species: B. smithii
has a similarly colored cap, but is largerandstouter. Its stalk may be narrowed at the base
but is usually pallid or yellow with a bright red band near or at the apex. It seems to grow
only with conifersandis quite common in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest.
Boletus bieolor
(RedandYellow Bolete)
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth or
minutely velvety, sometimes cracking in age; deep red to pinkish-red or rose, the margin
sometimes yellowish in age. Flesh thick, pale yellow, blueing erratically or not at all when
exposed. PORES yellow to bright yellow, sometimes with reddish areas in old age;
typically staining blue or blue-green slowly when bruised; tubes also yellow. STALK 5-10
cm long, 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker below or with a tapered base; smooth, firm, solid,
not reticulate or only slightly so at apex; deep red to rosy except for yellow apex. SPORE
PRINT olive-brown; spores 8-12x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, associated mainly with oak and
perhaps aspen; common in the summerandearly fall in eastern North Americaandalso
occurring in the Southwest, but apparently not found on the west coast. A related species,
B. coccyginus (see comments), occurs in Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest, but is rare.
EDIBILITY Edible,andaccording to some, excellent. However, gastrointestinal upsets
have been attributed to closely related species, so exercise caution.
COMMENTS The rosy to red capandstalk contrast vividly with theyellow pores, making
this a most beautiful bolete. There are a number of similar red-capped, yellow-pored,
blue-staining species that form a close-knit group within Boletus. They are difficult to
distinguish in the fieldandare largely confined to the humid forests of easternandsouthern
North Americaandthe tropics. They include: B. sensibilis, somewhat larger, with a brick-
red capandyellow stalk; B. miniato-palleseens, cap rosy-red fading to yellowandstalk
yellow to reddish-brown, common;andseveral smaller, slimmer (stalk less than I cm
thick) species such as B. rubellus, widespread, B. eampestris, especially common on
shaded la wns,andB.Jraternus, with an areolate cap at maturity. All of these species bruise
blue (often quickly)anddo not ha ve the robust, reticulate stalk of B. regius. Other species:
B. coeeyginus is a rare, small, slender western species with a red to rose or purple-red cap
and yellow poresandflesh that do not stain blue; B. bieolor var. borealis resembles the
typical variety but has red to orange pores; it occurs mainly in the Southeast.
Boletus mirabilis
(Admirable Bolete)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex to plane; surface moist to dry, granulose to plushlike
(roughened by numerous small, often erect, fibrillose scales); dark reddish-brown to
maroon-brown, bay-brown, or chocolate-brown; margin often hung with fragments of
tissue. Flesh thick, white to dingy pinkish or yellow, rarely blueing when bruised. PORES
fairly large (I-2 mm in diameter), pale yellow becoming mustard-yellowandfinally
greenish-yellow, not blueing when bruised but sometimes staining darker yellow; tubes
also yellow. STALK 7-20 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, usually club-shaped (thicker toward
base); dark brown to maroon-brown or reddish-brown, sometimes with yellow, buff, or
beige streaks; firmandoften roughened, pitted, or longitudinally ridged, the apex often
coarsely reticulate; base frequently with yellow mycelium. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown;
spores 18-24 x 7-9 microns, spindle-shaped to eIIiptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on or near rotting conifers (especially hemlock),
but sometimes appearing terrestrial; common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and
northern California, also reported (rarely) from Michigan. It does not seem to venture
south of San Francisco. (Neither does hemlock,andneither would I if I could help it.)
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious-some collections have a distinct lemony flavor.
Don't use specimens attacked by a whitish mold (Hypomyces chyrospermum).
COMMENTS This beautiful northern bolete is practically unmistakable. The plush-
like maroon-brown capandlong roughened, similarly-colored stalk plus the yellow
pores that do not stain blueandgrowth on or near rotting conifers form a unique set of
characters. Other species: B. projectellus of eastern North America is a closely related,
terrestrial species that favors sandy situations under pine.
Boletus flaviporus
(Viscid Boletus)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane; surface viscid or slimy when wet, smooth or fibrillose,
reddish-brown to cinnamon-brown or chestnut-brown, not normally cracking into scales.
Flesh thick, white to pale pinkish, not blueing when bruised. PORESandtubes brilliantly,
intensely yellow, becoming slightly greenish-yellow in age; not bruising blue. STALK 6-15
cm long, 0.6-2 (3) cm thick, equal to slightly thicker below or often with a short, tapered,
rooting base; smooth, viscid in wet weather but otherwise dry; color variable, but usually
yellow at apexandpallid to reddish-brown or dark brown below; typically not reticulate
or only slightly so at apex. SPORE_PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 11-17 x 4-6 microns,
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in mixed woodsandunder hardwoods;
endemic to the west coast. In our area it is fairly common in the fallandwinter under oak,
madrone,andmanzanita, but seldom fruits in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Edible, but mediocre.
COMMENTS This is our only Boletus with a distinctly viscid capandintensely yellow
pores that do not stain blue. It might be mistaken for a Suillus, but it isn't associated with
conifersandhas neither glandular dots nor a veil. The stem is not truly reticulate like that of
B. edulisandB. fib rillosus, but the tubes ma y form a sligh t raised network at the stalk apex.
Its eastern counterparts with brilliant yellow, non-blueing pores are B. viridiflavus,
with a reddish-or pinkish-tinged stalk and sometimes viscid cap;andB. auriporus
(=B. caespitosus?), with a yellower stalkandsomewhat more velvety cap.
Boletus ornatipes (Ornate-Stalked Bolete)
CAP 4-20 cm broad, convex to nearly plane; surface dull, often velvety when young, dry
or slightly viscid when wet, color variable: gray, purple-gray, olive, olive-brown, yellow,
or mixtures thereof. Flesh firm, thick, yellow, not blueing; taste mild to somewhat
bitter. PORESandtubes lemon-yellow to bright yellow, usually staining orange-
yellow to rusty-brown when bruised, but not blueing; pores small. STALK 7-15 cm long,
1-3.5 cm thick, more or less equal but often curved, solid, firm, bright yellow to yellow-
orange throughoutandprominently reticulate nearly to base (reticulation often coarse);
dingier in age. SPORE_PRINT brown to olive-brown; spores 9-13 x 3-4 microns,
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, gregarious or in small clusters on ground under oaks
and other hardwoods in eastern North America (particularly the northern halO; it is
common in the summerandearly fall.
EDIBILITY Non-bitter specimens are said to be edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This beautiful eastern bolete is readily told by its yellow poresandflesh
and its beautifully patterned (reticulate) golden-yellow stalk. The cap color varies consi-
derably but is usually some shade of gray, olive, or yellow-olive. B. retipes is a bitter-
tasting southern version (probably a form of the same species); B. auriflammeus, also
southern, is similar but has a brownish-orange to brilliant gold capandcreamy or pink-
tinged flesh. All of these stain your fingers yellow when handled. Another closely related
species, B. griseus, is grayish but often shows some yellow( at least at the base of the stalk)
as it ages. It has softer, mild-tasting, pallid, edible (but often wormy!) flesh, white to gray
or grayish-brown (never yellow!) pores that may stain brown,anda reticulate stalk. It is
common under hardwoods in eastern North Americaandalso occurs in southern Arizona.
Boletus Jibrillosus
CAP 6-17 cm broad, convex to more or less plane; surface dry, minutely velvety becoming
fibrillose or sometimes fibrillose-scaly at the center; brown to dark brown to cinnamon-
brown, sometimes with paler blotches or paler at the margin (but not yellow). Flesh thick,
white or buff, not blueing when bruised; taste mild. PORESandtubes pale yellow to
yellow or dingy olive-yellow (occasionally pallid when very young), not bruising blue.
STALK 8-16 cm long, 24 cm thick at apex, equal or thicker below( but sometimes pinched
at base); solid, firm; light brown to brown (often paler than cap); apex often yellow and/or
base whitish; usually lined or fibrillose, reticulate at least at the top. SPORE_PRINT
dark olive-brown; spores 13-17.5 x 3.5-5.5 microns. spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in mixed woodsandunder conifers;
known only from the west coast, sometimes common in the fall in coastal northern
Californiaandthe Cascades. A similar species (see below) occurs in our area.
EDIBILITY Edibleandfairly good, but certainly not the equal of B. edu/is or B. aereus.
COMMENTS The dark brown frequently fibrillose cap, yellow pores, brown reticulate
stalk,and"failure" of all parts to turn blue when bruised are the telltale traits of this
northern bolete (see photo on p. 529). It resembles B. edu/isandB. aereus, but its cap is
more fibrilloseandits pores are often yellow even when young. Tylopilus pseudoscaber
is also somewhat similar, but does not have yellow pores. Both T. pseudoscaberandB.
fibrillosus have passed under the defunct name B. ol;vaceobrunneus. A similar, uniden-
tified Boletus occurs rarely in our area under live oak, but differs in having a yellow stalk.
B. citr;n;porus is a smaller Californian species with a brown yo blackish cap, brilliant
yellow pores that do not bruise blue, a whitish to buff (or yellow at apex) stalk that is not
reticulate or only slightly so,andmild taste. I have found it in mixed woodsandunder oak.
Boletus calopus (Bitter Bolete)
CAP 10-30 cm broad. convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, dull, smooth to
minutely hairy or fibrillose, often cracking (areolate) in age; dull brown to olive-brown,
grayish-brown, or olive-buff, sometimes yellow-brown or in age darker brown. Flesh very
thick, pale yellow or whitish, quickly blueing when exposed; taste distinctly and
persistently bitter. PORESandtu bes pale yellow becoming darker or dingier yellow in age;
typically bruising blue or blue-green quickly. STALK 6-15 (20) cm long, 3-7 cm thick at
apex, equal or bulbous; solid, firm; yellow, but usually with pink to red zones or
discolorations also present, or sometimes entirely reddish; blueing when bruised; apex or
upper half finely reticulate. SPORE_PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 13-19 x 4-6 microns,
spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in mixed woodsand underconifers
in the late summerandfall (or occasionally spring); common in western North America,
rare in the East. It is particularly prominent at higher elevations (e.g., in the Sierra
Nevada), but I have also seen large fruitings on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington.
In our area it is apparently supplanted by another bitter bolete, B. "marshii."
EDIBILITY Bitter-tasting (see comments on the edibility of B. "marshii").
COMMENTS This sometimes massive bolete is easily recognized by its bitter taste,
blueing of all parts when injured, yellow pores,andreticulate stalk. The bitter taste always
comes as a disappointment to those seduced by its large size. Our other large "bitter
boletes," B. "marshii"andB. rubripes, have non-reticulate stalks. Still another bitter
bolete, B. coniferarum, has a yellow reticulate stalk (without any red or pink), a darker
(olive-gray to deep brown) cap,anda northern distribution. I have seen it under conifers
in northern IdahoandBritish Columbia.
Boletus rubripes (Red-Stemmed Bitter Bolete) Color Plate 130
CAP 6-15 (25) cm broad, convex to broadly convex or sometimes plane; surface dry, dull,
smooth or velvety, often becoming cracked or furrowed in age; pale buffto olive-buffto
tan. Flesh thick, firm, buff to pale yellow or even whitish, but blueing when exposed; taste
usually bitter. PORESandtubes pale yellow becoming darker or duller yellow in age;
blueing when bruised. STALK 7-13 (20) cm long, 1-4 cm thick, sometimes swollen below
(especially when young), but often more or less equal in age; firm, solid, not reticulate but
often longitudinally striate in age; color variable, but usually yellow at apex with bright
pink to reddish areas below, becoming dark red throughout in age. SPORE_PRINT olive-
brown; spores 12.5-17.5 x 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups, associated primarily with conifers; known
only from western North AmericaandMexico. I have not seen it in our area, but it is fairly
common in northern California under Sitka spruceandalso occurs in the Sierra Nevada.
It fruits in the summerandfall. The color photograph was taken in New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Bitter-tasting (see comments on the edibility of B. "marshii").
COMMENTS This beautiful but bitter bolete can be told from B. c%pus by its non-
reticulate stalk (use a hand lens if unsure!),andfrom B. "marshU" by the red to pink stalk
which beomes dark red or dull purple-red in age. Several Ty/opi/us species are also bitter-
tasting, but do not have yellow pores.
Boletus "marsh;;" (Ben's Bitter Bolete)
CAP 5-25 cm broad, convex to nearly plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth
or cracking in age, whitish to gray, pale grayish-brown or buff when young, becoming
dull brownishanddeveloping darker brown stains in age or upon handling. Flesh thick,
dense, white or grayish, turning blue to bluish-gray erratically when exposed; taste bitter,
at least latently. PORESandtubes pale yellow becoming dingy yellow or olive-yellow,
bruising blue quickly, then eventually turning dingy brown. STALK 4-15 cm long, 2-5
cm thick at apex, usually enlarged below but sometimes tapered at the base, smooth, not
reticulate; pallid to buff or yellow above (sometimes with a very slight reddish zone), dingy
brown below, darker brown throughout in old age; turning blue when bruised. SPORE
PRINT olive-brown; spores 11-14 x 4.5-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground near or under live oak in the summer and
early fall (before the onset of the fall rainy season); common in the vicinity of Santa Cruz,
California,andalso reported by several collectors from the foothills of the Sierra Nevada.
EDIBILITY Sauteed delicately in butter with a pinch of pepperanda clove of garlic,
served steaming hot on toast with cream cheeseandcelery, broiled belligerently on a
skewer with spiced lambandbell peppers, or layered lovingly in a casserole with parmesan
cheese, egg noodles,andonions, Boletus "marsh;;" is still inedible.
COMMENTS This bulky bolete with the bitter taste appears to be unnamed. However,
it is known to local yokels as B. "marsh;;" because it bears an uncanny resemblance to
its discoverer, Ben Marsh, who is also dense, bulky, bitter,andbulbous,andwho spent
many fruitless hours (and ruined many otherwise marvelous meals) in a highly commen-
dable ifill-conceived attempt to make it palatable. It is easily distinguished from B. calopus
by the non-reticulate stalk, from B. appendiculalUs by the paler cap, non-reticulate stalk,
and bitter taste, from B. rubripes by the paler capandabsence of red on the stalk, and
from B. barrowsii by the bitter taste, blue-staining pores that are yellow when young, and
non-reticulate stalk. Its habit of fruiting before the rains arrive is odd, but quite reliable.
A European species, B. albidus (=B. radicans), is similar in colorandtaste, but is usually
described as having a reticulate stalk with a rooting base. Although B. "marshii" never
seems to have a reticulate stalk, it often has a rooting base,anda critical comparison may
reveal that the two species are oneandthe same.
Boletus appendiculatus
(Butter Bolete)
CAP 6-20 (30) cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex or even plane; surface dry or
slightly viscid, smooth or witha fine bloom when young, sometimes cracked inage; brown
to cinnamon-brown or yellow-brown, or sometimes buff to yellowish, often with reddish
stains or blushes. Flesh thick, very firmanddense, pale yellow to yellow, changing slowly
and erratically to blue when cut, or not at all; taste mild. PO RESandtubes lemon-yellow to
bright butter-yellow or in old age olive-yellow; usually blueing when bruised, but
sometimes not (especially in button stage). STALK 5-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex,
usually bulbous or thicker below, but sometimes equal or tapered at base; solid, very firm;
uniformly yellow or butter-yellow, sometimes with brownish or reddish stains; upper
portion finely reticulate; flesh in base usually pinkish or vinaceous. SPORE_PRINT dark
olive-brown; spores 12-15 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under hardwoods, especially live
oakandtan oak; fruiting shortly after the first fall rainsandapparently more common in
our area than anywhere else in North America. It is abundant some years, practically
absent others; it often grows with B. satanas, B. regius, and/or B. aereus.
EDIBILITY Edibleandpopular (although some people are "allergic" to it). It lacks the
nuttiness of B. edulis but is remarkable for its firmness-a joy to find as well as to eat,
something you can really sink your teeth into. When cooked it will often turn blue, then
gray. then back to yellow.
COMMENTS The butter bolete is easily recognized by its heaviness (it is the densest of
our boletes-the young buttons are sometimes as hard as rocks), mild (never bitter!) taste,
yellow pores that usually bruise blue quickly,andfinely reticulate, butter-yellow stalk.
Don't be misled by the variation in cap color-it is usually brown, but ranges from yel-
lowish to somewhat reddish or rusty-brown. Sometimes it seems to intergrade with B.
regius, which is also edible. The reticulation is usually the same color as the stalk (unless
stained brown by spores),andthus can be difficult to see(a hand lens will help). Specimens
of the poisonous B. satanas which have lost their red pore color are easily distinguished
because they do not have a yellow stalk. B. "marsh;;" differs in its paler cap, white flesh,
non-reticulate stalk,andbitter taste. Other species: B. abieticola, sometimes common
under fir in the Siskiyou Mountains of northern Californiaandsouthern Oregon, is quite
similar, but has a more fibrillose, tan to rose-colored cap.
Boletus regius (Red-Capped Butter Bolete) Color Plate 133
CAP 6-20 cm broad or more, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface smooth to
uneven or pitted, sometimes minutely hairy when young, dry or slightly viscid; pink to
rosy-red or dark red, sometimes also with brownish tones or yellow areas. Flesh very thick,
firm, yellow, slowlyanderratically or irregularly blueing when exposed; taste mild.
PORESandtubes bright yellow becoming darker yellow or olive-yellow in old age; usually
blueing when bruised. STALK 4-14 cm long, 2.5-6 cm thick at apex, usually bulbous or
thicker below, often rather short in relation to cap; solid, firm, pale to bright yellow but
usually bruising blueandoften reddish-stained below; finely reticulate over at least the
upper half; flesh in base often pinkish or vinaceous. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown; spores
12.5-16.5 x 3.5-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods; known from California, Oregon,
and Washington. In our area it fruits in the fall under live oak, often with B. barrowsii, B.
satanas, and/or B. appendiculatus. Like those species it does not seem to fruit every year.
In the Sierra NevadaandCascades it grows under conifers in the spring, summer,andfall.
EDIBILITY Edibleandvery similar to B. appendiculatus in flavor, but not as firm and
therefore not as good; it is often riddled with maggots.
COMMENTS This sometimes massive boletecan be told by its blue-staining yellow pores,
yellow flesh, pink to reddish cap,andlarge, thick, reticulate yellow stem. It closely mimics
B. appendiculatus except for cap color, but since both are edible it hardly matters if you
confuse them. S mall specimens of B. regius are shown on p. 512. B. speciosus is a similar
eastern species with a longer, slimmer stalkanda tendency to stain blue more readily.
Boletus erythropus Color Plate 135
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad, convex becoming nearly plane to slightly depressed or pitted in
age; surface dry, minutely velvety when young, yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown, dark
brown, or reddish-brown, quickly staining bluish-black when bruised. Flesh thick, firm,
yellow or yellowish but blueing very quickly when ex posed; often reddish-brown or reddish
in base of stalk. PORES red to brick-red to orange-red, orange, rusty-orange, or burnt
sienna (but sometimes yellowish in old age), blueing quickly when bruised; tubes yellow
becoming greenish-yellow in age. STALK 4-15 cm long, (1.5) 2-4 (5) cm thick, equal or
thicker at either end but not bulbous; yellowish or more often masked by a coating of
minute red to orange dots or granules; blueing quickly when bruisedandoften dingier
(darker or browner) in age; solid, firm, often curved; not reticulate or only very slightly
so at apex from decurrent tube walls. SPORE_PRINT olive-brown to ochraceous-brown;
spores 12-16 x 4-6 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed. It is
fairly common under conifers (especially spruce) from northern California to Alaska, and
under both hardwoodsandconifers in eastern North America; also reported from
the Rocky Mountains. In the oakandmadrone woodlands of California it is replaced by
B. amygdalinus (see comments).
EDIBILITY Poisonous to some people-to be avoided. Two books which list B. satanas
as poisonous state flatly that B. erythropus is edible. However, Bill Everson (an intrepid
Californian toadstool-tester) was unaffected by cooked B. satanas but ate a small portion
of sauteed B. erythropusandvomited soon after-an explicit example of why you should
be cautious when trying any mushroom for the first time, even a so-called "edible" one!
COMMENTS The red to orange pores, non-reticulateandnon-bulbous stalk,andbrown
to dark brown cap typify this beautiful bolete. It certainly has substance, but is puny in
comparison to the bulky hulk (hulking bulk?) of B. satanas. It bruises blue so rapidly that
a few minutes frenzied handling will render it unrecognizable. A very similar species that is
apparently unique to California, B. amygda/inus, has oranger poresandgrows under
hardwoods. Another look-alike, B. subve/utipes (COLOR PLATE 136), is quite common in
the Southwest as well as eastern North America. It can have a somewhat yellower cap and
often has dark red hairs at the base of the stalk. B. hypocarycinus is a very similar south-
eastern species with a dark red to carmine stal baseandshorter spores. B. orovi//us is a
rare but striking bolete with a large brilliant yellow cap, bright red pores that mayor may
not bruise blue,anda thick, non-reticulate stalk. It has been takeninafewwidelyscattered
localities in northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest. None ofthese should beeaten.
Boletus satanas
(Satan's Bolete)
CAP 7-30 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane in age; surface dry, smooth
or sometimes cracked; pallid to gray or olive-buff, becoming suffused with pink in age,
especially toward margin (but yellowish where slug-eaten). Flesh white to yellow, blueing
when bruised, especially when young or near the tubes. PORES deep red becoming red to
pink or in old age orange to yellowish, turning blue to blue-black when bruised; tubes
yellow to greenish. STALK 6-15 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex, with a massive abrupt bulb
at base which is up to 15 cm broadandis especially prominent when young; solid, firm;
upper portion colored more or less like the capandfinely but distinctly reticulate (reti-
culation usually reddish); bulb usually pink or pinkish-red, but the pink tones usually
more evident in youthandtending to disappear in age. SPORE_PRINT brown to olive-
brown; spores 11-15 x 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in grou ps under oaks (often at the edges of pastures); known only
from CaliforniaandEurope. In our area it is sometimes abundant in the fall or early
winter. It is usually one of the very first boletes to appear.
EDIBILITY Poisonous, at least raw! It causes vomiting, diarrhea,andsevere cramps.
Thorough cooking reputedly destroys the toxins,andsome people eat it regularly. Its
voluminous avoirdupois is certainly inviting-but when so many more delectableandless
dangerous mushrooms abound, why tempt fate? '
COMMENTS The red pores, pallid to olive-buff cap,andbulbous reticulate stem are
diagnostic. Young specimens can be told by their obesity alone-the bulb can be several
inches broad, often larger than the capandjust as round! The red color of the pores
sometimes fades in old age, but the pronounced bulbandblue-staining tubes signify B.
salanas. I found one specimen at the edge of a meadow that weighed six pounds,andhalf of
it had been eaten by a cow! B. pulcherrimus is the only other red-pored, reticulate-stalked
bolete in coastal California, but it is not so bulbousandhas a brown to reddish-brown cap.
Boletus pulcherrimus (Red-Pored Bolete)
CAP 8-25 cm broad, convex to broadly convex or nearly plane; surface dry, smooth or
minutely velvety when young, sometimes breaking up into small scales in age; brown
to pale olive-brown orreddish-brown( often redder at margin). Flesh thick, yellow, blueing
when exposed. PORES deep red to bright scarlet-red, often duller (reddish-brown) or
paler in old age; quickly staining blue or blue-black when bruised; tubes yellow. STALK
7-20 cm long, 2-5 cm thick at apexandup to 10 cm thick at base; sometimes equal, more
often club-shaped (thicker below), but not abruptly bulbous; solid, firm, yellowish to pale
reddish-brown with dark red reticulation over at least the upper half. SPORE_PRINT
olive-brown; spores 13-16 x 5.5-6.5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in mixed woodsandunder conifers in the summer and
fall; endemic to western North America, rather rare but sometimes fruiting in quantity.
I've seen it in northern CaliforniaandNew Mexico, but have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! Like B. salanas, it is especially dangerous raw.
COMMENTS Listed in older books as B. eastwoodiae, this largeandbeautiful bolete is
easily told by its red to dark red pores, reticulate stalk,andbrown to reddish-brown cap. It
is the principal red-pored bolete of the Pacific Northwest, but does not fruit every year.
In our area it is replaced by B. salanas, which is differently coloredandmuch more obese.
A very similar species, B. haematinus (COLOR PLATE 138) is common under western
mountain conifers. It has a yellow-brown to olive-brown or brown cap, sometimes has a
yellower stalk,andoften has yellow pores when very young (the pores at the cap margin
of older specimens can also be yellow). A similar but unidentified species with a pallid cap
has been found by Greg Wright under conifers in southern California. Another reticulate-
stalked species, B. luridus, grows under hardwoodsandconifers in eastern North America
and the Southwest. It has a slimmer (1-3 cm) stalk red to orange pores,anda yellowish to
olive-brown, brown, or reddish-brown cap. All of the above species are poisonousandall
lack the exaggerated bulb of B. salanas. For species with bright red caps, see B./roslii.
Boletusfrosti; (Apple Bolete; Frosts Bolete) Color Plate 139
CAP 5-15 cm broad, convex to broadly convex, often becoming plane or with an uplifted
margin in age; surface smooth, viscid when moistandoften shiny, dark red (or even
blackish-red) when young, becoming blood-red or apple-red in age,andoften developing
yellowish (faded) areas when old. Flesh thick, pallid to yellow, quickly blueing when cut.
PORES small, dark red when freshandoften beaded with yellow droplets when young,
often fading to paler red in age; typically staining dark or dingy bluish when bruised;
tubes yellow to olive. STALK 4-12 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, equal or thicker below, dry,
solid, coarselyanddeeply reticulate throughout; dark red to red, sometimes with yellowish
areas; reticulation same color or paler; base red to yellow or whitish. SPORE_PRINT
brown to olive-brown; spores 11-17 x 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under hardwoods; common during the
summer throughout eastern North America, also in Texas, southern Arizona, Mexico,
and Costa Rica. It favors oak, but is said to be frequent under madrone in Mexico.
EDIBILITY Edible. In Mexico it is often sold in farmer's markets, but since it has red
pores, be careful! Cook it thoroughlyandbe sure of your identification!
COMMENTS One of the most beautifulandmemorable of all boletes, this species is
easily told by its viscid red to dark red cap, dark red pores,andcoarsely reticulate stalk.
The stalk may be thickened downward, but is never bulbous as in B. satanas. Thetendency
of the young pores to exude yellow droplets is also distinctive. In Mexico it is sometimes
called panza agria, which means "sour belly:' Other species: B.flammansandB. rubro-
flammeus, both poisonous, have a non-viscid red to dark red capandfinely to scarcely
reticulate stalkandred pores (at least when young). The first favors eastern conifers, the
second grows with hardwoods in eastern North Americaandsouthern Arizona.
Boletus barrows;;
(White King Bolete)
CAP 6-25 cm broad, convex becoming broadly convex to plane; surface smooth or very
slightly velvety, dry, dull white to buff or grayish. Flesh thick, white, not blueing when
exposed (or blueing only very slightly near the tubes). PORESandtubes white or pallid
when young (and appearing stuffed with a pith), becoming yellow to olive-yellow in age;
not blueing when bruised. STALK 6-20 cm long, 2-6 cm thick at apex, equal or thicker
below (especially when young), solid, firm, whitish to buff or colored like cap, sometimes
with brownish stains; finely but distinctly reticulate at least over the upper portion. SPORE
PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 13-15 x 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious under both hardwoodsandconifers,
fruiting mainly in the summerandfall; apparently endemic to the drier parts of western
North AmericaandMexico. It is a warm weather speciesandmore abundant in Arizona
and New Mexico than anywhere else. There it is associated almost exclusively with ponde-
rosa pine, while B. edu/is favors spruce. In Colorado, however, I have found it under spruce
and fir,andin coastal California it is usually associated-quite curiously-with live oak,
while B. edu/is grows with pine. In our area it fruits in the fallandwinter, but is abundant
only after warm early (September-N ovember) rains.
EDIBILITY Delectably delicious. It is a favorite of collectors in the Southwest,andin
the completely objective opinion of its "discoverer," Chuck Barrows, it is the best of the
boletes for the table. Unfortunately, the maggots share his opinion, for they attack it even
more voraciously than they do B. edu/is!
COMMENTS For many years this handsome, meaty bolete has passed as a ..white"
B. edu/is,andis listed as such in the first edition of Mushrooms Demystified. However,
it does not intergrade with B. edu/isandlacks the clearly differentiated, often viscid cap
cuticle (skin) of that species. Result: it is now recognized as a distinct species.
Boletus edulis Color Plates 142,143,144
(King Bolete; Cep; Steinpilz; Porcini; etc.)
CAP 8-30 cm broad or more, convex to broadly convex or bun-shaped, orin age becoming
plane; surface dry or more often viscid when moist, smooth to somewhat pitted or in dry
wea ther sometimes cracking into plaq ues; color variable: biscuit-brown or warm brown to
yellow-brown, cinnamon-brown, reddish-brown, or dark red (but often with whitish or
pinkish tints while still under the dufO; margin sometimes paler or yellower. Flesh thick,
firm, white or sometimes tinged yellowish ordingy reddish inage; not blueing when bruised
or only blueing slightly near the tubes; odorandtaste pleasant. PORES at first white or
pallidandappearing stuffed with a pith, then becoming yellow, olive-yellow, or brown in
age, not blueing when bruised; tubes whitish becoming yellow, then olive-yellow. STALK
(3) 8-25 cm long, 2-7 (12) cm thick (often large in relation to cap); usually enlarged below
when young, often becoming more or less equal in age; firm, solid, entirely white, or
whitish at the baseandbrownish above; finely reticula te over upper portion orthroughout;
flesh in base sometimes with dark yellow areas (a parasite?). SPORE_PRINT more or less
olive-brown; spores 13-19 x 4-7 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or sometimes troups on ground in woods;
found throughout the worldandvery common in western North America. It favors coni-
fers (pine, spruce, hemlock, fir) but also grows with hardwoods such as oakandbirch. It
is often abundant in our coastal pme forests in the fallandwinter( usually 2-4 weeks after
the first substantial fall rains) as well as under oak,anda smaller flush may appear in the
spring. In coastal northern CaliforniaandOregon it grows with pineandspruce in the fall;
in the Sierra Nevada a stout form fruits in large quantities under conifers in the spring,
summer,andfall;andin the high Rockies the variety with a dark red cap fruits in colossal
quantities in AugustandSeptember, under spruce.
EDIBILITY One of the finest offleshy fungiandcertainly the best-lovedandmost sought-
after in Europe, where it has more common names than there are languages. If any
mushroom deserves the dubious title of ""king," this is the one. It is a consummate crea-
tion, the peerless epitome of earthbound substance, a bald bulbous pillar of thick white
flesh-the one aristocrat the peasantry can eat!
The entire fruiting body is exceptionally delicious, even the tubes ifthey're firm enough.
It is delicious raw, but can cause stomach upsets because it's difficult to digest, so play it
safeandcook it (preferably on high heat in an open pan, so as to drive off the excess mois-
ture). The odorandtaste of dried B. edu/is are marvelous-nutty, earthy,andmeaty all
at once. But you have to find them before you can eat them.andit isn't always easy. You
can't just casually look for them the way you can forchanterelles or blewits-you have to
hunt them downandroot them up from under the duff before they're visible to others.
Timing is of paramount importance, because you face formidable competition from both
maggotsandboletivores(see p. 546). One source suggests getting up at the crack of dawn
and wearing your shirt inside out. Uthatdoesn't work, you can always resort to the dried,
imported version found in delicatessens.
COMMENTS This magnificent mushroom has several color forms, two of which are
particularly common. The first has a brown to reddish-brown ca p( Color PIa tes 142 & 144)
and is the dominant one in coastal California. The second, also called B. edulis var. pinicola
(= B. pinicola, B. pinophilus), has a dark red to red-brown cap. It is prevalent in the Rocky
MountainsandSouthwest (Color Plate 143)andGulf Coast region. Remember: brown to
reddish cap, thick reticulate stalk, mild to nutty (not bitter) taste,andwhite pores when young
that do not bruise blue. No mushroom is more substantial or satisfying to find! Other edible
species: B. mottii of the Sierra Nevada has a pittedand/or ridged cap; B. separans (reddish to
liver-colored cap when young)andB. pseudoseparans (dark purple cap when young) usually
have a purple or purple-tinged stalkandgrow under hardwoods in eastern North America.
Tylopilus species can be somewhat similar, but have pinker pores, pinkish-to reddish-
brown spores, stain dark brown when bruised, and/or are bitter-tasting. B.fibrillosus is
another look-alike, but its cap is darkerandhairier. See also B. aereusandB. barrowsii.
Boletus aereus
(Queen Bolete)
CAP 5-15 (20) cm broad. convex becoming broadly convex to plane in age; surface dry or
moist (or viscid only in age), smooth or somewhat pitted, dark brown to nearly black when
youngandcovered at least partially with a fine whitish bloom, but inage becoming smooth
and cinnamon or red-brown or blotched with paler (whitish to tan) areas. Flesh thick,
white or tinged reddish, not blueing when exposed (or blueing only slightly nearthe tubes);
taste mild or pleasant. PORESandtubes white when youngandat first stuffed witha pith,
becoming yellow to greenish-yellow in age; not blueing when bruised. STALK 5-15 cm
long, 2-5 cm thick at apex, usually enlarged below when young but oftenequal inage; firm,
solid, white or often brown in age, finely reticulate at least over upper part. SPORE
PRINT dark olive-brown; spores 12-14 x 4-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in mixed woodsandunder hardwoods
(especially oaks); found in California, but originally described from Europe. In our area
it is fairly common in the fall in the coastal mountains, usually under tanoak, madrone,
and/or chinquapin. It also grows with live oak, but not as commonly as B. barrowsii.
EDIBILITY Delicious! It is every bit as good as B. edu/is,andless apt to be wormy!
COMMENTS This relative of B. edu/is often grows with B. appendiculalUs, but has white
pores when young, a darker cap,anddoes not stain blue. The hoary bloom on young caps
(see photos on pp. 50 & 512) disappears as the cap becomes more cinnamon-colored, and
in age there is little to distinguish it from B. edu/is other than habitat. Fortunately, both
species are so delectably delicious that it hardly matters if you unwittingly confuse them!
Bfibrillosus is also similar, but has a hairier cap without a whitish bloom. Anothercousin
of B. edu/is, B. variipes, has a dry, tan to grayish-brown, yellow-brown, or dark brown cap
that lacks the whitish bloom of B. aereusandoften becomes areolate (cracked) inage. It is
abundant in the summer under oakandbeech in easternN orth America, but rare or absent
in the West. It is edible, but usually riddled with maggotsandsometimes bitterish to boot.
Tylopilus chroma pes (Chrome-Footed Bolete)
CAP (3)5-15 cm broad, convex, often becoming more or less plane in age; surface smooth
or felty, dry to slightly viscid, bright pink to rose-colored when fresh, but often fading (to
pinkish-tan, tan, or even whitish) in age. Flesh thick, white or tinged pink, not blueing;
taste mild or slightly acidic. PORES minute, white when young becoming pinkish to flesh-
colored to dingy brownish in age, not staining appreciably when bruised, or staining
pinkish; tubes more or less same color or slightly yellower. STALK 4-20 cm long, 1-2.5
cm thick, equal or slightly tapered either way, solid, firm; upper portion white or pallid or
sometimes splotched with pink (especially when young), base bright yellow insideandout;
not reticulate but often scurfy above from small hairs or scales. SPOR E PRINT vinaceous-
to pinkish-brown; spores 10-17 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground under both hardwoodsandconifers; locally
frequent throughout eastern North America in the summerandfall. I t is especially
common under birch, aspen,andconifers in northern latitudes in JuneandJuly.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good, but often riddled with maggots.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Boletus chroma pesandLeccinum chroma pes, this
lovely bolete is easily recognized by its pink capandwhite pores when youngandits
scurfy stalk with a bright yellow base. (The color scheme is reminiscent of Gomphidius
subroseus. a gilled mushroom closely related to the boletes.) It is one of several very
striking species of Ty/opi/us that are native to eastern North America. Others include:
T. plumbeov;olaceus, a beautiful but bitter-tasting violet to purple-brown species; T.
(=Austroboletus) gracilis, a slender-stemmed species (COLOR PLATE 149);andT.
ballou;;, with an orange, Leccinum-like cap when fresh. For more details on these and
other distinctive eastern species, see the key to Ty/opi/us.
Tylopilus pseudoscaber group
(Dark Bolete)
CAP 5-16 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, minutely velvety
to smooth in age, dark brown to very dark brown or at times grayish-brown to olive-brown,
usually bruising darker brown to blackish; margin sometimes slightly paler. Flesh thick,
whitish, typically bruising blue (but sometimes slowly or erratically), then slowly dis-
coloring to reddish-brown or brown (or sometimes staining directly to pinkish); odor often
pungent, taste mild or at least not bitter. PORESandtubes dark yellow-brown to coffee-
brown to grayish-brown, chocolate-brown, or very dark brown (but in some forms pallid
to grayish or yellow-gray when young); usually (but not always!) staining blueandthen
slowly reddish to dark brown when bruised. STALK (4) 7-16(20)cmlong, 1-3 (4)cmthick,
equal or more often thicker below, firm, dry, minutely velvety and/or scurfy, often
longitudinally lined or streaked; distinctly reticulate above in one form, not reticulate in
others; brown or colored like cap or darker, usually bruising darker brown or sometimes
blue; base typically whitish. SPORE_PRINT pale to dark chocolate-brown or reddish-
brown; spores 11-19 (25) x 5-9 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or rotten wood, usually under
conifers but sometimes with hardwoods; widely distributed but mainly northern. It is
fairly common in the late summerandfall in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern Cali-
fornia. It is especially fond ofSitkaspruce-which mayexplainitsabsence ornearabsence
south of Mendocino County, California (the southernmost limit of Sitka spruce).
EDIBILITY Edible, but according to most sources, far from incredible. Its somber
color is unappetizingandmakes it difficult to see in the forest gloom. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known as Porphyrellus pseudoscaber, this distinctive bolete is easily
told by its dark color (see photo on p. 535), reddish-brown spore print, dark brown pores in
age,andtendency to stain blue. The latter feature varies considerably in duration and
intensityandmay even be absent; however, if the fruiting body is wrapped in white or
waxed paper it will usually stain the paper blue or dark blue-green. The above description
is actually a composite of several closely related '''dark boletes" that have passed under
the names T. pseudoscaber. T. porphyrosporus. T. o/ivaceobrunneus. T. atroJuscus,
T. sord;dus, etc. Some mycologists consider them to be forms of one highly variable
species. Others consider them distinct-for instance, they reserve the name T. porphy-
rosporus for the form with pallid pores when young,andT. ol;vaceobrunneus for the
variety with a reticulate stalk. Other sp_cies in the group include: T. pacif;cus, which tends
to have a copiously cracked (areolate) cap in age; T.Jumos;pes, an eastern species with an
areolate cap in ageandnarrower spores;andT. nebulosus, which typically does not stain
blue. Two other dark species, T. a/boaterandT. eximius. are described in the key.
Tylopilus indecisus (Indecisive Bolete)
CAP 5-15 (25) cm broad, convex to plane; surface usually dryandsmooth, dark brown to
brown, dingy brown, or dingy cinnamon (usually darker when young, paler in age), stain-
ing dark brown where bruised. Flesh thick, pallid, often staining pale vinaceous or flesh-
color when bruised; taste mild. PORESandtubes pallid when young, soon becoming dull
pinkish or pale flesh-color; slightly darker, dingier, or more vinaceous in age, staining
brown where bruised. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1-3 (4.5) cm thick, equal or thicker below,
dry, firm, buff to brown, the apex often pallid; darker brown where bruised or handled;
reticulate at least at the apex (but eastern variety sometimes not reticulate), sometimes
nearly throughout. SPORE_PRINT flesh-colored to reddish-brown or tinged vinaceous;
spores 10-15 x 3-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in mixed woodsandunder oaks; fairly
common in eastern North America, but rare in the West. I have seen it only a few times in
our area, under live oak in the late fallandearly winter,andunder white oak inland.
EDIBILITY Edible, according to the literature. I haven't fried it.
COMMENTS There is nothing particularly indecisive about this drab bolete, but there is
nothing particularly decisive about it either. The brown capandreticulate stalk are remi-
niscent of Boletus edulis. but the pores are pinker (and never olive-yellow), the fruiting
body stains dark brown when handled or bruised,andthe spore print is pinkish. Eastern
material (including vaT. subpunctipes, which differs microscopically) is less apt to be
reticulate than the western version. T. ammiratiiissimilarbuthasa tanorvinaceous-tinged
capandwhitish stalk that is not reticulate oronlyslightlysoat the apex; it occurs in Califor-
nia under oak. Similar easterners include: T. subunicolor, a small, slim, tawny-ochre
southern species with yellowish flesh; T. tabacinusandT. rubrobrunneus, both medium to
large (see key to Tylopilus);andT.felleus (COLOR PLATE 150), with a reticulate stalk
and very bitter taste. T felleus is especially common under conifers (e.g., hemlock and
pine); it is often mistaken for Boletus edu/is. For other easterners, see key to Tylopilus.
Tylopilus humilus
(Humble Bolete)
CAP 4-12 cm broad, nearly round to convex when young, sometimes expanding to plane in
age or often somewhat misshapen or irregular; surface dry or slightly tacky, often minutely
velvety, dull brown or sometimes reddish-brown; margin often with vinaceous tints and
frequently remaining incurved through maturity or even covering some of the pores. Flesh
thick, white, bruising pinkish-brown or vinaceous (rarely blue); taste mild. PORES and
tubes whitish when young, becoming pale flesh-color or dull pale pinkish, staining brown
when bruised. STALK 2-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually rather stockyandsometimes
off-center; equal or swollel1 below, but the base often pinched; firm, solid, white at apex,
usually brownish-or vinaceous-stained below, especially when handled; not reticulate or
only very slightly so at extreme apex. SPORE_PRINT dull reddish-brown; spores 8-12 x
x 3-4 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in small clumps on ground (often partially buried),
fruiting in the fallandwinter; known only from California, rare. It appears every year in
sand y soil in a burned-over area near Santa Cruz, apparently in association with manzanita
or live oak, but with knobcone pine also in the general vicinity. It was originally discovered
by Harry Thiers in Mendocino County under pines near a destroyed dormitory.
COMMENTS This bashful bolete is easily separated from other Tylopilus species by its
semi-underground habit, i.e., it tends not to expose itself until fully mature,andeven then
may remain half-buried. The stocky or poorly-developed stem is reminiscent of Gastro-
boletus, but the spores are forcibly dischargedandthe tubes are arranged vertically.
Leccinum manzanitae
(Manzanita Bolete)
CAP (5) 7-20 (30) cm broad, rounded becoming convexandthen broadly convex to plane
or somewhat irregular; surface viscid when moist, practically smooth but usually with
flattened fibrils, sometimes pitted in age; dark red to reddish-brown, or at times rusty-
brown, rusty-orange, or brown (see comments); margin with flaps of sterile tissue when
young, which break up into segments or disappear in age. Flesh thick, firm becoming soft
at maturity, white, usually bruising smoky-gray to purple-gray or bluish-gray when cut, but
often very slowly or only in certain areas. PORESandtubes whitish to pale olive, olive-
gray, or grayish, usually deep dingy olive-buff in age; not blueing when bruised but often
discoloring brown. STALK 8-20 cm long, 1.5-4 cm thick at apex, equal or often thicker or
swollen below, tough, fibrous, solid, white or whitish when fresh, but roughened by
numerous small projecting scabers that are pallid at first but deep brown to black by
maturity; lower portion often bruising (or already stained) bright blue to greenish-blue.
SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 13-19 x 3-5 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious on ground, associated with man-
zanitaandmadrone but often growing in mixed woods; known only from the west coast.
It is common in our area in the fallandwinterandis easily the most prevalent Leccinum in
coastal California. It is seldom as prolific as B. edulis, but 1 have seen more than fifty
prime fructifications under a patch of stunted madrones in the middle of a pasture.
EDIBILITY Edibleandesteemed by many boletivores, but disappointingly bland in
my experience. Mature or waterlogged specimens should be dried in order to concentrate
their flavorandget rid of excess moisture. In one blind tasting of several local boletes (all
fresh), it placed next to last-slightly behind the boring Boletus subtomentosus but ahead
of the abominable Suillusfuscotomentosus. Michael Cabaniss, who did the line drawings
for this book, says: "I have tried only dried slices, a form which is not the most visually
stimulating. . . their consistency is rather grainy, giving the gustatory experience of dried
earth or decomposed redwood chips. Dried slices are not even chewy; they break up readily
when inserted into the oral cavityandare swallowed with great difficulty."
COMMENTS This large, impressive bolete is easily identified by its reddish to brown
cap, hard tough stalk with dark scabers,andgrowth with manzanitaandmadrone (see
photo on p. 39). It is the central species in a cluster of edible Leccinums that appear to
associate only with ericaceous plants such as manzanitaandmadrone,andare
consequently referred to collectively as "manzanita boletes." Their ranks include a
common but unidentified (probably unnamed) species in our area with a bright orange to
rusty-brown cap, orange scabers,andflesh that tends to stain reddish before turning
fuscous (it is known locally as L. "aurantioscaber'); L. arbuticola, with reddish-staining
fleshanda buff to pale brown cap; L. aeneum, with a non-viscid, oranger cap; L.largentii,
possibly associated with toyon, with a dry cap, dark olive-gray pores,andvery dense
scabers; L. constans, with a pale pink to apricot-colored capandunchanging flesh; L.
armeniacum, a common species with an orangish capandsomewhat paler scabers (especially
when young);andL. arctostaphylos, an Alaskan species associated with bearberry (a type of
manzanita). Other species: L. ponderosum (CO LO R PLATE 146) is a sometimes massive
species that looks like L. manzanitae, but typically has unchanging (or only slightly
staining) fleshandis associated with conifers in the Pacific Northwest; it is quite tasty.
L. fibrillosum also grows with conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but it has a fibrillose
to fibrillose-scaly, liver-brown capandits flesh stains reddish or vinaceous when cut. L.
idahoensis has a roughened, liver-colored cap but does not stain appreciably when
bruised, while L. brunneum has a dark brown to reddish-brown cap, stains directly to
fuscous,andis quite common under aspen in the Sierra NevadaandSouthwest. See also
L. insigneandthe species listed under it.
Leccinum insigne (Aspen Bolete) Color Plate 147
CAP (4) 6-17 cm broad, round to convex becoming broadly convex to nearly plane; surface
dry or only slightly viscid when wet, smooth to minutely fibrillose or sometimes breaking
up into small scales, in age sometimes pitted; color variable: bright orange to rusty-orange,
reddish-orange, orange-brown, reddish-brown, or cinnamon (or in one form brown),
often paler or duller (tan, brown, or dull orange-brown) in age; margin usually with flaps
of sterile tissue, at least when young. Flesh thick, often rather soft in age, white, turning
bluish-gray to purple-gray or fuscous when bruised or cut, but sometimes very slowly or
erratically. PORESandtubes pallid or whitish when young, becoming olive-buff to
grayish or dull yellowish-buff in age; not blueing when bruised (but may stain yellowish to
brown, lavender, or vinaceous). STALK 6-15 cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick at apex, equal or
swollen below, dry, solid, rather toughandfibrous; white or whitish when fresh, but
roughened by numerous small, projecting scabers which are initially pallid but become
reddish-orange to brownandfinally blackish by maturity; base or lower portion often
staining or discoloring blue. SPORE_PRINT brown to yellow-brown; spores 11-18x 4-6
microns, spindle-shaped to elongated-elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious or in troops on ground in woodsandat their
edges; associated primarily if not exclusively with aspen,andcommon in the summer and
early fall wherever aspen occurs. It is abundant in the Sierra Nevada (along with other
Leccinums-see comments),andI have seen enormous fruitings in the Southwest and
Rocky Mountains shortly after the blue columbines bloom. It is also abundant in Alaska.
EDIBILITY Edibleandgood. Though not the equal of Boletus edu/is. it is far better in
flavor than its coastal counterpart, L. manzanitae. Like most Leccinums it darkens when
cooked or dried. If this intimidates you, that's fine with me-I'll be more than happy to take
them off your hands!
COMMENTS This common aspen-lover has many look-alikes in the genus Leccinum.
most of which have passed under the name L. aurantiacum. They are very difficult to dis-
tinguish without a microscope but all are apparently edible, though some may cause
digestive upsets in sensitive individuals. L. insigne is recognized by its rusty.:.orange to
reddish-hrown or brown cap, scabers on the stalk which darken in age,andgrowth with
aspen. Some of its more common look-alikes include: L. aurantiacum, very similar and
widespread under aspenandconifers, but sometimes largerandmore robustandwith
flesh that distinctly stains burgundy-red before turning purplish-or bluish-gray; L. dis-
color, very similar to L. aurantiacum. but growing only with aspenandwith a slightly
duller, browner, or more cinnamon-colored cap (see p. 537 for the critical microscopic
difference); L. atrostipitatumandL. testaceoscabrum (the latter more brightly colored),
with scabers that are black even in the button stage, associated mainly with birch and
poisonous to some people; andL.Jallax andL. subalpinum, with a rusty to dark reddish
capandclub-shaped stalk, associated with spruceandfir in the Rocky Mountains and
Southwest. Also see L. manzanitaeandthe species discussed under it.
Leccinum scabrum (Birch Bolete)
CAP 4-10 cm broad, convex to broadly convex to nearly plane or slightly depressed
centrally; surface smooth, dry to slightly viscid when wet, dull brown to grayish-brown to
dingy yellow-brown or tan (but often developing olive tints in age); margin lacking
flaps of sterile tissue. Flesh thick, white, typically not staining when cut or discoloring
slightly pinkish to brownish in the stalk. PORESandtubes dull whitish or pallid becoming
dingy brownish in age; not blueing when bruised but sometimes staining slightly yellowish
or ochre. STALK 7-15 (20) cm long, 0.5-1.5 (3) cm thick at apex, usually thicker below,
firm, solid, white to grayish but roughened by numerous projecting tufted hairs (scabers)
which soon become brownish to black at least over the upper portion; often staining blue-
green below. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 14-20 x 5-7 microns, spindle-shaped to
elongated-elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups near or under birch in the summerandfall;
common throughout the northern hemisphere wherever birch occurs. It has not been
found in California, but could conceivably appear on lawns where birches have been
planted (just like Lactarius torminosus).
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice according to some, mediocre according to others; only
firm specimens should be used.
COMMENTS The dingy brownish cap, dark scabers on the stalk,andassociation with
birch are the principal field marks of this bolete. There are several similarly colored species
that are best differentiated microscopically, but L. montanum ofthe Sierra Nevada can
be distinguished by its different mycorrhizal mate-aspen. Other species:L. griseonigrum,
associated with birch, is one of several species with a blackish to bluish-gray to dark brown
cap (which, however, may bleach out in age); L. snellii also has a dark cap but favors aspen; L.
alaskanum, common with birch in Alaska, has a darkandlight, streaked or mottled cap.
There are also several species with a whitish or pallid cap, including: L. h%pusandL.
rotundifo/iae, both fairly common in northern North America under birch, the former
often developing olive tinges on the cap in ageandthe latter usually growing in bogs;
and L. a/bellum, a slender-stemmed, dry-capped eastern species that favors southern oaks.
L. ca/ifornicum hasa whitish to buff cap, but grows with aspen in the Sierra Nevada, while
L. cretaceum has a pale buff capandflesh that stains vinaceous-pink erratically. L. roseo-
fracta has a dark brown capandreddish-or pinkish-staining fleshandis associated with
birch. Finally, there is L. griseum, an eastern species that somewhat resembles L. scab rum
but usually has an areolate (cracked) cap in ageandfavors oakandother hardwoods over
birch. All of these species lack the flaps of sterile tissue on the cap margin characteristic of
L. insigne, L. manzanitae,andthe species discussed under them.
Strobilomycesfloccopus (Old Man of the Woods)
CAP 4-15 em broad, convex orcushion-shaped becoming broadlyconvex to plane; surface
dry. shaggy from numerous soft, coarse. gray to grayish-brown or black scales on a paler
background (but in age sometimes entirely blackish); margin usually hung with pallid to
grayish veil remnants. Flesh whitish. usually turning reddish (often slowly) when bruised,
then dark brownish to black. PORES fairly large, white or gray becoming darker gray to
nearly black in age, usually bruising reddish, then brownish to black; tubes same color.
STALK 5-12 em long, 1-2.5 em thick, equal or somewhat thicker toward base, solid, firm,
dry, sheathed by large gray to grayish-black scales or shaggy material except atapex. VEIL
pallid to grayish, woolly-cottony, leaving tissue on cap marginandusually one or more
shaggy zones on stalk. SPORE_PRINT black to blackish-brown; spores 9.5-15x 8.5-12
microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, reticulate.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups in humus under hard woods( especially oak),
sometimes also with conifers; common in the summerandfall in eastern North America,
and according to Dr. Robert Gilbertson of the University of Arizona, also fairly common
in southern Arizona. Its dark color makes it hard to see in the forest gloom.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not rated highly by most mushroom enthusiasts. I found it
rather insipid although the texture was good. Only young specimens should be used.
COMMENTS This most distinctive of all the boletes is easily told by its shaggy gray to
black fruiting body. In contrast to most boletes, it does not decay readily. As a result, it
often seems more numerous than it actually is. Other species: S. strobi/aceus is a synonym.
s. confusus of eastern North America is quite similar in colorandoverall aspect, but has
more erect scales on the cap (see photo on p. 542)andspiny-warty to only partly reticulate
spores; S. dryophilus is a southern species that is similarly colored in age but usually paler
(cap pinkish-tan to brown) when young.
Gastroboletus turbinatus (Bogus Boletus; Gastroid Bolete)
CAP 2-5 (8) cm broad, convex to slightly depressed to irregular (misshapen); surface dry,
minutely velvety, often pitted or wrinkled; color variable, but usually brown to reddish-
brown to bright yellow with red or brown spotsandstains. Flesh soft, yellow (but often
reddish in base of stalk), typically bruising blue quickly. PORES pinkish to reddish,
orange, or yellow, typically blueing quickly when bruised; tubes greenish-yellow to yellow,
irregularandsinuous or disoriented (arranged at various angles rather than exclusively
vertical). STALK 14 (7) cm long, 1-2.5 cm thick, equal or narrowed at base, often (but
not always) protruding only a short distance below the tubes; solid, dry, yellow or with
reddish streaks or granules or colored like the cap, sometimes reddish in old ageandoften
reddish at the base. SPORE_PRINT unobtainable; spores(9.5) 13.5-18 x 6.5-9.5 microns,
elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth, brown or golden under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground in woods or at their edges, often
partially buried; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the summerandfall under
conifers in the Pacific Northwest, northern California,andthe Sierra Nevada. I have
found it twice in our area under live oak, in JulyandOctober (it is not necessarily rare,
however-just easy to overlook).
EDIBILITY Unknown, like myself,andlikely to remain so.
COMMENTS A curiously wrought fungal afterthought, easily recognized by its irregular
shape, semi-underground growth habit,anddisoriented tube layer. Since the spores are
not forcibly discharged, there is no need to elevate the cap above the ground. Just how
the spores are spread is a mystery-perhaps with the help ofboletivorous bipeds such as I.
Many agarics have been "reduced" to gastroid forms (see Podaxales & Allies, p. 724);
this is one instance in which a bolete has. Most of the other members of the genus have
limited distributions. Several occur under conifers in the Sierra Nevada, including:
G. xerocomo;des, which blues only slightlyandhas mostly truncate spores,andthree
species which do not blue when bruised: G. su;llo;des, with a brown cap; G. amylo;deus,
with a yellow, buff, or reddish-spotted capandamyloid spores;andG. subalpinus(below).
Gastroboletus subalpinus (Gastroid King Bolete)
CAP 5-12 cm broad, convex becoming plane to depressed or somewhat irregular; surface
smooth to slightly velvety, often pitted and/or wrinkled, not viscid but often covered with
dirtanddebris; whitish to buff or pale tan, sometimes darkening somewhat in age; margin
extending downwardandover the tubes as a thin white membrane that often disappears
or breaks up in age. Flesh thick, soft, white or with yellow to olive discolorations; not
blueing when bruised but sometimes staining pinkish. PORES pallid or whitish becoming
grayish-yellow to buffandfinally darkening to olive-brown, not blueing when bruised;
tubes occasionally oriented vertically (especially near stalk) but mostly arranged hap-
hazardly (at various angles); colored more or less like pores. STALK 2-6 cm long, 2-5
cm thick, tapered downward or sometimes equal or even swollen below; solid, dry (but
often dirty), white to buff, sometimes darkening to tan in age; base sometimes orange-
yellow. SPORE_PRINT unobtainable; spores 10-16 (18)x 4.5-6 (8) microns, elliptical to
spindle-shaped, smooth, yellowish to brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff under mountain conifers in the late spring
and summer; known only from the Sierra Nevada (where it is fairly common) but to be
expected in other mountain ranges of the West. It develops underground but is often
partially exposed (erumpent) at maturity.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This gastroid bolete is easily told from its brethren by its pale color and
white, non-blueing flesh. It is likely to be mistaken for an aborted button of Boletusedulis,
or more likely still, B. barrowsii. However, the disoriented tube layer, tendency to develop
underground,andrefusal to give a spore print are distinctive. The thin layer of tissue
which at least partially covers the tubes of young specimens may represent a more elabo-
rate version of the whitish pith that plugs the tubes of young B. edu/isandB. barrowsii.
Fistulina hepatica (Beefsteak Fungus; Ox Tongue) Color Plate 152
FRUITING_BODY annual, at first knoblike, then cushion-or shelflike juicy when
fresh, soft to fairly firm. CAP 7-30 cm broadand2-6cm thick when mature, tongue-shaped
or fan-shaped surface minutely roughenedandsuedelike or velvety, but often gelatinous
when wet, firm or very softandspongy, sometimes knobby orange-buff to reddish-orange
to pinkish, reddish-brown, dark red, or liver-colored margin often lobed. Flesh thick,
softandwatery when freshandoozing with 4ark reddish juice whitish to grayish, olive-
brown, or reddish, streaked or marbled horizontally with paler veins (usually reddening
after standing) taste rather sour or strongly acidic. PO RES 1-3 per mm. circular, whitish
to yellowish, buff, or pale flesh-color, becoming dark reddish-brown when bruised or in
old age tubes 10-15 mm long, closely packed but discrete (their walls not joined). STALK
absent, or if present then lateralandrather short, 2-6 (10) cm long, 1-4 cm thick tougher
than the cap but continous with itandcolored similarly, firm. SPORE_PRINT pinkish-
salmon to pale ochre or pale rusty-brown; spores 4-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or sometimes several together at the bases of hardwoodsandon
stumps, especially of chestnutandoak; widely distributed, but most common in Europe
and eastern North America. In coastal California it seems to grow exclusively onchinqua-
pin (a close relative of chestnut) in the fallandwinter. In my experience it is not common,
but Chroogomphus-king Ciro Milazzo discovered one large local fruiting of over thirty
individuals on some recently cut chinquapin stumps. It causes a serious carbonizing decay
in its host. The rich brown hue it imparts to the wood is prized by cabinetmakers.
EDIBILITY Edible. The strong sour taste is displeasing to some, esteemed by others.
Parboiling may remove some of the sourness as well as some of the nutrients (it is rich in
vitamin C). I like to marinate thin, raw slices in seasoned vinegarandolive oil.
COMMENTS This remarkable fungus looks like a slab of raw meat, especially after it
is sliced openandstarts oozing "blood." The streaked or marbled flesh is very distinctive,
plus it never becomes as tough as other polyporesandbracket fungi. The fruiting bodies
seem to develop very slowlyandare rarely attacked by maggots. Other species: Pseudo-
fistulina radicata (=F. pallida) of eastern North AmericaandMexico also has discrete
tubes, but the cap is grayish-brown to pale reddishandthe stalk is usually longer(to 15 cm)
and somewhat rooting. It is edible also.
Boletopsis subsquamosa group (Kurokawa)
CAP 4-15 (20) em broad, broadly convex to plane or slightly depressed; circular in outline
to somewhat irregular; surface dry, smooth to fibrillose or breaking up into small scales,
especially at center; color variable: dingy whitish to gray, purple-gray, bluish-gray,
yinaceous-tinged, or with olive, pinkish, brownish, or even black tones (usually darker
in age), often with a somewhat streaked appearance; margin incurved at first, often wavy or
lobed. Flesh thick, firm, white or tinged variously with cap colors; taste mild to bitter.
PORES small or minute (1-5 per mm), usually white when freshandyoung but soon
discolored grayish, vinaceous-buff, brownish, etc.; tubes 2-4 mm long, usually at least
somewhat decurrent. STALK (2) 4-13 cm long, 1-4 cm thick, central or off-center, eq ual or
with a narrowed base, solid, smooth; whitish or colored like the cap or pores. SPORE
PRINT white to pale brown; spores 4-7 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, but
distinctly angular-warty.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under both hardwoods and
conifers; widely distributed. In our area it is fairly common in the fallandwinter under
tanoakandmadrone; to the north it often fruits in coastal sand dunes under pine.
EDIBILITY Edible, but often bitter. It is esteemed by the Japanese, who usually soak it
in brine to remove the bitterness.
COMMENTS Like A/hatTel/us ovinus, this polypore is sometimes mistaken for a bolete
because of its frequently central, well-developed stalkandterrestrial growth habit.
However, the tube layer cannot easily be peeled from the capandthe overall shape is quite
different. The color of the fruiting body (especially the cap) is extremely variable, leading
to the naming of several different "species," including B. leucomelas, with a bluish-black
to black cap,andB. griseus, with a grayish cap. These color forms appear to intergrade,
however,andthe common one in our area can be bluish-gray to purplish, pinkish-purple,
or blackish, depending on season, temperature,andexposure to sunlight. The warty-
angular spores are the critical microscopic feature. Albatrellus avellaneus (often listed
as a variety of A. ovinus) can be similar in color but stains yellowandhas smooth spores.
A/batre//us ovinus (Sheep Polypore)
CAP 4-15 (20) cm broad, circular in outline or irregular; convex becoming plane or slightly
depressed; surface dry, unpolished, smooth or breaking into scales in age; usually whitish
at first, but often yellow, ochre, buff, pinkish, or tan (especially at center) in age, orin some
forms purplish to purple-gray throughout; margin often wavy. Flesh thick, white or yellow,
firmandrather tough. PORES minute (2-4 per mm), white but often becoming yellow
or yeJIowish in age or when bruised; tubes shallow (1-2 mm long), usually decurrent.
STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, central or slightly off-center, equal or enlarged
below with a narrowed base; solid, firm, whitish or tinged cap color, but sometimes staining
pinkish. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-4.5 x 2.5-3.5 microns, elliptical to nearly round,
smooth, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious, sometimes in fused masses, on ground
in mixed woodsandunder conifers; widely distributed. It is very abundant in the Rocky
Mountains in the late summer under spruceandI have also seen impressive fruitings in
Maine. In our area it is locally common under manzanita in the faJIandwinter.
EDIBILITY Edible when cooked weJI,andaccording to European sources, fairly good.
Large quantities can have laxative effects, however,andmaterial I tested was rather slimy
("okraceous") when cooked.
COMMENTS This widespread Albatrel/us is variable in color (the purplish-capped
form is often called A. avellaneus), but can usually be recognized by the yellow tints that
develop in age or after handling. The pores are sometimes so tiny that the pore surface may
appear completely smooth. Because of its terrestrial habit this polypore is sometimes
mistaken for a bolete, but is much tougheranddoes not have detachable tubes. Other
species: A. confluens is a very similar, widespread species which becomes orange to
pinkish-cinnamon in age or upon dryingandhas slightly larger, weakly amyloid spores
and a bitter taste; A. similis, reported from Arizona, is also similar, but has distinctly amy-
loid spores; A. peckianus is an eastern beech-lover with a yellow to cinnamon-buff cap.
A lbatrellus flettU
(Blue-Capped Polypore)
CAP 5-20 or more cm broad, convex becoming plane or centrally depressed; surface dry,
blue to blue-gray or sometimes blue-green, but developing ochraceous, salmon, or rusty
stains in age; margin at first incurved, often lobed or wavy. Flesh thick, firmandrather
tough, white. PORES fairly small (1-4 per mm). white. but often becoming torn and
developing salmon or ochraceous stains in age or upon drying; tubes 1-7 mm long,
decurrent. STALK 5-15cmlong,(I) 1.5-4cm thick, central or off-center, equal orthickerat
either end, white to pale bluish-gray, or aging dingy ochraceous to reddish; solid, firm.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3.5-4 x 2.5-3 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth,
weakly amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground in mixed woods and
under conifers; known only from western North America. I have found it under knobcone
pine in the fallandwinter, but it seems to be quite rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible. It has been sold commercially in northern California, but I haven't
tried it. If it's anything like A. ovinus. then it isn't worth collecting.
COMMENTS The unusual blue to blue-gray cap color contrasts nicely with the white
pores to set this beautiful terrestrial polypore apart. Dingy ochraceous to rusty-ochraceous
stains develop in age, but there are almost always vestiges of blue-green or blue somewhere
on the cap. Otherspecies:A. caeruleoporusof eastern N orth America is similar, but entirely
indigo-blue to blue-gray (including the pores).
A Ihatrellus ellisii
(Greening Goat's Foot)
CAP 8-25 cm or more broad, convex becoming plane, wavy, or depressed; surface dry,
at first hairy or plushlike but the hairs often matted in age or grouping to form coarse
scales; greenish to sulfur-yellow or yellow-brown (often a mixture of colors), sometimes
with darker brown shades or stains in age; margin often wavyandat first inrolled. Flesh
thick, firm, white, sometimes bruising greenish slowly. PORES 0.5-2 mm in diameter,
white, usually staining greenish or yellow-green when bruised or becoming yellowish to
dingy greenish in old age; tubes 2-6 mm long, often decurrent. STALK 3-12 cm long or
more, 2-6 cm thick, usually off-center or lateral, solid, tough, equal or thicker at either
end; usually colored more or less like cap. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 8-9x 5-7 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or infused clusters on ground in woods; widely
distributed. I t favors conifersandis especially common in the mountains of western North
America. I have seen huge fruitings in the late summerandfall in the CascadesandSierra
Nevada, but in our area it is supplanted by A. pescaprae.
EDIBILITY Edible, with a mild fla vorandpleasantly chewy texture. Care must be taken
to simmer it slowlyandthoroughly or it will toughen.
COMMENTS Also known asS cutiger ellisii, this impressive conifer-lover is easily told by
its yellow-green to yellow-brown color, fairly large size, growth on the ground,andten-
dency to stain greenish (especially the pores). Its close relative, A. pescaprae, is browner or
redder in colorandmore southern in distribution. A. sylvestris is a somewhat similar
species with a smoky-olive or darker pore surfaceandroughened spores. A. cristatus of
eastern North America is similar in color but has a less hairy capandfavors hardwoods.
A lbatrellus pescaprae (Goat's Foot)
CAP (2.5) 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, covered with
fine fibrils which form small, dense scales or sometimes a plush( especially toward center);
dark brown to brown, reddish-brown, or pinkish-brown; margin often deeply indented.
Flesh thick, fairly tough, white, bruising pinkish slowly; taste mild. PORES large, angular,
1-2 mm or more in diameter ( or length); white to yellowish or with greenish stains, some-
times becoming pinkish in age; tubes 2-5 mm long, often decurrent. STALK 2.5-8 cm
long, 1-3 (4) cm thick, solid, usually enlarged below (sometimes several arising from a
common base); occasionally central, but usually off-center to lateral; white to yellowish or
in age brownish. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 x 5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clumps on ground in woods; widely distributed, but
more southern than A. el/isii. In our area it is not uncommon in mixed woodsandunder
tanoakandmadrone, especially in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Edible, at least according to European sources; I haven't tried it. Young
caps are said to be quite tasty (though chewy) if cooked thoroughly.
COMMENTS Also known as Scutiger pescaprae, this terrestrial polypore can be told
by its reddish-brown to brown, densely scaly cap plus its large pores, well-developed stem
(see photo at top of p. 558),andmild taste. Bondarzewia species are somewhat similar,
but have spiny sporesandless scaly capsandare not normally yellowish-or greenish-
stained. Polyporus hirtus is also somewhat similar, but has a bitter taste.
Polyporus hirtus (Bitter Polypore; Iodine Polypore)
CAP 5-18 cm broad, convex to plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry, covered with
minute short, stiff, erect or matted hairs; uniformly brown to dark brown or grayish-
brown. Flesh thick, white, firmandrather tough; taste very bitter (but often latently).
PORES white to creamy, drying yellowish, 1-2 per mm; tubes 2 mm long, adnate to
decurrent. STALK 2-10 cm long, 0.7-3 cm thick, usually lateral or off-center; equal or
tapering downward, hairyandcolored like ca p; solid, firm, rather tough. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 12-17 x 4.5 microns, spindle-shaped or cylindrical ("boletoid"), smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground, around old stumpsandtrees (especially
conifers), sometimes also on wood (often buried); northern North America. It is not un-
common in our area in the fallandwinter, particularly in mixed woods of tanoak and
redwood. It is also fairly common in the Pacific Northwest.
EDIBILITY Inedible. If you boil it for several daysandchange the water frequently, you
might remove the bitter taste, but you would remove everything else as well!
COMMENTS Also known as Albatrellus hirtusandScutiger hirtus, this species is the
most common terrestrial polypore in our area, but is by no means numerous. The evenly
colored brown hairy cap plus the white pores, bitter taste,andpresence of a stalk are good
fieldmarks (see photos at top of next page). According to mycologist Daniel Stuntz, speci-
mens in the Pacific Northwest emit an iodine odor soon after being picked, but I have not
detected such an odor in local material. Bondarzewia montana can be similar when it
doesn't grow in clusters, but has warted amyloid sporesandis not as bitter-tasting.
Polyporus decurrens
CAP 4-14 cm broad, convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, yellowish to yellow-
brown to ochre or dull orange (rarely reddish-brown), with darker (usually brown) erect
fibrillose scales which become flattened in age. Flesh thick, white, tough. PORES fairly
large (0.5-2 mm in diameter), angular or becoming torn or toothlike in age, white, but
sometimes discoloring when dried; tubes 2-6 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK 2-10
cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm thick, equal or thicker at either end, solid, tough; white or somewhat
brownish, usually reticulate above from the decurrent tube walls. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 10-18 x 4-6 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups or tufts on the ground (usually originating from
buried wood) or sometimes on dead wood, fall through spring; known from California,
occasional. It favors hardwoods, but I have found it in a variety of habitats. It is the most
common terrestrial polypore of southern California.
EDIBILITY Unknown. The closely related P. squamosus (see comments) is edible
when thoroughly cooked, but is thoroughly mediocre.
COMMENTS The dull orange to yellowish-brown to ochre scaly cap with fairly large
decurrent pores distinguish this species from A/barrel/us pescapraeandothers. It is also
known as P. mcmurphy;. The "Dryad Saddle," P. squamosus, is a better-known, closely
related species. It is larger (cap 6-30 (60) cm broadandstalk up to 5 cm thick)andpaler
with dense, flattened brown to dark brown scales (but may become darker brown overall
in age)andvery large pores (1-10 mm each in largest dimension). It usually grows solitary
or clustered on hardwoods (often living) rather than on the groundandits stem, when
well-developed, usually has a black base. In North America it is most common east ofthe
Rocky Mountains, but occurs occasionally in WashingtonandCalifornia. (I've seen what
might be a photograph ofthis species from Fresno.) Another related species,P.Jagicola
(=P. lentus) of eastern North America, occurs on hardwoods but is smallerandless scaly.
Polyporus badius (Black-Leg)
CAP 4-20 cm broad, convex becoming depressed or umbilicate; surface tan to chestnut-
brown to dark reddish-brown or often becoming blackish in age; margin usually paler,
often lobed. Flesh tough when fresh, rigid when dry, very thin, white becoming brownish.
PORES minute, 4-7 per mm, white when fresh, brownish in age; tubes shallow, adnate to
somewhat decurrent. STALK 1-6 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, central or off-center or lateral,
more or less equal; pallid aboveandblack below or more frequently black throughout,
tough. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-9 x 34 microns, cylindrical to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on rotting hardwoods (especially aspen) or occasionally
conifers; widely distributed,andoccasional in our area in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Too tough to eat.
COMMENTS Also known as P. picipes, this species is close to P. elegans but has a darker
and often larger cap (see photo on p. 42). Also, the entire stalk is usually blackandit often
grows on logsandstumps whereas P. elegans is more common on branchesandsticks.
Both species are retained in the genus Polyporus in its residual (narrowest) sense. For
similar species, see comments under P. elegans.
Polyporus elegans (Elegant Polypore; Black-Foot)
CAP 1.5-7 cm broad, round to kidney-shaped in outline; convex, soon becoming de-
pressed, vase-shaped, or umbilicate; surface smooth or finely striate, pale tan to tan or
ochre, often weathering to white; margin often wavy or 10 bed. Flesh tough when fresh, rigid
when dry, thin, white to pale cinnamon. PORES minute,4-6 permm, white when fresh but
often becoming grayish or brownish in age; tubes shallow, usually decurrent. STALK 0 .5-5
cm long, 2-6 (10) mm thick, central or off-center or lateral, more or less equal or swollen at
base; pallid or tan above, soon becoming black below; tough. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 6.5-10 x 2.54 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or several together on decaying hardwoods sticks, branches, and
debris (only rarely on conifers); widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area in the
winterandspring, especially on willow, alder, poplar (cottonwood),andoak.
EDIBILITY Too tough to eat, but dries nicely for decorative purposes.
COMMENTS This dainty polypore is easily recognized by its tan to whitish cap, smalJ
size,andblack "foot:' P. var;us is sometimes listed as a synonym, but is also applied to a
form with a radialJy streaked cap that is intermediate in color between P. elegansandP.
badius. The latter species is usually larger than P. elegans,andhas a darker capandentirely
black stem. Another species, P. me/anopus, grows on the ground or from buried wood; it
has a velvety stemandvelvety-scurfy cap, at least when young.
Polyporus areularius (Fringed Polypore)
CAP 1-8 cm broad, round in outline, convex becoming depressed, vase-shaped, or
umbilicate; surface dry. golden-brown to dark brown, usually minutely scaly; margin
often ciliate (fringed with fine hairs). Flesh thin, white, tough. PORES large(l-2 per mm),
angular or hexagonal, white or yellowish; tubes shallow, sometimes decurrent. STALK
2-6 cm long, 24 mm thick, usually central or slightly off-center, more or less equal, dark
brown to yellowish-brown, smooth or minutely scaly, the base sometimes hairy. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 2-3 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods; widespread, but rare in our
area. I've seen it in the SouthwestandPacific Northwest in the summer,andin eastern
North America in the spring. Several closely related species are abundant in the tropics.
EDIBILITY Much too smallandtough to be edible.
COMMENTS The small sizeandfairly large pores plus the typically central stem and
frequently ciliate cap margin characterize this attractive polypore. P. mor;(also called
Favo/us a/veo/ar;s). similar but without hairs on cap,andwith a stubby stalkandlarge.
diamond-shaped or hexagonal pores, occurs east of the Rockies. P. bruma/;s has much
smaller poresandits cap is some shade of brown. It is common on birchandother
hardwoods in eastern North America, rare in the West. M;cropore//us dea/batus has a
concentrically zoned capandcentral stalk; M. obovatus has a whitish, unzoned cap and
central to lateral stalk. Both are common on dead hardwoods in the southeastern United
States. ,None of these have the black or half-black stem of P. elegansandP. badius.
Polyporus tuberaster (Stone Fungus) Color Plate 151
CAP 4-15 cm broad, convex to plane with a depressed or umbilicate center or becoming
funnel-shaped; surface dry, tan to brown or ochre, darker with ageandwith scattered
darker brown fibrils or fibrillose scales which are often radially arranged; margin often
indented or lobed. Flesh thin, pallid, rigid when dry. PORES 1-3 per mm. white to pale
tan; tubes 1-3 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK 2.5-10 (20) cm long, 1-2.5 (4) cm thick,
more or less equal, central or off-center, brown or colored like cap; solid, tough, arising
from a large brown to black underground sclerotium ("tuber") which is rather rubbery
when fresh but rock-hard when dry; exterior of ""tuber" roughandirregular; interior often
marbled with blackish-brownandpaler areasandusually full of dirtanddebris. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 10-16x 3.5-6 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in twos or threes on ground in woods; widely distributed, but not
common. I have found it several times in our area in mixed woodsandunder oak and
madrone. It fruits in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Edible, but tough unless young, fresh,andthoroughly cooked. Native
Americans ate an underground sclerotium which they called "tuckahoe." It was once
thought to be this species(as reported in the I st edition of Mushrooms Demystified), butis
now believed to be the sclerotium of another polypore (see Poria cocos. p. 604). The
"tubers" of P. tuberaster are inedible because they are full of dirt. However, they are sold
in southern Italy under the name pietra fungaia ("Stone Fungus"). Buyers plant the
"tubers" in flower pots, water them regularly,andthen eat the fruiting bodies that result.
COMMENTS The large underground ..tuber" immediately identifies this polypore.
The "tuber" might be mistaken for a piece of buried wood or a parasitized potato (it's
usually the same size or larger), but the texture when fresh is distinctive. It is thought
to be a resting stage of the fungus, or a secret storage compartment for nutrients.
Bondarzewia berke/eyi may have a thick, rooting stem or'.tuber," but is much larger. Other
species: P. radieatus of eastern North America is somewhat similar but larger,andhas a
long, black, narrowed rooting base instead of a sclerotium; P. mylittae of Australia has a
yellower capandproduces edible sclerotia weighing up to 40 lbs. each! The sclerotia are
known as "Blackfellow's Bread," a reference to their use as food by the aboriginees.
Grifola frondosa
(Hen of the Woods; Sheep's Head)
FRUITING_BODY compound, 15-60cm broad ormore,consistingofa mass of numerous
small, overlapping caps arising from a common, fleshy, repeatedly branched base. CAPS
2-7 (10) cm broad, spoon-shaped, tongue-shaped, or fan-shapedandtlattened; surface dry,
smooth or rough to fibrillose, gray to brown or grayish-brown; margin often wavy. Flesh
whiteandfirm, rather tough; taste mild when young. PORES 1-3 per mm, white or
yellowish; tubes shallow (2-3 mm long), decurrent. STALKS (branches) smooth, fleshy
but tough, white or pale grayish, off-center or more often lateral (attached to sides of
caps). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT At or near the bases of treesandstumps (usually oak), fruiting year
after year in the same spots; widely distributed, but common only in eastern North
America. It has been reported from Idaho, but is rare in the Westandapparently absent in
our area. It causes a delignifying butt rot of both the heartwoodandsapwood of its host.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-along with the sulfurshelfand beefsteak fungus, the best
of the polypores for the table. Long, slow cooking is recommendedandonly the young,
tender caps are worth eating. "Allergies" have been reported. It is excellent pickled.
COMMENTS The numerous overlapping, more or less spoon-shaped caps are remi-
niscent of a fluffed-up hen, making this one of the safestandmost easily recognized of all
edible mushrooms. Clusters weighing 100 pounds have been recorded, but 5-10 pound
specimens are the norm. There are usually more caps per cluster than in Bondarzewia, and
the stems are attached to the sides of the caps rather than being central. Polyporus or
Polypilus frondosus are synonyms. G. umbellata(=P. umbellatus}, also edible, is a similar
species with whitish to gray to smoky-brown, circular caps with central stems. Its fruiting
bodies arise from sclerotia ("tubers") that have been used by the Chinese as an immune
system stimulant. It occurs across the northern half ofthe continent, but is not common.
Bondarzewia montana
FRUITING_BODY simple (with a capandstalk) or compound (with numerous caps and
stalks arising from a common base), but often fingerlike when first emerging or taking
the form of a lumpy, misshapen, or rosette-like mass (when compound); often massive
when mature (up to I m (3 ft.) broad if compound); usually arising from a rooting base.
CAP(s) 5-25 cm broad when mature, convex to irregular or depressed; surface dry, finely
velvety to fibrillose, or becoming smooth; tan or ochre to brown or dark brown, sometimes
paler when immature. Flesh fairly thick, white, firm but brittle when fresh; taste mild or
sometimes bitter in age. PORES fairly large (0.5-2 mm broad), usually angular or irregular
in shape or breaking up to form "teeth"; pore surface often lumpy or nod ulose in com pound
fruiting bodies, white to creamy or buff, dingier when dried or in age; tubes 1-6 mm long,
usually decurrent. STALK(s) central to lateral, continuous with individual capsandsimi-
lar in colorandtexture, usually arising from a ta pered, underground, gnarly rooting base
that is 4-12 cm longand2-5 cm thick. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 microns, round,
with conspicuous amyloid warts.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups under conifers, usually near stumps or trunks (pre-
sumably arising from roots or buried wood); locally common in the late summerandfall
in western North America, particularly at higher elevations. I have found it in quantity
near Lake Tahoe under firandwhite pine, but ha ve not seen it on the coast. The very similar
B. berkeleyi (see comments) favors living hardwoods, producing a serious delignifying
butt rot of the heartwood ("stringandray rot") that completely hollows out its host.
EDIBILITY : Tempting because of its size, but rather toughandsometimes bitter to boot.
It is probably harmless, but certainly not the equal of Grifolafrondosa.
COMMENTS The warted amyloid spores, often compound fruiting body,andgnarled
rooting base are characteristic of the genus Bondarzewia. The spores are unique among
the polypores, leading some investigators to suggest a relationship to the agaric genera,
RussulaandLaclarius. When B. montana has a massive compound fruiting body (see
photo on p. 548) it is reminiscent of the hen of the woods, Grifolafrondosa, an eastern
hardwood-loving species with smooth spores. Fruiting bodies with one to several caps, on
the other hand, are more likely to be confused with Polyporus hirtus, a bitter-tasting,
smooth-spored polypore. Its only close relative, B. berkeleyi, is quite similar but usually
has fewer (one to five), broader, paler(whitish to grayish or yellowish-tan) capsandslightly
larger spores, plus it favors hardwoods (especially oakandmaple). It seems to intergrade
with B. montana,andis very widely distributed. Another sometimes gigantic polypore,
Meripilus giganteus, occurs at the bases of hardwoods in eastern North America. It stains,
ages, or dries gray to dark brown or black on the pore surface and/or marginandhas much
smaller pores (3-7 per mm). Like Bondarzewia, it often has a compound fruiting body, but
has smooth, non-amyloid spores. The individual caps in all of these species are usually
larger than those of Grifo/a.
H eteroporus biennis
FRUITING_BODY arising from a poorly developed stalk or fleshy base, with one cap or
several fused together in an overlapping rosette, or very distorted with most of the
surface covered with pores. CAP 3-9 (20) cm broad when well-developed, plane to de-
pressed; surface dry, woolly-hairy or felty, white to tan or aging pinkish to reddish. Flesh
tough, duplex, white or pinkish. PORES 1-3 per mm, angular, irregular, or mazelike, or
becoming toothlike; whitish, but often discoloring or bruising reddish, dingier in age;
tubes 2-6 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK central to off-center, poorly developed or
even absent, continuous withandcolored like the cap; hairy. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
4-8 x 3-5 microns, elliptical, smooth; thick-walled, nearly round spores (chlamydo-
spores) often present also.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground around hardwood stumpsandtrees (pre-
sumably growing on the roots), occasionally under conifers; widely distributed, but not
common. I have found it in our area under oakandpine in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Unknown; too tough to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS Misshapen fruiting bodies are usually found with pores covering much or
most of the mushroom-the best fieldmark of this otherwise unimposing, profoundly
forgettable, pitiful excuse for a polypore. The growth habit is sometimes reminiscent of
Phaeo/us schweinitzii. A bortiporus b;enn;sandPolyporus b;enn;s are synonyms.
Coltricia cinnamomea (Fairy Stool)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk, usually terrestrial. CAP 1-5 cm broad, more Or
less circular in outline, centrally depressed or umbilicate; surface dry. bright cinnamon
to reddish-brown, yellow-brown, rusty-brown, or darker, with shiny Or silky striations and
narrow or inconspicuous concentric zones; margin often fringed or torn. Flesh very thin
(1 mm thick or less), pliant when fresh; rusty-brown. PORES 2-3 per mm, yellow-brown
to brown Or reddish-brown; tubes shallow (0.5-3 mm long), typically not decurrent.
STALK 1-5 cm long, 1-4 mm thick, usually centralandmore or less equal, brown to
reddish-brown, hairy Or velvety, tough. SPORE_PRINT yellowish-brown; spores 6-10
x 4.5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth. Cap tissue staining black in KGH.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on ground or moss in woods, often along well-
beaten paths, road banks,andin clearings (rarely on rotten wood); widespread. In our area
this speciesandC. perennis (see comments) occur year-round, but are not very common.
EDIBILITY Too tough toeat, but makes an intriguing addition to seedpod arrangements.
COMMENTS This beautiful little polypore is easily told by its very thin, silky-shiny,
cinnamon to amber-brown cap, brown pore surface,andreddish-brown to dark brown
(not black!) stem. The rusty-brown flesh distinguishes it from Po/yporusand other stalked
polypores. In similar habitats or on charred groundandjust as common is the elegant
C. perenn;s (see photo below). Its cinnamon to yellow-brown or grayish cap is up to 10 cm
broadandusually strongly zonedandfinely velvety( ratherthan silky). It also tends to ha ve
a thicker stemandbrown to grayish-brown pores that are sometimes decurrent. Itis widely
distributed, but a third species, C. montagne;, is restricted to eastern North America. It
has large, often mazelike pores or even thick, concentrically arranged plates Or "gills."
I nonotus hispidus
FRUITING_BODY annual, growing shelflike or bracketlike on wood, at first soft and
spongy but tough in ageandrigid when dry. CAP 5-20 (30) cm broadand2-10 cm thick,
convex or plane; surface at first densely covered with stiff or bristly hairs, the hairs
tending to wear away in age; bright reddish-orange to yellowish-brown to rusty-yellow
when fresh, becoming brown to dark reddish-brown or even blackish in age. Flesh up to
5 (10) cm thick, at first watery or spongy(but fibrous), tougher in age; rusty to rusty-yellow
to dark reddish-brown; odor often rather pleasant when fresh. PORES 1-3 (4) per mm,
yellowish to brown or rusty-yellow, sometimes with an olive tingeandsometimes beaded
with droplets, darkening with age or where bruised; tubes 0.5-3 cm long. STALK absent.
SPORE_PRINT ochre-to chestnut-brown; spores 7 .5-11 x 6-9 microns, broadly elliptical
to nearly round, smooth. Flesh darkening (staining red to black) in KOH.
HABITAT Usually solitary (occasionally several) on living or recently dead hard woods
or rarely conifers; fruiting mostly in the summerandfall but occurring year-round, widely
distributed. It is a destructive parasite of oakandwalnut( causing a white rot of the heart-
wood), but occurs on a wide range of other trees, including mulberryandwillow. The
fruiting bodies usually emerge from the wounds of trees, often at a considerable distance
from the ground. I have not seen this species locally but it occurs in southern California.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This speciesandits close relatives (see below) are reminiscent of I. IOmen-
tosusandPhaeo/us schweinitzii, but are strictly shelving species with no stalk. They can
also be confused with species of Phellinus, but are softandspongy when freshandare not
perennial. Similar species include: I. cut;cu/ar;s, with a woolly-matted to nearly smooth
(not bristly) cap, found on various hardwoods such as willow, cottonwood,andpepper
trees; I. dryoph;/us, with a thick granular core between the upper fibrous tissueandthe
tube layer, found on hardwoods (especially oak); I. texanus, found on desert legumes
(particularly acaciaandmesquite); I. ar;zon;cus, found on sycamore; I. dryadeus (see
comments under l. IOmenlOsus);andI. radiatus, widespread (but especially common in
eastern North America) on hardwoods such as birchandalder, with a rather thin, firm,
brightly colored (golden to rusty-brown or even yellowish-green) cap that is often zoned
and radially fibrillose plus unpigmented spores. See also l. IOmentosus, which some-
times grows shelflike on conifers.
I nonotus tomentosus
FRUITING_BODY usually terrestrial with a capanda short or rudimentary stalk, but
sometimes lacking a stalkandgrowing shelflike on wood. CAP 3-12 (18) cm broad, circular
to fan-shaped in outline, convex to plane to centrally depressed; surface dry, softandhairy
(tomentose) or velvety, whitish when very young but soon yellowish-brown to tan, dull
ochre, brown, or rusty-brown, sometimes with faint concentric zones. Flesh yellow-brown
to brown, duplex: upper layer softandspongy when fresh, lower layer rather thin, firm, and
fibrous. PORES round to angular or irregular becoming torn or sometimes toothlike in
age, 24 per mm, pale buff to grayish or beige or becoming brownish, but often with a hoary
sheen or surface covering; darker brown where bruised; tubes 1.5-7 mm long, usually
decurrent. STALK often rudimentary, when present short (1-5 cm long), 0.5-2 cm thick,
central to off-center or lateral, continuous with capandmore or less same colorandtexture,
or darker. SPORE_PRINT pale yellow to pale brown; spores 4.5-7 x 2.54 microns,
elliptical, smooth, hyaline under the microscope. Brown sterile cells (setae) abundant
among basidia, straightandpointed. Cap tissue blackening in KOH (sometimes with a
fleeting red intermediate phase).
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground under conifers (presumably arising from
roots or buried wood), sometimes also on stumps or bases of trunks; widely distributed.
In our area it is fairly common throughout the mushroom season, especially in coastal
pine forests. It causes a white pocket rot of the rootsandbutt of a wide variety of conifers
in the pine family, but is especially fond of pineandspruce.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too tough to be of value.
COMMENTS Also known as Onnia tomentosaandPolystictus (or MucTonopoTus)
tomentosus, this common polypore can be recognized by its soft hairy or velvety cap and
overall brown to yellow-brown color. I t is thickerandspongier than Co/tricia; it could be
confused with Phaeo/us schweinitzii, but is dullerincolor, somewhat smaller,anddoes not
usually have a compound fruiting body. Also, the fresh pore surface is brown to grayish
or hoary rather than yellow or greenish. I. ciTcinatus is a very similar species with hooked
setae; it is also common on or near conifers across North America. I. dTyadeus favors
conifers in the West (but oak in the eastern states); it always grows shelflike on wood,
has a bald or nearly bald cap, minute pores,andattains sizes of30 cm broad or more. For
shelflike (stalkless) species of Inonotus that favor hardwoodsandhave more highly pig-
mented (browner) spores, see I. hispidusandthe species listed under it.
Phaeo/us schweinitzii
(Dyer's Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY usually compound, composed of several caps arising in tiers from a
common base, but sometimes simple (with one cap)andsometimes growing shelflike on
wood. CAP(s) 5-30 or more cm broad, circular to fan-shaped in outline; cushion-shaped
becoming plane or depressed; softandspongy when freshandoften knobby when actively
growing, tough Or corky in age, rigidandbrittle when dry; surface covered with a dense felty
or woolly mat of hairs, smoother in age; color variable: orange to ochraceous to yellowish
or greenish-yellow (especially on the margin) when growing, becoming rusty-brown to
dark brown in age (or from the center outward); staining brown to blackish when bruised
and becoming entirely dark brown to blackish in old age; sometimes concentrically zoned
with several of above colors; margin often wavy. Flesh yellowish to rusty-brown or brown,
often appearing zoned. PORES 1-3 per mm or fused together to form larger pores;
mustard-yellow to greenish when fresh, but quickly becoming brown or blackish when
bruised or in age; tubes 2-10 mm long, usually decurrent. STALK(ifpresent) 1-6 cmlong
and 1-5 cm thick, usually tapered downward, often rooting, central or off-center, same
colorandtexture as cap. SPORE_PRINT white or tinged yellow to green; spores 5-9 x 3.5-5
microns, elliptical, smooth. Setae absent. Cap surfaceandtissue staining black in KOH,
often with a fleeting cherry-red intermediate phase.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on or around deadandliving conifers, usually but not
always appearing terrestrial (originating from the roots); widely distributedandvery
common throughout the West. In our area it favors pineandDouglas-fir, the fruiting
bodies usually appearing after the first fall rains but persisting year-round. The mycelium
attacks the rootsandheartwood of its host, causing a serious carbonizing decay known as
"red-brown butt rot." It fractures the wood into cubical blacks as high as fifteen feet up the
trunk, weakening the tree so that it blows over easily. It also occurs on coniferous slash,
in which case it is more apt to be shelflike than terrestrial. In the West it is one ofthe two or
three most prevalent brown rot fungi. There is one report of it growing on eucalyptus.
EDIBILITY Possibly poisonous. It contains a stimulant found in the roots ofthe kava
kava plant, but apparently some toxic substances as well. It is too toughandhairy to be
of food value anyway. However, it is prized by dye-makers for the richandvaried hues
it imparts to yarn.
COMMENTS One of the most commonandconspicuous of the larger polypores, this
cosmopolitan species is apt to confuse the beginner because of the colorandtexture
changes it undergoes as it ages. However, the yellowish to greenish-yellow pores when
young, yellow to rusty-orange tones in the caps of young specimens,andgrowth at the base
of or near conifers are diagnostic. (The color plate shows young specimens that are pre-
dominantly orange rather than greenish-yellow.) It grows gradually, engulfing pine
needles, sticks, plants,andother debris in its way, as shown in the color plate. Old,
weathered fruiting bodies are quite light in weightandentirely dark brown in color.
Inonotus tomentosus is somewhat similar, but has a tan to dull brown capandbrownish or
hoary pore surface. Hydnellum species are superficially similar, but have short, blunt
spines or ""teeth" on the underside of the cap instead of pores.
Phaeolus alboluteus (Orange Sponge Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY resupinateandspreading or bracketlike, softandspongy when
fresh, up to I meter or more in length. CAP (upper surface) usually present only as a free
margin, softandspongy; surface bright orange but eventually weathering or fading to
whitish. Flesh thin, orange. PORES large(l-3 mm or more in diameter), angular, the walls
often jagged or splitting to form ""teeth"; whitish or yellowish soon becoming orange (or
tubes orange with white edges); tubes long (1-3 cm). STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores (7) 10-14 x 34 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Flesh reddening in KOH.
HABITAT On fallen logs of conifers, usually on the undersidesandoften developing
in snow; common in the subalpine forests of the West, fruiting mainly in the spring but
persisting into summer, fall, or even winter. It is quite common in the southern Rocky
Mountains,andI have also seen it in the Sierra Nevada. It prod uces a brown rot (carbon-
izing decay)andis said to occasionally occur on aspen.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species, which has also been placed in Pycnoporel/usandAurantio-
porel/us. is easily told by its large poresandorange spongelike fruiting body that peels off
in one continuous felty layer. P.fibrillosus is a somewhat similar species that is shelflike
(i.e., with a well-defined fiery red to orange or brownish-orange cap). It has creamy to
orange poresandgrows on conifer slash or rarely aspen. Pycnoporus. A urantioporus. and
several Porias are-also brightly colored, but are tougher and/or have much smaller pores.
Laetiporus sulphureus Color Plates 154, 155
(Sulfur Shelf; Chicken of the Woods)
FRUITING_BODY annual, emerging kno blike or fingerlike, soon becoming shelflike; soft
and fleshy when young, tough in age. CAP 5-50 (70) cm broadandup to 4 cm thick,
fan-shaped to elongated or semi-circular in outline; surface smooth to suede like, often
uneven or wrinkled; red-orange to bright orange, yellow-orange, sulfur-yellow, or salmon
(the margin usually yellow), fading slowly with age to yellowish, buff, or eventually dull
whitish; margin at first thickandblunt. Flesh thick, softandwatery when very fresh,
becoming toughandeventually crumbly; white to pale yellow or salmon-tinged; when
very fresh often exuding yellow or orange dropletsandreminiscent of uncooked chicken;
odor fungal or rather pungent; taste nearly mild or acidic becoming quite sour or un-
pleasant in age. PORES 2-4 per mm but barely visible when young, bright sulfur-yellow,
but often darkening when bruisedandfading slowly in age; tubes shallow (1-4 mm long).
STALK absent or present only as a narrowed base. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in overlapping clusters or shelving masses on dead
stum psandlogs, sometimes also on living trees or sometimes growing in rosettes from roots
or buried wood; usually appearing on the same stumps year after year; widely distributed
and common. In our area it fruits mainly in the late summerandfall, but old fruiting bodies
may persist for months. It grows on a wide range of hardwoodsandconifers. In coastal
California it favors eucalyptus (September-October, ushering in the new mushroom
season)andto a lesser extent conifersandoaks (N ovember-December). In the Sierra
Nevada it is common on fir in the summer; in eastern North America it favors oak. It
causes a destructive red-brown carbonizing heart rot that eventually hollows out the tree,
producing cracks in the wood in which thin sheets of white mycelium may appear. It is
said to have caused considerable damage to British sailing vessels.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelectable when thoroughly cooked. However, there have been
several cases of sulfur shelf poisoning on the west coast, so try it cautiously the first time
and never eat it raw. When young the succulent flesh has a mild flavor, tofu-like texture,
and ..Candy Corn"-like color, making it especially attractiveanddelicious in omelets.
Maturing specimens are tougheranddevelop a strong sour flavor; their texture when
cooked is reminiscent of white chicken meat, so they're good in sandwiches. If the
specimens you find are mature (but not so old as to be asbestos-like)" you can trim offthe
tender, rapidly growing margin (about 5 cm),andperhaps return later for more!
COMMENTS One ofthe"F oolproofF our"-the brilliant yellow-orange shelving masses
are unmistakable. Actually, nothing is foolproof, but the sulfur shelf is certainly
intelligence-proof,andI trust that no one reading this book is a fool! I always experience
an element of disbelief when I stumble onto a large cluster. It looks like something out of a
Jacques Cousteau movie-you no more expect to find it on an aging eucalyptus stump by
the railroad tracks than you do a freight train at the bottom of the sea! Fresh specimens
can be so soft that it's difficult to handle them without leaving fingerprints. They are
full of waterandweigh far more than their size suggests (I have found clusters weighing
over 50 pounds!). It seems strange that such a large fungus should require so little moisture
to fruit, for in our area it often appears before the arrival of the fall rains. The cap color
ranges from deep orange to yellow or salmon, but the fresh pore surface is always sulfur-
yellow-except in the rare var. sem;alb;nus, which has a salmon-colored cap, white pores,
and a frequently rooting base. Polyporus su/phureusandGrifola su/phureaare synonyms.
Other species: L. persicinus is a southeastern species that usually grows in stalked clumps;
it has whitish to creamy poresanda buff to pinkish-brown or darker cap.
I schnoderma res;nosum (Resinous Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY annual; shelflike or bracketIike, watery at firstandoften exuding
droplets, especially near margin of cap, becoming tougheranddrier in age. CAP 5-30 cm
broadand1-3 cm thick, fan-to kidney-shaped or semicircular in outline; surface rough
or velvety (like sandpaper) at first (but often nearly smooth in age), often wrinkled radially
and saturated or incrusted with a resin (the resinous areas often darkerandmore metallic-
lookingandsometimes slightly bluish), often concentrically zoned or ridged in age; color
usually dark brown to blackish, but often overlaid with a thin golden or ochre coating
when very young; margin usually quite thick. Flesh whitish to beige, tan, or brownish,
watery when young becoming toughandcorky in age. PO RES minute(3-6 per mm), white
or creamy, but often becoming brownish when bruisedandochre-brown to brownish in
age; tubes 1-10 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-7 x 1.5-2.5
microns, sausage-shaped to cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or several together (often overlapping) on dead hardwoods and
conifers, fruiting mostly in the summerandfall; widely distributed but not particularly
common, at least in my experience. In northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest it
favors larger (first-growth) conifers. It cases a delignifying decay of both the sapwood
and heartwood,andthe infected area sometimes has a strong aniselike odor I have not
seen it ih our area.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible when youngandwatery, but soon toughandcorky.
COMMENTS This distinctive shelving polypore is easily identified by its resinous dark
brown to blackish cap that is often radially wrinkledandits tendency to exude droplets
of liquid (especially when young or in wet weather). Some mycologists reserve the name
I. resinosum for the form that grows on hardwoods (particularly elm), while using the
name I. benzo;num for the conifer-loving version with darker (browner) fleshandtubes.
Ganoderma applanatum group (Artist's Conk; Artist's Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY emerging whitishandknoblike, becoming hooflike or shelf1ike to
somewhat irregular; very hardandwoody; perennial. CAP 5-75 cm broad or more, 2-20 cm
thick, usually fan-shaped or semi-circular in outline, with a hard surface crust that is
usually cracked, furrowed, ridged, and/or lumpy or knobby in age, but not varnished;
surface gray to brown or grayish-brown, sometimes aging grayish-black, but often covered
with brown to cocoa-brown spore powder. Flesh punky or corky, 0.5-5 cm thick, brown or
cinnamon-brown, rarely whitish. PORES barely visible (4-6 per mm), white or whitish
when fresh but instantly turning brown when scratched; often dingy yellowish to brown
when dried or in old age; tube layers distinctly stratifiedandseparated by a thin layer of
chocolate-brown tissue; each tube layer 4-12 or more mm deep. STALK usually absent.
SPORE_PRINT brown or reddish-brown; spores 6-9.5x 4.5-7 microns, broadly elliptical
to slightly truncate at apex, thick-walled, appearing minutely spiny.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on hardwood logsandstumps, or growing from wounds
in living trees (usually near the ground); also common on conifers in some areas. Very
widely distributed, found year-round. Its hosts include virtually every hardwood found in
North America, plus numerous conifers. In coastal California it(and close relatives-see
comments) is especially common on bay laurel, but can also be found on oak, magnolia,
pepper trees, acacia, eucalyptus, elm,andDouglas-fir. Along with F omitopsis pinicola. it
is the commonest conk in our area. The only regions where it seems to be absent are those
where there aren't any trees! It usually attacks dead ordyingtrees, but can also be parasitic,
producing a whitish, delignifying decay ofthe sapwoodandheartwood. I nfected trees blow
over easily, so if one appears on a tree near your house-watch out!
EDIBILITY Much too toughandwoody to be worthwhile (see edibility of Fomitopsis
pinicola); however, sturdy specimens can be made into stools.
COMMENTS This is the hard, woody growth you see so often at the bases of bay laurels
and other hardwoods. Since the brown-staining of the pore surface is reasonably per-
manent, it makes an excellent medium for etching( or better yet. leaving cryptic messages in
the woods)-hence its popular .name, artist's conk. It's been calculated that a large
specimen (I've found one weighing 26 pounds) liberates 30 billion spores a day, 6 months a
year-or over 5,000,000,000,000 (5 trillion!) spores annually. Millions of these may be
borne aloft by air currentsanddeposited on top of the cap, turning it brown. G. app/anatum
as discussed here is actually a "collective" species, embracing at least two others: G.
annular;s, with unstratified tubesandno flesh;andG. brown;; (=G. adspersum? G.
europaeum?), with thicker (3-8 cm), darker flesh. Both have longer spores(9-12 microns)
than the "true" G. app/anatum. The latter is especially common in our area on bay laurel,
perhaps more so than G. app/anatum. All of these conks used to be placed in Fomes and
have also been put in E/fvingia.
Ganoderma /ucidum (Varnished Conk; Ling Chih)
FRUITING_BODY annual, corkyandtough; often emerging as a whitish or pallid knob
but soon becoming shelflike or developing a capandstalk. CAP 2-20 (35) cm broad, 4-8
cm thick, circular to semi-circular to fan-shaped or kidney-shaped in outline; surface
usually with a varnished (shiny) surface crust, smooth or often concentrically zoned and
grooved; color variable: dark red to reddish-brown, orange-brown, mahogany, or
reddish-black, but often ochre or yellowish toward the margin (which is often white when
actively growing); surface sometimes covered with brownish spore powder. Flesh ochra-
ceo us-brown to dark brown, or pallid near the capandbrownish near the tubes; soft-
corky or punky when fresh, tough when dry or old. PORES minute( 4-7 per mm), whitish or
yellowish-white when fresh, usually bruising or aging brown; tubes 2-20 mm long, one
layer only (rarely two). STALK sometimes absent, but often present; usually attached
laterally, but often verticalandwell-developed, 3-14 cm long, 0.5-3 (4) cm thick; often
gnarled or twisted, equal or enlarged below; dark red to reddish-blackandappearing
varnished like the cap. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 7-13 x 5-8 microns, elliptical,
double-walled, appearing minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups at bases of living hardwoods or on stumps and
roots, very rarely on conifers; fruiting during mushroom season but often persisting year-
round. Distribution worldwide-in both the tropicalandtemperate zones, from Canada
to ArgentinaandEurope to Siberia, China, India, Australia,andAfrica. It is fairly
common in eastern North America but rather infrequent in California. It occurs on a wide
577
578
POL YPORACEAE & ALLIES
range of hosts, but in North America is partial to maple. The very similar G. tsugae and
G. oregonense occur on conifers (see comments). It is sometimes parasitic, but can also
be saprophytic, producing a wet white rot in its host.
EDIBILITY Too tough to be edible, but in the Orient it is pictured in many classical art
worksandhas been revered for centuries as a symbol of successandwell-being ( Ling Chih
means" marvelous herb" or"mushroom of immortality"). It has been used in the treatment
of cancerandvarious other maladies,andis believed by some to have the power of arousing
the dead. One method of preparation is to soak the fruiting body in wine for several
months. The resulting liquid "essence" or elixir is then drunk or put into candies. The
varnished fruiting bodies are also used for decorative purposes.
COMMENTS This striking polyporeandits close relatives are easily recognized by
their shiny ochre to reddish-black caps that look as if they had been artificially varnished
or shellacked (see Color PIa te 156) unless old orcovered by spore powder. Like PiplOporus
belUlinus. the fruiting bodies are annual (with one tube layer) but persist for months.
Two extreme growth forms occur: one is fairly large, often sessile( with little or no stalk) and
particularly common in North America. The other is smaller( cap rarely over 15 cm broad),
has a long slender stalk,andappears to be more common in the tropicsandOld W orid.
However, a large number of intermediate forms also occur, plus occasional abnormal ones
in which the fruiting body is branchedandantler-or tree-like,andthese are all currently
thought to be forms of one highly variable, farflung species. G. curtisii is a similar species
with an ochre to whitish or only partly reddish cap that often lacks the varnish in age. It
typically has a stalkandgrows on hardwoods in eastern (especially southeastern) North
America. G. tsugae (COLOR PLATE 156) is also very similar to G.lucidum. but has
white fleshandgrows only on conifers, particularly hemlock, in northern North America.
Still another similar species, G. oregonense, also grows on conifers, but is usually
larger ( ca p 5-100 cm broad, 2-20 cm thick!), with larger sporesanda somew hat darker or
slightly duller ca p. It is the most common "Varnished Conk" of Washington, Oregon, and
California. All of these can be distinguished from FomilOpsis pinicola by their punkier
(softer) flesh, annual fruiting body,andbrown-staining pore surface (when fresh).
Fomitopsis pinicola (Red-Belted Conk)
FRUITING_BODY emerging as a whitish, pale yellow, or lilac-tinged knob, becoming
hoof-shaped or shelflike or sometimes bracketlike; hardandwoody in age. CAP 540 (75)
cm broad, 3-22 cm thick, usually fan-shaped to semi-circular in outline; surface developing
a thin, hard, resinous crust in age which is sometimes slightly varnished; usually at least
partially reddish to dark red, but sometimes brownandoften rusty or blackish-brown
toward the baseandbrightly colored (white, yellow, ochraceous, or reddish) at the margin;
concentrically furrowed and/or zoned in age; growing margin rounded, thick,andblunt.
Flesh corky or woody, very tough, white to pinkish-buff or yellow when young, pale
brownish or straw-colored in old age; usually bruising pinkish when actively growing; odor
when fresh rather strongandfungal. PORES minute (3-5 per mm), white or pale yellow
becoming brownish in old age; not turning brown when scratched but sometimes bruising
yellow or pinkish-lilac; tube layers distinctly stratified, each layer 2-8 mm deep. STALK
typically absent. SPORE_PRINT white or pale yellowish; spores 5-8 x 3.5-5 microns,
cylindrical to elliptical, smooth. Flesh staining reddish to dark reddish-brown in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dead trees, logs,andstumps or rarely on living trees,
perennial; very commonandwidely distributed. It has been recorded from a wide range of
hosts but is found mainly on conifers (in our area primarily Douglas-firandredwood). It
attacks both the heartwoodandsapwood of its host, producing a slow carbonizing rot
which fractures the woodandturns it brown ("brown crumbly rot"). Large mycelial mats
can often be seen in the fractured wood.
EDIBILITY This woody conk is not often eaten, but in a pinch you can use the following
recipe developed by my wife: "Saw into 2-inch cubes, then marinate in olive oil and
dandelion wine for at least 48 hours (be sure to use LOTS of garlic!). Roast slowly on
skewers over charcoal indefinitely (minimum time: 20 hours). Cool. Pound vigorously
with a large mallet between two pieces of thick leather. Pulverize in a meat grinder and
then force through a braced sieve (allow several hours for this step). Wrap the resulting
mess in several thicknesses of cheeseclothandhang up someplace highandout of the way
(on a clothesline or TV antenna). Allow to dangle thus for at least one week. (Aging has
a mellowing effect, so you may want to try one year.) Wring periodically, making sure
to reserve the drippings for gravy or as a motor oil additive. To eat, boil for twenty-four
hours, squeeze thoroughly, garnish with gravel,andserve forth."
COMMENTS This beautiful but cosmopolitan conk is a major destroyer of dead coni-
ferous timber. The reddish or partially reddish cap with a brightly colored margin (when
growing)andpallid pores that do not bruise brown are good field marks. Varnished spe-
cimens might be confused with Ganoderma tsugae or G. oregonensis(see G. lucidum), but
are perennialandmuch harderanddenser. Fomes pinicolaandVngulina marginata are
synonyms. Another common, widespread woody conk with whitish fleshandwhite to
yellowish pores is H eterobasidion annosum (=F omes annosus). I t has a bracketlike to
shelflike to resupinate or irregularly knobby fruiting body that, when shelflike, is usually
thinnerandrougher (knobby, pitted, grooved, etc.) than F. pinicola. The cap is usually
brown to grayish-brown with a pallid growing margin, but is sometimes reddish-brown
(and can be whitish when very young)andits flesh does not redden in KOH. It is a frequent
parasite of conifers ( or occasionally hardwoods)andusually grows at the base ofthe trunk
or from its roots. It is especially common on second-growth mountain conifers (e.g., pon-
derosaandJeffrey pines). Two other species with whitish to yellow-brown flesh,F.fraxi-
nophilusandF. ellisianus, somewhat resemble H. annosum but have different hosts:
the first favors ash trees, while the second grows on buffalo berry (a shrub).
Fomitopsis officina/is (Quinine Conk; Quinine Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY perennial, emerging as a whitish knob, then becoming convex and
finally hoof-shaped to cylindrical; hardandtough in age. CAP 4-30 cm broadand5-40
cm or more thick (high); surface with a thin crust, often cracked and/or furrowed in age;
white to yellowish, but aging grayishandsometimes with a greenish covering of algae.
Flesh thick, white, cheesy when young but chalky or friable (crumbly) in mature or old
specimens; odor farinaceous; taste very bitter. PORES 34 per mm, white or whitish when
fresh, discoloring in age or drying; tube layers each 3-20 mm long, often stratified. STALK
absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 4-5.5 x 34 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or several on livinganddead conifers; common year-round
throughout much of the West, especially on larchandpine, but also on spruce, fir, hemlock,
and Douglas-fir. It apparently does not occur in our area, but I have seen it on sugar pine
and ponderosa pine on the slopes of the Sierra Nevada. It is said to be one of the three major
destroyers of standing coniferous timber in the West (Phellinus piniandPhaeolus
schweinitz;; are the other two). It causes "felted heart rot," an extensive carbonizing trunk
rot with thick mycelial mats often several feet long.
EDIBILITY Friable but not fryable-it is inedible due to the bitter tasteandtough
texture, but has been used as a laxativeandquinine substitute. (It does not have anti-
malarial properties, but was thought to because of its taste.) Since the fruiting bodies often
grow high above the ground, commercial "quinine" collectors used to dislodge them with
rifles.
COMMENTS Also known asLaricifomes officina/is andF omes officina/is, this destruc-
tive conifer-killer is easily recognized by its pale color, chalky white flesh, bitter taste,
and sometimes massive size. New fruiting bodies are convex, but add layers yearly until
they are hoof-shaped if growing on slash or vertically elongated (cylindrical) if growing
high up on living trees (see photo at top of p. 579). Specimens 60 cm(2 ft.) in height with
more than 70 tube layers have been recorded!
Fomitopsis cajanderi (Rosy Conk)
FRUITING_BODY often perennial; shelflike or bracketlike to somewhat hoof-shaped,
tough in age. CAP 2.5-10 (13) cm broad, 0.3-2 cm thick; surface covered with hairs,
becoming nearly bald in age (but often roughened), not incrusted; pinkish-red to pinkish-
brown becoming brown to grayish-brownandin old age blackish except for the margin;
often zoned or grooved concentrically; margin usually thin, acute. Flesh rosy-pink to
reddish-brown or pinkish-brown, rather soft when fresh but corky in age. PORES minute
(3-5 per mm), rosy to pinkish-red or pinkish-brown when fresh, often dulleranddarker
(reddish-brown) in age; tube layers not distinctly stratified; each layer 1-3 mm deep.
STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 4-8 x 1.5-2.5 microns, cylindrical but
slightly curved (sausage-shaped), smooth.
HABITAT Usually in colonies on dead conifers, but also reported on madrone and
various fruit trees; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area, especially on
Douglas-fir,andis usually but not always perennial. I find it most often on the cut ends of
recently felled trees. It produces a carbonizing brown pocket rot but is of minor economic
importance.
EDIBILITY Inedible (but see comments on edibility of F. pinicola).
COMMENTS The beautiful rosy pore surface is the outstanding feature of this out-
standing polypore, which is better known as Fomes subroseus. The upper surface is not as
hardandcrusty as that of many species of F omitopsisandF omes,andthe fruiting bodies
are not so obviously perennial-therefore it is apt to be looked for in another genus. Other
species: F. rosea is practically identical, but has paler (silvery-pink to pale rose) flesh,
slightly broader, cylindrical (not curved) spores,anda cap surface that is sometimes
incrusted slightly in older specimens. It also favors conifers, causing a top rot of dead trees.
Phe//;nus ;gn;ar;us (False Tinder Polypore; False Tinder Conk)
FRUITING_BODY perennial, soon shelflike or bracketlike to hoof-shaped; hard and
woody. CAP 5-20 cm or more broad, 2-12 (20) cm thick; surface usually with a crust, at
least in older specimens; brownandfinely hairy or velvety when young, soon becoming
baldandgrayish, then finally black; often cracked, furrowed, and/or knobby in age;
margin brownandvelvety when actively growing. Flesh hard, woody, rusty-brown to
brown; taste sour or bitter. PORES minute, 4-5 per mm, grayish-brown to brown; tube
layers each 2-5 mm long but not always stratified; tubesandpores of older(buried) layers
often stuffed with white mycelial threads that show as streaks or flecks when cut open.
STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 5-7 x 4-6 microns, round
or nearly round, smooth. Brown sterile cells (setae) sometimes abundant among the
basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on hardwood trunks (usually living); widely
distributed. It is especially common on birchandaspen in the northern half of North
America,andoccurs year-round. In our area it grows on alder, madrone, manzanita,
maple,andwillow, but in my experience is not common. It can be quite destructive, causing
an intensive white heart rot that reduces its host to a "soft, spongy, whitened mass."
EDIBILITY Inedible unless you are fond ofwood(see recipe under Fomitopsispinicola).
COMMENTS This conk is easily recognized by its brown to grayish-black cap and
pores, brown to rusty-brown flesh, velvety brown actively-growing margin,andwhitish-
flecked or streaked tubes when old. A smaller variant, often called P. tremulae, is com-
mon on aspen. P. laevigatus is a closely related resupinate variety that usually grows
on birch; P. pomaceus, often resupinate, causes extensive heart rot in fruit trees (Prunus),
especially wild ones; P. robusluS( see comments under P. gilvus) is similar, but has yellow-
brown fleshandfavors oak or eucalyptus. Finally, there is the "true" tinder polypore or
"Amadou!" Fomesfomentarius. This hoof-shaped fungus resembles P. igniarius in color
but has a hard thick surface crust, non-stratified tubes without white mycelial threads,
and cylindrical spores 14-20 microns long. It grows on dead hardwoods (especially birch
and maple) or from wounds in living trees,andis widely distributed. Unlike Ganoder;"a
applanaturn, its pore surface is not whiteanddoes not turn brown when scratched. As its
name implies, it has been used for centuries to ignite fires. Since the tubesare not stratified,
they are quite longandreadily soak up liquids through capillary action. Chunks of the
tube layer were soaked in a salt peter solution, then driedandused as "matches."
Phellinus gilvus (Oak Conk)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, often perennial; toughandcorky when
fresh. CAP 2.5-15 cm broadand1-3 cm thick; fan-shaped or semi-circular in outline; sur-
face at first velvety (just the growing margin if perennial), becoming rough to nearly
smooth and/or somewhat zoned; bright rusty-yellow to ochraceous when young(as is the
growing margin of older specimens), dark rusty-brownandfinally blackish in age; not in-
crusted. Flesh tough, bright ochraceous to dark yellow-brown or colored like cap. PORES
minute( 4-8 per mm), grayish-brown becoming reddish-brown or dark brown; tubes in 1-5
layers, each 1-5 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 4-5 x 2.5-3.5
microns (but rarely found), oblong-elliptical, smooth. Large brown sterile cells (setae)
abundant among the basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Solitary or more often in colonies on dead or occasionally living hardwoods
(rarely on conifers); widely distributed. It occurs year-round in our area on oakandtan-
oakandis our most common perennial polypore of dead hardwoods. It produces a
general delignifying decay of the sapwood, rendering it whitishandvery brittle.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The dark rusty-brown colorandvelvety yellow-ochre growing margin
are the fallible field marks of this common conk. The upper surface is not crusty as in many
conks,andthe colorandtexture are somewhat reminiscent of old Phaeolus schweinitzii,
which grows with conifers( usually on the ground). A specimen of P. gilvus can be seen in the
photograph at the bottom of p. 887. Other Phellinusspecies that favor hardwoods include:
P. robustus, widespread, especially on oaks, largeandwoody but not incrusted, with a
gray-brown to blackish cap, bright yellow-brown flesh,andstratified tubes (it also grows
on eucalyptus, pittosporum, walnut, cactus, various other hardwoods,andon conifers);
P. everhartii (see photo at bottom of p. 583), very hardandwoody, up to 40 cm broad,
growing mainly on oak, with unstratified tubes, brown spores,andsetae;P. rimosus(=P.
robiniae), with a rich brown cap, growing on locust, acacia,andother legumes;andP.
ferruginosusandP. ferreus, common on dead hardwoodsandrather similar to P. gilvus,
but with a rusty-brown resupinate (capless) fruiting body. Most of these were once placed
in Fornes, but now belong to Phellinus because they darken in KOH, have rusty-brown to
ta wny flesh,andoften possess setae. For conifer-loving species, see P. pini,andfor a similar
but more brightly colored annual species, see Inonolus radial us (under /. hispidus).
Phellinus pini (Pine Conk)
FRUITING_BODY perennial; shelflike, hooflike, or bracketlike, very tough or woody.
CAP 2-20 cm broadand1-15 cm thick; hoof-shaped to convex or fan-shaped; surface hard,
often crusty but not shiny; rough or cracked, minutely hairy orroughened(like sandpaper)
at first, often concentrically grooved in age; tawny to rusty-brown becoming brown to
reddish-brown or brownish-black in age; margin sometimes brighter. Flesh less than I cm
thick, tough, tawny to rusty-reddish or ochre. PORES 2-5 per mm, round to irregularly
sinuous, ochraceous-tawny to rusty-brown becoming brown; tubes2-5 mm long, in one or
several layers. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 4 x 3.5-5
microns, round or nearly round, smooth. Large brown sterile cells (setae) intermingled
with basidia. Cap tissue blackening in potassium hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Solitary or more often in rows or columns upanddown living or recently
conifers; widely distributedandcommon, infecting all important members of the pine
family (pine, Douglas-fir, etc.). Perennial, in our area occurring mainly on pine. It attacks
the heartwoodandsometimes the sapwood ofliving trees, resulting in a delignifying pocket
rot known as "conch rot." The fruiting bodies are largely confined to older trees, partly
because years of growth must take place before the mycelium can fruit. As a result, the
appearance of a single fruiting body means that extensive heart rot has already taken place
10-15 feet aboveandbelow it. This fungus is said to cause more timber loss than any other.
EDIBILITY Inedible (but see comments on edibility of Fomitopsis pinico/a).
COMMENTS The rough unpolished cap, frequently sinuous pores, ochraceous to rust-
colored flesh,andgrowth on conifers are the fallible fieldmarks of this destructive fungus.
It varies considerably in size, from large hoof-shaped specimens to moderately sized ones
( see photo), to a small thin shelving form that often occurs in fused massesandis considered
a distinct species, P. chrys%ma, by many investigators. Other species: Truncospora demi-
doffii (also known as Fu/vijomes, Pyrofomes, or Fomesjuniperinus) is somewhat similar,
but has rusty to reddish-orange fleshandgrows only on juniper; P. texanus resembles a
small P. robustus (see comments under P. gilvus) but also grows onjuniper, while a resu-
pinate form of P. robustus with bright yellow-brown flesh often grows on conifers; P.
taxodii causes heart rot in bald cypress; P. nigro/imitatus, common on conifers in the
Rocky Mountains, usually has a spongy upper layer oftissueandfine black lines running
through its flesh;P. toru/osus looks like P. gilvus, but has yellow-brown poresandgrows
on conifers in Arizona. For hardwood-loving species, see P. gilvusandP. igniarius.
Piptoporus betulinus (Birch Conk; Birch Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY annual, nearly round becoming shelflike or hooflike at maturity;
tough or corky when fresh, rigidandhard when dry. CAP (2.5) 5-25 cm broad, 2-6 (10) cm
thick, kidney-shaped to nearly round in outline, convex to nearly plane; surface covered
by a thin, smooth or suedelike, white to buff, tan, brown, or grayish-brown crust that often
breaks up into scales or flat patches or wears away, revealing the whitish undersurface;
margin thick, blunt, inrolled, curblike (projecting below the pore surface), sometimes
wavy. Flesh punky or corky, thick, white. PORES appearing recessed due to curblike
margin, 24 per mm; white when fresh, in age becoming pale brown or grayish-brown and
occasionally torn up or toothlike; tubes 2-10 mm long, one layer only. STALK absent or
present only as a stubby extension of the cap; lateral or attached to top of cap. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 3-6 x 1.5-2 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or columns on dead or sometimes living birch trees;
common year-round in the northern hemisphere throughout the range of birch. I have not
seen it in California, undoubtedly because birch does not occur naturally. However, it
is found in WashingtonandIdahoandis very abundant in northeasternN orthAmerica. It
causes a reddish-brown to yellow-brown carbonizing decay.
EDIBILITY Edible when young (according to McIlvaine), but tough. The fruiting bodies
are quite attractive, however,andhave enjoyed a variety of non-culinary uses, e.g., as
tinder, as a razor strop,andas a mounting medium for pinned insect specimens.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Polyporus betulinus, this commonanddistinctive
polypore is easily told by its recessed pore surface with a curblike margin ( see photo) plus
its white to tan or grayish-tan colorandgrowth on birch. The fruiting bodies are annual
in the sense that they possess only one tube layer; however, they remain intact for many
monthsandas a result can be found year-round.
Cryptoporus volvotus (Cryptic Globe Fungus; Veiled Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY annual, tough or corky, more or less round to oval to slightly com-
pressed or hooflike; 1.5.5 cm broad, with a hollow interior. CAP(upper or outer surface)
with a thin, smooth, glazed or resinous crust; whitish to warm tan or yellowish, drying
darker( ochre-brown to reddish-brown); margin extending downandunder to form""veil"
which completely covers pore surface; in age the underside perforated by one (rarely two)
holes. Flesh whitish, tough; odor often fragrant (like Sparassis). PORES hidden by the
""veil," 3-4 per mm, white becoming pinkish or brownish in age; tu bes2-5 mm long. STALK
absent. SPORE_PRINT pinkish or flesh-colored; spores often collecting in a heap on the
inner ""floor" of fresh specimens), 8-12 x 3-5 microns, cylindrical to elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in groups on dead or occasionally old living conifers
throughout northern North America. Common year-round in our area, especially on
pine. It seems to favor standing or recently felled treesandproduces a delignifyingdecay
that scarcely damages its host.
EDIBILITY Too tough to be edible. However, Alexander Smith says that "worms"
(insect larvae) found inside the fruiting bodies can be used as fishbait. So can worms
found outside the fruiting bodies.
COMMENTS This bizarre evolutionary anomaly looks like a cross between a confused
puffballanda bemused oak gall. The smooth, warmly tanned exterior is quite attractive
(often reminding me of a small loaf of bread)andgives no hint of the tube layer within.
Slicing it open, however, reveals a hollow interior with a ""ceiling" of tubes. The ""floor"
eventually rupturesandtiny bark-boring beetles enter the ""trap door" in search of tasty
tube tissueandspores. After feasting they depart to construct brood tunnels in old or
dying conifers,andthe spores they carry with them gain entry to a new host. Later, fruiting
bodies may emerge through the very holes bored by the beetles!
Daedalea quercina (Thick-Walled Maze Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY usually perennial; shelflike, rigidandvery tough or corky. CAP 4-20
cm broadand1.5-8 cm thick, more or less fan-shaped; convex or plane; surface uneven
or roughened, usually concentrically furrowed or zoned in older specimens (from new
growth layers); whitish to tan, ochraceous, grayish, or brown (usually quite pale when
fresh), often blackeningandcracking in old age; margin often thick. Flesh very tough and
corky; white to buff, ochraceous, or pale brown (never dark). PORES usually greatly
elongatedandpocket-or mazelike, sometimes even forming gills; whitish to buff, tan,
or dull ochre; tube walls ( or "gills") thick (1 mm or more), the spaces between them at
least I mm broad; tubes 0.5-3 cm long, the layers not distinctly stratified. STALK absent
or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 5-7.5 x 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical to
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or sometimes in shelving groups on dead or living hardwoods, espe-
cially oak, chestnut,andchinquapin; widely distributed, but especiallycommonineastern
North America. 1 have seen it in northern CaliforniaandOregon, but have yet to find it in
our area. It causes a brown heart rot,andthe tough fruiting bodies occur year-round.
EDIBILITY Much too tough to be edible.
COMMENTS The color of this species is rather variable, but the configuration of its
sporebearing surface is relatively constant (i.e., mazelike),andnot nearly as polymorphic
as that of Daedaleopsis confragosa. In addition, the tube walls are thickerandoften
deeper (see photo)andthe fruiting body is usually perennial. Daedalea berkeleyi is
a southern species that grows on dead conifersandhas dark brown to dark rusty-brown
flesh. Daedalea juniperina is a widespread but smaller pale-fleshed species that grows
on juniper. Both of the above tend to have mazelike poresandneither is worth eating.
Daedaleopsis confragosa (Thin-Walled Maze Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY usually annual, shelflike or sometimes bracketlike, leathery or corky
when fresh, rigid when dry. CAP (3) 5-15 (22) cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular in
outline, broadly convex to plane; surface dry, smooth or slightly hairy, usually zoned or
ridged concentrically, often radially wrinkled or bumpy in age; reddish-brown to brown
to grayish, sometimes blackish in old age; margin thin, acute. Flesh white to pinkish or
brownish, tough. PORES 0.5-1.5 mm in diameter, usually elongatedandmaze like with
relatively thin walls, but sometimes circularandat other times forming gills or becoming
toothlike in age; white to tan or brown. sometimes bruising pinkish or reddish; tubes up to
1.5 cm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 2-3 microns, cylin-
drical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods or from wounds in living trees,
occurring year-round (sometimes perennial); widely distributed. I ts favorite host is willow,
but it also occurs on birchandother hard woodsandvery rarely on conifers. I have yet to
find it in our area, perhaps because it is not fond of oak. However, it occurs in the Pacific
North westandis very common in eastern North America. I t produces a delignifyingdecay
of the sapwood.
EDIBILITY Not edible.
COMMENTS The maze-like ("daedaloid") pattern of the pores is characteristic of this
speciesandseveral others, all of which were originally placed in a single genus, Daedalea.
The configuration of the pores is extremely variable, however, leading to confusion with
LenzitesandGloeophyllum (when they form gills),anddozens of other polypores(when
they are not noticeably daedaloid). This species can usually be recognized, however,
by its relatively thin, corky, fan-shaped, brown to grayish cap with a bald, often zoned
surface. The depth of the tubesandthickness of the cap are also quite variable, depending
on how old the fruiting body is, but the tube walls are never as thick as those of Daedalea
quercina (see photo at top of p. 586). Daedalea confragosa is an older name for it. Other
species: Daedaleopsis ambigua is a similar southern species with a whiter cap. Cerrena
(=Daedalea) unicolor has a thin, hairy, white to grayish (or greenish from a coating of
algae) capandpallid to grayish or even blackish mazelike pores that often break up to
form small "teeth." It is common on dead hardwoods in many regions, but not ours. For
other ..daedaloid" species, see Daedalea quercinaandGloeophyllum saepiarium.
Lenzites betulina (Gilled Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY usually annual; shelflike, bracketlike, orforming rosettes; tough and
leathery. CAP 2-13 cm broad, nearly round to fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, velvety
or hairy, with narrow concentric zones or grooves of various colors: whitish, tan, buff,
gray, brown, yellow-brown, dull orange, etc. (or in old age often greenish from algae).
Flesh thin (1-2 mm), tough, white. GILLS platelike, often branching toward the margin
or forming elongated pockets (especially in young specimens); white or whitish, drying
dingy yellowish or darker, often wavy in age. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 4-7 x 1.5-3 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or more often in overlapping rows, columns, or shelving masses on
rotting hardwood logsandstumps (rarely on conifers); widely distributedandvery
common in our area throughout the year, often sharing logs with Trametes versicolor and
Stereum hirsutum. The species epithet means birch, but it grows on a wide range of hard-
woods, especially oakandwillow. It produces a de lignifying decay of the sapwood.
EDIBILITY Inedible, but dries nicely. If you are adamant about trying it, see comments
on the edibility of Trametes versicolor for cooking suggestions.
COMMENTS This species is an excellent example of convergent evolution-a gilled
fungus that is not an agaric. Inall respects save the gills it is a typical polypore-the multi-
colored, hairy, zoned cap bearing an uncannY resemblance to Trametes species. In fact, it
sometimes can't be distinguished from those mushrooms without examining the underside
ofthecap. Itcanalsobeconfused with Gloeophyllum, which has brown gills,andDaedalea
and Daedaleopsis, which ha ve ..daedaloid"( elongated or mazelike) pores. In eastern North
America, L. betu/ina often shows orange tones on the cap, whereas in our area it is usually
quite dull in color (grayish, buff, etc.).
Gloeophyllum saep;ar;um (Rusty Gilled Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY annual; shelflike or bracketlike, leathery when fresh, rigid when dry.
CAP 2-12 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, hairy to nearly smooth,
concentrically zoned or ridgedandoften radially wrinkled, rusty-brown to dark brown or
maroon-brown, often with brighter (yellow, orangish, etc.) zones, but sometimes fading or
weathering to grayish; margin orange, yellow, or whitish when actively growing. Flesh 1-5
mm thick, yellow-brown to rusty-brown. GILLS close, ochre to yellow-brown or rusty-
brown becoming brownish in old age, often fused to form elongated pores or sometimes the
underside of cap entirely poroid or even toothlike. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 8-13 x 3-5 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Cap tissue blackening in potassium
hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or overlapping tiers on dead conifers ( or occasionally
dead hardwoods, particularly aspen); very widely distributed. I have yet to find it in our
area, but it is very common in the Southwest, Pacific Northwest,andthe mountains of
California. It causes a rapid carbonizing decay (brown rot) of both the heartwood and
sapwood,andalong with G. trabeum (see comments), is a pest of telephone poles, struc-
tural timber in housesandbridges, etc.
EDIBILITY Inedible.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Lenzites saepiaria, this common conifer-lover, like
the hardwood-loving Lenzites betulina, typically has gills instead of pores (see photo on
p. 588). However, the gills are not whiteandthe flesh is rusty-brown-a typical feature of
Gloeophyllum. The gills at times join to form mazelike pocketsandsometimes there are
pores instead of gills (leading to confusion with DaedaleaandDaedaleopsis), but the rusty
to orange-yellow colors ofthe cap are distinctive. A related species, G. trabeum, hasagray
to brownish, unzoned cap. It usually grows on dead hardwoods (but occasionally on
conifers),andis more apt to have mazelike pores than gills. It is said to be common on the
woodwork of automobiles! Another unzoned species, G. striatum, occurs only on dead
juniperandcypress. Other species: Osmoporus odoratus is rather similar in color to
G. saepiarium, but usually has pores on the underside of the capandoften has an aniselike
odor when fresh. It is widely distributedandproduces a brown rot in dead conifers.
Sch;zophyllum commune (Split-Gill)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or with a narrowed base, toughandleathery both fresh and
dry. CAP 1-4 cm broad, more or less fan-shaped (or vase-shaped if stalk central); surface
dry, densely hairy, white to grayish-white, gray, or sometimes brownish-gray when wet;
margin usually lobedandimolled in dry weather. Flesh tough, leathery, thin, pallid or
grayish. GILLS radiating from point of attachment, well-spaced, white to grayish; edges
appearing split or grooved lengthwise (i.e., cuplike in cross-section), rolling back in dry
weather. STALK absent or present only as a narrowed basal point of attachment. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 3-4 (6) x 1-1.5 (3) microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups, rows, or fused clusters on hardwood sticks, stumps,
logs, etc.; distribution worldwide. It survives dry spells by folding back its gills,andhence
can be found practically year-round. In our area it is common on oak, producing a white
rot (delignifying decay) in its host.
EDIBILITY Too smallandtough to be of value. However, some natives of Madagascar
are said to chew them, for reasons unknown.
COMMENTS The hairy white to grayish cap of this farflung fungus is reminiscent of the
common bracket polypores in the genus Trichaplum. However, the peculiar manner in
which the gills split lengthwise is unique. The "split" gills are actually two adjacent plates
which separateandroll up in dry weather, thus protecting the spore-bearing surface
(see photographs). Specimens sealed in a tube in 1911, then moistened 50 years later,
unrolled their gillsandbegan shedding spores! Schizophyllum has been widely used in
genetic studies because it fruits readily in the laboratory. Trog;a(=P/;caturops;s} cr;spa of
eastern North America is a related mushroom with crisped (wavy) gillsanda tough, hairy,
tan to yellowish cap.
Tr;chaptum ab;et;nus (Violet-Pored Bracket Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, toughandleathery whenfresh, rigid when dry.
CAP 14 cm broad, fan-shaped to kidney-shaped or elongated in outline; surface dry,
covered with coarse, stiff hairs; usually concentrically zoned or grooved, white to grayish,
but old weathered specimens often greenish from algae or blackish; margin often wavy.
Flesh very thin (up to 1 mm thick), tough, pale gray to brownish or purplish. PORES 24
per mm, round to angular but in age often irregularly torn or toothlike; whitish to brownish
but usually tinged bright lavender to purplish when fresh, especially toward cap margin;
duller or browner in age; tubes very shallow (up to 3 mm long). STALK absent. SPORE
PRINT whitish; spores 4-8 x 2-4 microns, cylindrical or sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT In groups, shelving masses, or overlapping tiers on decaying conifers; widely
distributedandcommon practically year-round. It is said to be the most important de-
lignifier of coniferous slash in North America. In our area it fa vors Douglas-firandpine.
EDIBILITY Boil for 26 hours, squeeze thoroughly,andserve forth.
COMMENTS Also known as Hirschioporus abietinus, this little polypore is roughly to
rotting conifers what Trametes versicolorandLenzites betu/ina are to rotting hardwoods
-overwhelmingly abundant. The violet-tinged pores (when fresh) that break up into
"teeth" are the best field character. The cap is usually zoned, but not multicolored as in
Trametes versicolor. Fomilopsis cajanderi has rosy pores, but is much thickerandhas a
reddish to brown cap. Other species: T. biformis (better known as Hirschioporus par-
gamenus) is a hardwood-loving version of T.' abietinus with a cap 2-7 cm broad, violet-
tinted pores that quickly become toothlike,andsoft, velvety hairs on the cap. It is one of
the most common polypores of eastern North America (even more abundant than
Trametes versicolor!), often growing in huge masses that completely cover rotting logs,
but is not as prevalent in the West. T. abietinus var. abietisresembles the typical variety but
is usually larger, weathers darker,andhas "gills" instead of pores on underside of cap.
Trametes versicolor Color Plate 158
(Turkey Tail; Many-Colored Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, thinandleathery when fresh, rigid or slightly
flexible when dry. CAP 2-7 (10) cm broad, tongue-shap0d becoming fan-shaped, or
growing in circular rosettes; plane or wavy; surface dry, velvety (covered with fine hairs)
or silky, strongly zoned with narrow, concentric bands of contrasting colors (but more
uniformly colored in sheltered situations), hairy zones usually alternating with silky-
smooth ones; colors extremely variable: a mixture of white, gray, brown, yellowish-buff,
bluish, reddish, or black (or even greenish from a coating of algae), or sometimes dark
brown with a white margin; margin often wavyandwhite or creamy when actively growing.
Flesh very thin (1-2 mm), tough, white. PORES white to dingy yellowish, minute(3-5 per
mm) but visible; tubes shallow (up to 2 mm long). STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE
PRINT white or yellowish; spores 4-6 x 1.5-2.5 microns, cylindrical or sausage-shaped,
smooth.
HABITAT Typically in groups, rows, tiers, shelving masses, or overlapping clusters on
logs, stumps,andfallen branches of dead hardwoods (particularly oak), sometimes also
on wounds in living treesandrarely on conifers; very commonandwidely distributed. It is
abundant in our oak woodlands year-round, but fruits mainly in the winterandspring-it
can be seen on almost any jaunt through the woods. I t causes a general delignifying decay of
the sapwood,andalong with T. hirsuta, is sometimes parasitic on wounded fruit trees
and lilac bushes.
EDIBILITY Boil for 62 hours, squeeze thoroughly,andserve forth.
COMMENTS Our most common polyp ore, this species is well known-by sight if not by
name-to everyone who spends time in the woods. The multicolored, concentrically zoned
caps do not decay readily, making beautiful ornaments, brooch clips, earrings, and
necklaces. The multiplicity of colors is both its most bewilderingandmost distinctive
characteristic-no two are colored quite alike. Other Trametes species are less radically
colored and/or hairier (see T. hirsuta). Stereum species are superficially similar, but
lack pores; Trichaptum species have violet-tinged to brownish pores. Synonyms include
Coriolus versicolor,Polystictus versicolor, andPolyporus versicolor.
Trametes hirsuta (Hairy Turkey Tail)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, toughandleathery when fresh, fairly rigid
when dry. CAP 2.5-15 (30) cm broad, fan-shaped to nearly circular in outline; surface
dry, denselyandconspicuously hairy to coarsely velvety, usually concentrically zoned or
grooved, but the colors of each zone dullandnot sharply contrasting; whitish to grayish,
yellowish, dull ochre, buff, beige, or pale brownish, the margin sometimes darkerandoften
wavy (but entire surface sometimes greenish from algae). Flesh tough, white (or pale
brownish to yellowish in age), 1-5 mm thick PORES (1) 24 per mm, white to dingy
yellowish or buff when fresh, often tinged brownish or gray in age; tubes 1-3 (5) mm long.
STALK usually absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish or pallid; spores 4.5-7.5x 1.5-3 microns,
cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in groups, fused rows, or overlapping clusters on dead
hardwoods (or occasionally conifers); widely distributed throughout the northern hemis-
phere. It occurs year-round in our area on oak, alder,andother hardwoods, but is rather
uncommon, at least in comparison to T. versicolor. Like the latter species, it causes a
general delignifying decay of the sapwoodandsometimes parasitizes fruit trees.
EDIBILITY Toughandhairy (but see T. versicolor for cooking suggestions).
COMMENTS This lesser known cousin of T. versicolor is thickerandoften larger than
that species, but not as brightly colored. Also, the cap is hairier. T. occ;denta/;s is a very
similar, slightly larger species with a southernandtropical distribution. I t is so similar,
in fact, that the two may very well be forms of a single wide-ranging species. For a list of
synonyms for T. occidentalis, see p. 550. Lenzites betu/ina looks quite similar from the top,
but has gills on the underside ofthe cap. Other species: T. ve/ut;na is very similar, but has a
more velvety capandits pores are often smoky-tinged; T. pubescens is smallerandhas a
white to grayish-yellow, silky-hairy cap with a radially striate margin plus a somewhat
fleshier texture when fresh; both occur on hardwoodsandare widely distributed.
Datronia mollis
FRUITING_BODY annual; bracketlike or at times resupinate; tough when fresh or dry.
CAP (when present) 1-7 cm broad, shelflikeandoften wavy; surface umber-brown and
velvety when fresh but becoming smoothanddark brown to blackish in age; usually zoned
concentrically. Flesh thin, tough, pale brown, often separated from the velvety surface
by a thin dark line. PORES 1-2 per mm, often becoming elongatedandsinuous (slot-
like); brown, but covered with a hoary bloom when fresh that gives them a grayish appear-
ance, the bloom rubbing off easily (i.e., surface bruising brown); tubes 0.5-5 mm long.
STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 x 2.5-4 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT Usually in groups on dead hardwoods, but also reported on conifers; widely
distributedandfairly common, but often overlooked because of its small size. In our area
I have found it several times in the winterandspring on dead oak. It causes a delignifying
decay ofthe sapwood.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but like myself, too small, thin,andtough to bother with.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Trametes moll isandDaedalea mollis, this small,
nondescript hardwood-lover is best recognized by its thin, tough, velvety capandgrayish
to brown, slotlike pores (see photograph). It is most likely to be confused with Bjerkandera
species, but has larger poresanda thinner cap.
Bjerkandera adusta (Smoky Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, several often fused together; tough or corky
when fresh, rigid when dry. CAP(s) 1.5-7 cm broad, plane or wavy, elongated or fan-
shaped in outline; surface white to tan, smoky-gray, or grayish-brown, dry, finely hairy
(velvety or suede-like) to nearly smooth; margin whitish when young, darkening or black-
ening in age. Flesh thin (1-6 mm), tough, white becoming grayish or brown; odor fungal,
taste often rather sour. PORES very minute (5-7 per mm), scarcely visible, at first whitish
and darkening where bruised, but soon becoming gray or smoky throughout,andfinally
blackish; tubes shallow (up to 2 mm long). STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white or
yellowish; spores 4-6 x 2.5-3 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT On dead hardwoods (or rarely conifers), usually in dense, overlapping or
fused clusters; widely distributed. It is fairly common in our area throughout the mush-
room season, but not nearly as abundant as T. versicolor. It produces a general deligni-
fying decay of the sapwood, giving it a whitish-flecked appearance.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedible.
COMMENTS The gray to black pore surface is the principal fieldmark of this small,
tough bracket fungus. Gloeoporus adustus is a synonym. B. Jumosa is a very similar
species that is somewhat largerandthicker; it has slightly larger, pale gray to smoky-
brown (rarely black) pores, larger spores,anda stronger (aniselike to unpleasant) odor.
In both species, but particularly B.fumosa. a thin dark line separates the pores from the
flesh. Intermediate forms occur, however,andit is questionable whether the two are
distinct. Cerrena un;color (see comments under Daedaleopsis confragosa) is somewhat
similar, but its grayish to blackish spore-bearing surface usually breaks up into small
flattened "teeth"; it is widely distributed on hardwoods.
Pycnoporus cinnabarinus (Red Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike, tough when fresh, nearly rigid when dry. CAP 2-12 cm
broad, nearly round to elongated or fan-shaped in outline; surface dry, smooth or finely
hairy, wrinkled or warty, bright orange to orange-red, red, or cinnabar-red, but fading
in age. Flesh red to yellowish-red, tough, up to 1.5 cm thick. PORES 2-4 per mm, bright
orange to orange-red or red, scarcely fading; tubes 1-6 mmlong. STALK absent. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5-6 x 2-2.5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, Cap tissue staining
magenta or black in potassium hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods (particularly cherry, but also oak,
birch, etc.) or occasionally on conifers; mainly northern in distribution. I have not found
it in California, but it occurs in the SouthwestandPacific Northwestandis quite common
in eastern North America. The very similar P. sanguineus (see comments) is prevalent in
the southern United Statesandtropics.
EDIBILITY Too tough to be edible, but makes a colorful ornament.
COMMENTS The beautiful bright red to orange color ofthe pores makes this one ofthe
easiest of all polypores to recognize. The cap may fade in age, but the pores will retain their
color for years if stored properly. The fruiting bodyis not spongy when fresh as in Phaeolus.
and has much smaller pores. P. sangu;neus is a closely related brilliant red to orange-red
southern species with a thinner (up to 5 mm) cap. A urant;oporus croceus has saffron to
bright orange pores when fresh; it is also larger (cap 5-30 cm broad)andsofter when
fresh,andgrows on eastern hardwoods.
Tyromyces caes;us (Blue Cheese Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, softandspongy or watery when fresh,
tougher when dry. CAP 1-5 (8) cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular in outline; surface
white to gray, but usually tinged or mottled bluish or blue-gray, especially toward the
margin; covered with soft, whitish hairs; not zoned. Flesh up to I cm thick, white or aging
gray to yellowish, spongy when fresh; odor often sweetish. PORES 24 per mm, white or
colored like cap; tubes 2-8 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT pale ashy-blue;
spores 3-6 x 1-2 microns. cylindrical or sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on decaying wood of both hardwoodsandconifers;
widely distributedandfairly common but rarely occurring in large numbers. In our area
it can be found practically year-round. It is associated with a brown carbonizing decay.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The delicate bluish-gray tint to the capandsoft texture when fresh
distinguish this unobtrusive polypore. Other species: T. perdelicatus also has pale bluish
spores, but the cap is smaller (up to 2 cm broad)andnot normally bluish,andthe taste is
bitter. It is fairly common on dead conifers in the Pacific Northwest.
Tyromyces ch;oneus (White Cheese Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike; fleshyandrather soft or spongy-watery when
fresh, rigidandtough when dry. CAP 2-12 cm broad, fan-shaped to semi-circular, broadly
convex to plane; surface smooth or slightly haity, pure white to buff, yellowish-buff, or
watery gray, not zoned. Flesh 2-15 mm thick. white; softandspongy with a fragrant odor
when fresh, crumbly when oldanddry. PORES 3-5 per mm, white to creamy or yellowish;
tubes 1.5-3 (7) mm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3.5-5 x 1-2
microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on dead hardwoods or occasionally on dead conifers;
widely distributedandcommon, but rarely fruiting in large numbers. In our area it is fairly
frequent in the fallandwinter. especially on oak. It produces a wet, stringy delignifying
decay of the sapwood.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The pale color, spongy or cheesy texture when fresh, modest size,
fragrant odor,andabsence of any staining reactions are the principal characteristics of this
polypore, which is better known as T. albellus. There are a number of more or less similar
white or pallid Tyromyces species that are best differentiated microscopically, including: T.
tephroleucus (=T. lacteus), with a mild odor, on both hardwoodsandconifers; T. galac-
tinus, common on hardwoods in eastern North America, with a hairier capandelliptical
spores; T. balsameus, small, thin, with a faintly zoned cap, on conifers; T. spraguei, with a
cap margin that stains greenish or blackish when youngandnearly round to elliptical
spores, on hardwoods; T. guttulatus, often larger (cap up to 16 cm broad), with circular
spots, pits, or droplets on the cap, growing mainly on conifers; T. stipticus(=T. immitis),
even more bitter but lacking spots or pits, on conifers; T. florijormis, usually bitter but
small ( cap up t04 cm broad)andpetal-like (i.e., the cap has a narrowed, stemlike base), on
conifers;andT. basilaris, tough, attacking living juniperandcypress trees (including
Monterey cypress). T. spumeus should also be mentioned. In contrast to T. chioneus,
nearly all of the above species produce brown rots (carbonizing decays) in their hosts.
Tyromyces jragilis (Rusty-Staining Cheese Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike or bracketlike, softandspongy Or watery when fresh; rigid
and brittle when dry. CAP 2-10 cm broad, fan-shaped to elongated in outline; surface
covered with soft white hairs that become matted in age; white, but becoming reddish to
pinkish-red in age; staining yellowish, then rusty to reddish when handled. Flesh soft when
fresh, white, discoloring like the cap surface. PORES 3-5 per mm, white, quickly bruising
yellowish, then rusty-reddish; tubes 2-8 mm long. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT
whitish; spores 4-5 x 1-2 microns, cylindrical to sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or fused clusters on rotting conifers; widely distributed.
In our area it is fairly common (along with T. mollis-see comments) in the fallandwinter
on pineandDouglas-fir. It produces a brown carbonizing decay in its host.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike myself, likely to remain so.
COMMENTS The tendency of all parts, especially the pores, to stain rusty-red when
handled is the one noteworthy feature of this otherwise unnoteworthy polypore. There
are several very similar reddish-staining species with slightly larger pores ( 1-3 per mm) and
thicker flesh (0.5-2 cm) that are best differentiated microscopically, including: T. mollis,
also common in our area, with a larger, smoother cap that stains rusty-red directly; T.
transmutans, with dextrinoid spores;andA mylocystis lapponica, with amyloid cystidia
and spores 7-11 microns long.
Tyromyces leucospongia (Marshmallow Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY annual, shelflike or bracketlike to somewhat irregular; softandrather
watery when fresh, but soon becoming toughandrigid except for the soft upper surface.
CAP usually elongated (2-10 cm longand1-5 cm wide), convex; surface white to bun,
grayish-buff, pinkish, or even brown or cinnamon; usually velvetyandvery soft or spongy
to the touch, but sometimes paperyandfairly firm if the velvety layer wears away; margin
usually extending below the pore surfaceandsometimes partially covering it. Flesh white
and rather tough, but covered by a thick( up to 1.5 cm), soft, spongy layer of cottony tissue
that is pallid to pinkish-buff or cinnamon. PORES 2-3 per mm, angularandoften
becoming tornandmarkedly toothlike in age ( or interspersed with spines or" teeth"); white
when fresh, often discoloring (buffto tan, brownish, or cinnamon) in age or when dried;
tubes 2-6 mm long. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-6 x 1-
.5 microns, more or less sausage-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on dead conifers, usually fruiting from fissures in
the bark; common at higher elevations throughout most of western North America. It
usually fruits in the spring (often beginning its development under the snow), but the
fruiting bodies persist for months without decaying,andcan thus be found most anytime.
It causes a brown (carbonizing) rot of both the heartwoodandsapwood of its host.
EDIBILITY Not edible.
COMMENTS Also known as Spongiporus (or Spongipellis) leucospongia, this is one of
my very favorite polypores because of the unique texture of its skin. The texture is difficult
to describe, but it is undeniably soft-something like cotton candy (but not sticky) or a
chamois-covered cotton ball,andalso reminiscent of a "N erf ball." I n age it may toughen
and is not so readily identified, but the tendency ofthe margin to grow over the pore surface
is also distinctive. Other species: Spongipellis pachydon (=lrpex mollis) is a widely
distributed species that grows on conifersandhas pores which soon become toothlike; itis
tough, has a spongy skin only when very young,andlacks the extended cap margin of T.
/eucospongia. T. (=Spongipellis) unicolor is also widespreadandspongy when fresh, but
has larger pores (1 mm or more broad), nearly round spores, a thicker(3-8 cm)andlarger
cap,andgrows on living or dead hardwoods (usually oak).
Tyromyces amarus (Incense Cedar Polypore)
FRUITING_BODY more or less hoof-shaped, annual; softandwatery when very young,
hardandrigid in age or when dry. CAP 7-30 cm broadand4-20 cm thick, convex; surface
downy when young, usually bald in age but often becoming roughened, wrinkled, or
shallowly fissured; whitish or buff to pale brown, sometimes darkening or becoming
more ochraceous as it dries; surface usually quite hard (or even crustlike) in age; margin
thickandblunt. Flesh thick, soft when fresh but very hard when dry; yellowish to pale
brown. PORES 2-3 per mm(but may fuse to form larger pores), yellowish to bright lemon-
yellow when fresh, often discoloring with age or handling; tubes 5-15 mm or more long.
STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 6-7.5 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or occasionally several together on incense cedar (Libocedrus);
known only from western North America, fruiting mainly in the late summer, fall, and
early winter (but persisting year-round) wherever incense cedar occurs. It causes a de-
structive carbonizing trunk rot that creates large tunnels in the wood. One third of all
logged incense cedar is infected by it,andmust either be rejected or used as "pecky cedar"
for fencingandother purposes.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too tough to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS This interesting polypore is restricted to incense cedar (although there
is one report of it from Idaho, on fir). It might be mistaken for a conk (Fomitopsis or Phe/-
linus) because of its large sizeandtough texture in age, but the fruiting body is usually
annualandquite watery when actively growing. The yellow pore surfaceandgrowth on
incense cedar are the principal field marks.
Poria corticola (Boring Poria)
FRUITING_BODY usually annual, rather tough; resupinate (consisting of a simple layer
oftubes). CAP absent or sometimes present as a free margin. Flesh thin, white, fibrous but
rather soft when fresh. PORES white or creamy, discoloring to pale tan in age or upon
drying, 14 per mm; tubes 3-10 mm long, rather soft when fresh but drying rigidandtough.
STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 3-5 microns, broadly elliptical,
smooth. Cystidia present among the basidia.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in rows or fused masses on rotting hardwood logs and
branches, less commonly on conifers; widely distributedandfairly common in our area
practically year-round. I t produces a white rot; many similar species occur on conifers.
EDIBILITY The entire group is worthless from an edibility standpoint.
COMMENTS This species typifies a large number of white to yellowish Porias that can
only be differentiated microscopically. Another common species,Perenniporia subacida,
is often perennial (i.e., with more than one tube layer). It is usually creamy or yellowish,
has minute pores (4-6 per mm), occurs on both hardwoodsandconifers,andis particularly
abundant in the Pacific Northwest. There are several similar species that cause brown rots
in structural timber as well as in dead conifersandhardwoods, including: P. vail/antii,
whitetoyellowish;P. incrassata, white to yellowish but drying grayish-brown to black and
with yellow spores; P. xantha, yellow or yellowish-white with a crumbly or chalky
texture, bitter taste,andminute pores;andP. sequoiae, which infects the butts of living
redwoods. Several Corio/ellus species should also be mentioned. They were formerly
placed in Trameles because they often possess a cap, but can also be resupinate or have
only a rudimentary cap. Coriolellus serialis is a corky or woody, white to creamy,
resupinate species that is common on dead conifersandhardwoods; C. carbonarius has
brownish poresandfleshandgrows on charred conifers, including redwood; C. hetero-
morphus is whitishandhas a rudimentary cap or free marginandlarge pores( 1-3 mmeach
in diameter); C. sepium also has a rudimentary cap but its pores are smaller (1-2 per mm);
and C. alaskanus is a resupinate species with very thin (less than 1 mm) flesh.
Poria cocos (Tuckahoe)
FRUITING_BODY annual, rather tough; resupinate (consisting of a simple tube layer),
but sometimes arising from a buried sclerotium ("tuber"). CAP absent or rudimentary.
Flesh thin, ivory-whitish to tan. PORES yellowish-white to tan or pinkish-buff, 1-3 per
mm. STALK absent. SCLEROTIUM when present often large, somewhat resembling an
oblong coconut; outer surface brownandscaly, interior whiteandcheesy when fresh.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 x 3-4 microns, cylindrical, smooth. Cystidia absent.
HABITAT Occasionally growing on conifer logs, but more often infecting tree roots and
stumps (of both hardwoodsandconifers),andthe fruiting bodies appearing terrestrial
if they arise from sclerotia; widely distributed, but most common in southeastern North
America. It is reported from California, but I have not seen it in ourarea. It causes a brown
cubical rootandbutt rot in its host.
EDIBILITY The fruiting bodies, like those of other Porias, are worthless, but the large
underground "tuber" was apparently eaten by various tribes of Native Americans (some
of whom called it "tuckahoe"). The "tubers" are said to be visually unappetizing, but I've
seen "Unnative" Americans foraging for even stranger fare in supermarkets-Spam, for
instance, or pickled pig's feet.
COMMENTS The ability to form large, coconut-sized sclerotia is the only redeeming
feature of this otherwise boring Poria.
Stereum hirsutum group (False Turkey Tail; Hairy Stereum)
FRUITING_BODY thin, leathery, pliant when moist, rigid when dry, annual but per-
sistent; bracketlike to shelflike or partially resupinate with a free margin. CAP 0.5-4 (5)
cm broad but sometimes fused laterally to form larger, lobed shelves 10 cm long or more;
plane to folded or wavy (crisped); surface dry, often zoned concentrically, with whitish to
brownish or grayish matted hairs (but often smooth toward the margin), the hairs wearing
away in narrow zones to reveal the reddish-brown to dark chestnut-brown cap cuticle;
margin often orange to golden or tawny, especially when young or growing; overall color
thus variable: orange-brown to reddish-brown to cinnamon when moist, but appearing
buff to grayish or paler from the hairs when dry; in old age sometimes greenish from algae
or even blackish. Flesh thin, tough. UNDERSIDE smooth to slightly bumpy or cracked
(when dry), sometimes exuding a red or yellow liquid when cut (fresh); color variable:
orange to dull orange-buff or ta wny to ochraceous, varying to buff or pinkish-buff, some-
times zoned concentrically, often browner or darker toward the base; in old age often dark
brown to chestnut-brown. STALK absent or present only as a narrowed lateral base.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-8 x 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT In groups, rows, fused masses, or dense overlapping clusters on hardwood
sticks, fallen branches, logs, stumps, etc., occasionally on living trees or conifers; widely
distributedandextremely common. Found in our area year-round, especially ondead oak.
Trametes, Lenzites, and/or Tremella species often co-inhabit the same piece of wood.
EDIBILITY Like myself, too thinandtoo tough to be edible.
COMMENTS This omnipresent little bracket fungus can be mistaken for the turkey tail
(Trametes versicolor), but a close inspection of the spore-bearing surface reveals the
complete absence of tubes or pores. The above description is rather lengthy because it
encompasses a number of confusing forms that are sometimes recognized as distinct
species. For instance, the common North American variety with a bright orange to
orange-buff spore-bearing surface has been called S. complicatumandS. rameale.
Another variety, S. gausapatum, "bleeds" red when cut, others exude a yellow juice,
while typical S. hirsutum does not bleed at all. However, these "species" grade into each
other, making a neat, clean separation almost impossible. As a group they can be
recognized easily by their omnipresence (in the hardwood forests of California they
outnumber even Trametes versicolor), the reddish-brown cap cuticle (best seen by sec-
tioning the fruiting body) beneath the hairs, the frequent orange to yellowish tones on
the cap margin or underside,andthe smooth spore-bearing surface.
Other species: S. fasciatum (=S. ostrea, S. lobatum) differs microscopically, but can
usually be told by its slightly larger caps (1-7 cm broad) that are more prominently zoned
(dark reddishandbrown)andusually form individual brackets rather than fusing, and
buff to cinnamon-buff underside; it, too, is common on hardwoods, especially oak.
S. (= Haematostereum) sangunolentum is one ofthe few widespread Stereums to grow on
conifers. When fresh its fertile surface "bleeds" dramatically when cut, sometimes even
staining one's hand. Hymenochaete tabacina resembles the S. hirsutum group in shape
and color, but its tissue blackens in potassium hydroxide (KOH). H. rubiginosa also
blackens in KOH but has a velvety, rusty-brown to chestnut-brown to blackish cap and
rusty-brown underside. Both of these favor oak. Chondrostereum purpureum is purple
when freshandoften resupinate; it parasitizes appleandplum trees, causing "silver leaf'
disease, but is also frequent on other trees (including oak in ourarea).Laxitextumbicolor,
found on hardwoods, has a brown capandwhite to pale bufffertile surface. Peniophora
gigantea forms a paper-thin crust on dead conifers. Veluticeps berkeleyi has a minutely
bristly fertile surfaceandgrows on both hardwoodsandconifers. but favors ponderosa
pine. Dozens of other species also occur.
Stereum striatum
FRUITING_BODY very thin, leatheryandpliant when fresh, annual but persistent;
bracketlike to cuplike. CAPO.3-3 (4) cm broad but sometimes fused laterally to form lines
10 cm long or more; flatandcircular to fan-shaped in outline or if small, often conical
(inverted cup-shaped); surface dry, whitish to buff or pale brown, sometimes zoned con-
centrically when moist; covered with long, loosely-arranged white hairs which usually
point toward the margin (var. ochraceoflavum) or the hairs pressed against the cap to give
it a silky-shiny striate appearance (var. striatum). Flesh very thin, tough. UNDERSIDE
(fertile surface) smooth, buff to pale brown or in some forms yellow to yellow-brown,
sometimes fading in age to whitish, sometimes zoned concentrically. STALK absent or
present only as a small knob or "umbo" on top of the cap. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores
5-8.5 x 2-3.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth.
HABITAT In groups or masses on dead branchesandtwigs (rarely logs) of hardwoods;
widely distributed. Variety ochraceoflavum can be found year-round in our oak wood-
lands, but is shrivelled upandinconspicuous in dry weather. Variety striatum occurs in
eastern North America on hornbeam (Carpinus).
EDIBILITY Not edible.
COMMENTS Like myself, this species is too tough, too thin,andtoo small to be edible.
Unlike myself, it contents itself with unambitious undertakings-decomposing branches,
sticks,andlopped-off limbs-while leaving the larger stumps, logs,andstanding trees
to the polyporesandother bracket fungi. Variety ochraceoflavum (=8. ochraceoflavum)
can be distinguished from the more common S. hirsutum group by its duller, paler color
and thinner, more pliant cap with long white hairs pointing toward the margin, plus the
absence of a red-brown cap cuticle. Variety striatum (=8. sericeum) is easily told by its silky-
striate cap. At least two growth forms ofvar. ochraceoflavum occur in our area: a small
one with a concave spore-bearing surfaceanda somewhat conical cap less than I cm
broad that is usually attached by its top to small twigs;anda larger one with a flatter cap
that usually inhabits larger sticksandbranchesandis often partially resupinate.
Cotylidia diaphana (Stalked Stereum)
FRUITING_BODY annual, erect, thinandtough, with a capandstalk. CAP 0.5-3 cm
broad, vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or often split into petal-like lobes; surface dry, with
fine radiating silky fibrils, whitish to buff to pale hazel-brown, sometimes with obscure
concentric zones. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) smooth or somewhat uneven but without
pores, whitish to buff, pinkish-buff, or tinged cap color. STALK 0.5-3.5 cm long, 1-2 mm
thick, more or less central, solid, smooth, colored like rest of fruiting body; base usually
with white mycelial down. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 4-6 (8) x 2.5-4 microns, ellip-
tical, smooth. Long, narrow, projecting cystidia present among the basidia.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups among humusanddebris in woods; widely distributed.
Occasional in our area in the fallandwinter, but easily overlooked.
EDIBILITY A worthless, miniscule morseL
COMMENTS Formerly known asStereum diaphanum, this species differs from Stereum
by its well-developed, more or less central stalk,andfrom Thelephora terrestris by its
paler colorandwhitish spores. It is considered by some to be a variety of C. aurantiaea,
a widely distributed, often largerandyellower species. Other species: C. deeolorans
(=Stereum burtianum) of eastern North America is similar but lacks cystidia.
Thelephora terrestris group (Earth Fan; Fiber Vase)
FRUITING_BODY annual but persistent, tough; usually vase-shaped to fanlike, often
clustered or in confluent masses, sometimes bracketlike or shelflike on plant stems. CAP
2-5 cm broad or forming rosettes or clusters up to 12 cm broad; surface dry, with radiating
silky fibrils or small scales; brown to reddish-or chocolate-brown to grayish-brown or
fuscous, often darker in age; margin usually fringed, splitting, often paler or whitish. Flesh
very thin, tough; odor mild or earthy. UNDERSIDE smooth or wrinkled, without pores;
some shade of brown. STALK when present lateral to central, thinandtough, colored like
cap or paler, short. SPORE_PRINT purplish-brown; spores 8-12 x 6-9 microns,
elliptical-angular, warted (often minutely so).
HABITAT Occasionally solitary but more often in groups or clusters in humus, sandy soil,
and decomposing vegetable matter; sometimes on old stumps or climbing up herbaceous
stems or tree seedlings; widespreadandcommon. In our area it grows year-round, but is
easily overlooked. I've seen it several times on potted plants in nurseries.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS The sizeandshape of this species is fairly variable but the color is quite
constant (quite variable? fairly constant?). When growing on the ground in small, erect
clusters it might be mistaken for an emaciated Cratere/lus, but is smalleranddifferently
colored. When growing on herbaceous stems, on the other hand, it looks more like a
Stereum. T. /aciniata is apparently a synonym. Other species: T. mu/tipartita is a small
(1-3 cm high), widespread, terrestrial species with a vase-shaped cap that splits into several
lobes or "branches"; T. via/is of eastern North America is a terrestrial species with a larger
fruiting bodyanda fetid odor in age,andsmaller spores; T. spicu/osa encrusts twigs and
stems, but has spiky protuberancesanda whitish growing margin;Sebacina incrustansalso
grows on herbaceous stems (usually at their bases) but is paler in colorandhas white spores.
N one of these are worth eating.
Thelephora palmata (Fetid False Coral)
FRUITING_BODY annual, erect, usually profusely branched from a common base;
2-10 cm highandjust as broad or broader. BRANCHES purplish-brown to chocolate-
brown or darker, flattened; tips also flattened (palmlike)andusually paler (whitish)
when actively growing. STALK present only as a common base or short "trunk" below
the branches. Flesh tough, leathery; odor garliclike becoming fetid (unpleasant) in age.
SPORE_PRINT dark reddish-brown; spores 8-11 x 7-8 microns, elliptical-angular, spiny.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on moist ground in woodsandat their edges; widely
distributed. It often grows along woodland paths but blends uncannily into its sur-
roundings. In our area it fruits in the late fali, winter,andspring, but is not particularly
common.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This mushroom looks like a coral fungusandis keyed out under that
group. However, the flattened branches, dark color, fetid garlic odor,andangular-
elliptical spores are distinctive. Other species: T. via/is of eastern North America is more
variable in colorandhas smaller spores.
Phlebia radiata
FRUITING_BODY annual, resupinate (lying flat on substrate), sometimes with a free
margin but no cap or stalk; soft when fresh, tough in age. FERTILE SURFACE usually
fused to form patches 30 cm or more long, but often with smaller, discrete systems of
radiating wrinkles or warty veins 1-4 cm broad; flesh-colored to bright orange to pinkish-
red, fading to whitish inoldage. Underside ofmargin(iffree) with white woolly hairs. Flesh
thin, rather soft or slightly gelatinous when fresh, tough in age or when dry. SPORE
PRINT whitish; spores 3.5-7 x 1-3 microns, sausage-shaped or elliptical. smooth.
HABITAT On fallen logsandbranches of both hardwoodsandconifers; widely dis-
tributed. I find it occasionally on oak logs in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Inedible. It looks as if it has already been eaten (see comments).
COMMENTS Also known as P. merismoides, this species is unique by virtue of its
resupinate, orange to pinkish fruiting body with radiating wrinkles. Its overall appearance
is somewhat reminiscent of regurgitated dog food,anda similar species, Radulum
orbiculare, has an irregularly lumpy or warty spore-producing surface that is distinctly
reminiscent of regurgitated dog food. Other species: Punctularia strigoso-zonata is also
similar, but has concentric wrinklesandfurrows instead of radiating ones; it grows on
dead hardwoods.
Serpula lacrymans (Dry Rot Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY annual, forming widely-spreading, nearly flat, fanlike sheets on
horizontal substrates, but sometimes bracketlike if growing on vertical substrates; soft and
spongy when fresh, 5 cm-l m (3 ft.) broad or more. Upper surface (or free margin) silvery-
white to gray, hairy. Flesh thin, dingy yellowish; odor often unpleasant, musty. FERTILE
SURF ACE consisting of very shallow (I mm deep), large, irregular pits orLLpores" formed
by a honeycomb-like network of foldsandridges rather than by tubes; olive-yellow to
brownish-yellow, rusty-brown, orange-brown, or cinnamon. STALK typically absent, but
white or grayish mycelial strands (by which it spreads) often present. SPORE_PRINT
orange-brown to orange-yellow to brownish; spores 8-12.5 x 4-6 microns, elliptical,
smooth, thick-walled.
HABITAT A serious pest of structural wood in old houses, buildings, ships, etc., usually
developing indoors or in poorly ventilated situations, often hiding under floorboards.
Bulging woodanda musty odor are telltale signs of its presence. Common in Europe, where
the ventilation in many houses was sealed off during the war; less common in North
America. It is called dry rot because it extracts water from the woodandcracks it into
cubical blocks, eventually reducing it to a fine, dark powder. A related species,S. himan-
tioides, turns up occasionally in the wild (on dead conifers), as do Merulius species (see
comments).
EDIBILITY Utterlyandindisputably inedible.
COMMENTS One of the few fleshy fungi that lives up to the labelfungus in its most
pejorative sense-odious, insidious, hideous, obnoxious, downright abominable. Once it
gains a foothold it is hard to eradicate because the often gigantic, padlike fruiting bodies
exude great quantities of water, stimulating further fungal growth. The mycelial strands
spread with astonishing rapidity. Like a horde of hungry army ants in search offood, they
will overrun anythingandeverything in their way: bricks, stones, tiles, plaster, drain
pipes, wires, leather boots, cement floors, books, tea kettles, even corpses. For a fascinating
account (and pictures) of some of its more heroic feats, see John Ramsbottom's
mycological treasure trove, MushroomsandToadstools.
The veined or honeycombed network oflarge, irregular, shallow "pores" is characteristic
of Serpula (colored spores)andMerulius (white spores). Both are now quite rightfully
placed in families of their own, apart from other crustandparchment fungi. Other species:
Coniophora puteana ("Wet Rot") is another pest of structural timber; it has a similar
growth habit but has an irregularly wrinkled to bumpy fertile surface. Merulius tremellosus
(see photo on p. 610) has an orange to orange-buffto pinkish, veined or honeycombed fer-
tile surfaceanda hairy white cap or free margin; it grows in the wild, mainly on dead hard-
woods. M. incarnatus is an eastern species with a bright coral-pink capandpaler, duller,
honeycombed or veined fertile surface. Several other species differ microscopically.
Echinodontium tinctorium (Indian Paint Fungus; Toothed Conk)
FRUITING_BODY shelflike, very tough or woody, often perennial, up to 15 cm thick.
CAP 4-25 cm broad, more or less hoof-shaped; surface dry, finely hairy to rough, often
covered with moss. Flesh very tough or woody, bright orange to rusty-red or cinnamon,
zoned. SPINES brittle, blunt, thick, flattened, long (1-3 cm); grayish to pale olive-buff, the
tips sometimes darker. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white (when obtainable); spores
5.5-8 x 3.5-6 microns, elliptical, minutely spiny, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or several on living or occasionally downed conifers; known only
from western North America, where it favors mountain conifers such as firandhemlock
(I haven't seen it on the coast). It causes an extensive white heart rot in its host.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedible, but can be used as a red dye. Its common
name is a tribute to its use by Native Americans in the preparation of war paint.
COMMENTS The woody hoof-shaped fruiting body looks like aconk, but has long spines
or "teeth" on its underside. The bright orange to reddish-orange flesh is also distinctive. It
is not closely related to other teeth fungiandis now sequestered in a family of its own.
Her;c;um ab;el;s (Conifer Coral Hericium) Color Plate 163
FRUITING_BODY 10-75 cm or more broadandhigh at maturity, consisting of an open to
compact branched framework from which tufts of icicle-like spines hang; branches arising
from a thick, tough, rooting base; color variable: white to creamy, yellowish-buff, pale
ochraceous, or salmon-buff. SPINES up to 25 mm long but usually 5-10 mm; soft but
brittle, arranged in tufts or clusters that are mainly grouped at the branch tips. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 4.5-5.5 x 4-5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely
roughened, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or sometimes several together on dead conifers (especially fir and
Douglas-fir); known only from the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, fruiting
mainly in the fall. It is rather infrequent but locally common, particularly at higher eleva-
tions (the largest fruitings I've seen were in the Cascades). It appears year after year on the
same logs, causing a conspicuous white pocket rot. The closely related H. coral/oides
(see comments) favors hardwoodsandis more widely distributed.
EDIBILITY Eminently edible, delectably delicious. When thoroughly cooked it is
reminiscent of fishandis excellent sauteed, curried, or marinated. Its large size (a 100-lb.
specimen was wheeled into one mushroom show!)plus its distinctive appearance make it an
excellent mushroom for beginners. However, its breathtaking beauty poses a minor moral
dilemma: should one ruthlessly uproot it for the sake of a meal, or leave it for others to see?
COMMENTS It is hard to believe that this astonishing Hericium, with its cascading
clusters ofpristine..icicles,"isafungus. It is easily distinguished from other Hericiums by its
white to salmon-buff color, clustered spines,andgrowth on conifers. It has long been a
favorite among nature-loversandphotographers in the Pacific Northwest, but only
recently has it been recognized as distinct from the better known, equally beautiful and
delicious H. coral/oides. Some investigators, in fact, still consider the two to be the same
species. Others reserve the name H. coral/oides for a pure white (when fresh) hardwood-
loving form with slightly longer spines (up to 4 cm)andslightly larger spores. This form
occurs in eastern North America, but reports of it from the West are based at least in part
on H. abietis. To complicate matters, it has now been suggested that the name H. cora/-
Joides is better applied to H. ramosum,andthat the eastern form traditionally called
H. coral/oides should be given a new name, H. americanum! To muddle matters even
more, there are several growth forms of H. abietis, including a very compact, scarcely
branched one (formerly H. weir;') that somewhat resembles H. erinaceus,andan exten-
sively branched one with very short spines (1-5 mm) that mimics H. ramosum (both forms
grow on conifers, however). Since all of these Hericiums are equally edible, their exact
identities needn't concern you-at least, they don't concern me!
Hericium ramosum (Comb Hericium) Color Plate 164
FRUITING_BODY 8-35 cm broadand6-15 cm high when mature, comprised of an open
framework of rather delicate, toothed (spine-laden) branches arising from a tough,
repeatedly branched rooting base or "trunk"; pure white when fresh, discoloring creamy to
buff or yellowish-tan in old age. Flesh white. SPINES more or less evenly distributed in
lines along the branches (like teeth on a comb), sometimes also in small tufts at the branch
tips; spines rather short (3-10 mm long or up to 25 mm long in the tufts). SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 3-5 x 3-4 microns, nearly round, smooth or minutely roughened, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on fallen hard wood branches, logs,andstumps;
widely distributed. It is said to be the most common Hericium in North America, but like
the others, is uncommon in our area. I have found it in the fall, winter,andearly spring on
dead oak,andI have seen it in the summer on aspenandpoplar in New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious when cooked slowly, but not as fleshy as the other
Hericiums.
COMMENTS Formerly known as H. laciniatum, this lovely species is smallerandmore
delicate than H. abietisandH. coral/oides, with slightly shorter spinesandsmaller spores.
Also, the branching is more openandthe spines are arranged in lines length wise along the
branches, rather than exclusively in tufts. A compact form of this species occurs, but is rare.
Hericium erinaceus (Lion's Mane Hericium; Old Man's Beard)
FRUITING_BODY an unbranched mass of numerous long, closely-packed, icicle-like
spines hanging from a tough, solid, hairy, rooting cushion of tissue; 8-40 cm or more broad
and high when mature; entirely white when fresh, discoloring yellowish to tan or dingy
ochre in age. Flesh white. SPINES (1) 2-5 (7) cm long, softandpliant when fresh, with
pointed tips. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptical to
nearly round, smooth to minutely roughened, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary (rarely several together) on wounds of living hard woods or on the cut
ends of recently felled logs; widely distributed. In our area it favors oakandis fairly
common (for a Hericium) in the fall, winter,andspring; farther north it grows on maple.
EDIBILITY Excellent when fresh, but tougher than other Hericiumsandsometimes
developing a rather sour, unpleasant taste in age. Slow cooking is called forandthe base
should not be eaten-it's so tough that it's difficult to remove from the tree without a knife!
COMMENTS The unbranched white to yellowish fruiting bodyandlong, slender spines
distinguish this impressive fungus from its relatives. Though hardly common, it is more
numerous in our area than the branched Hericiumsandis one of our most distinctive
wood-inhabiting fungi. Gigantic specimens weighing several pounds each are not un-
common. An unbranched version completely covered with small short spines occurs on
hardwoods in eastern North America, but I have not seen it in the West.
Dentinum repandum Color Plates 161, 162
(Hedgehog Mushroom; Pig's Trotter)
CAP 2-17 (25) cm broad, broadly convex to plane or depressed, the margin often wavy or
deeply indentedandat first inrolled; surface dry, more or less smooth, but sometimes
cracking into scales in age; pale flesh-color to pale or dull orange, orange-tan, salmon, tan,
or pale cinnamon to reddish-tawny (but white to creamy in vaT. album); bruised areas often
darker orange. Flesh thick, occasionally zoned concentrically, firm, brittle, white, usually
discoloring yellow to yellow-ochre or orange-brown when bruised; odor mild, taste mild to
somewhat bitter or peppery. SPINES 2-7 mm long, whitish to yellowish, salmon-buff, or
pale orange, bruising dark orange to ochraceous; slender, brittle but soft, usually
decurrent. STALK 3-10 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 (5 cm thick, central or off-center, equal or
enlarged below or occasionally tapered downward, firm, white or colored like cap but
usually paler; bruising ochre to dark orange-brown; smooth or downy at base. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6.5-9x 5.5-8 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or in troops on ground under both hard-
woodsandconifers; widely distributed throughout the north temperate zoneandprobably
the most common of all the teeth fungi. In California it fruits throughout the mushroom
season but develops slowlyandnormally does not peak until the late winter or early spring,
when the wild irises are in bloom (see Color Plate 161)andmost other fungi have long
since rotted away. In our area it favors fern, bramble,andpoison oak thickets under pine;
in the Pacific NorthwestandRocky Mountains it grows under a wide range of conifers,
and in eastern North America it is often common under oaks in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice! It is comparable to the chanterelle in color, texture, and
flavor,andlike that species is usually maggot-free. It is easier to clean, however,andis also
easier to recognize.The peppery taste (if present) disappears in cooking. It's superb in
casseroles, tomato sauces, or sauteed with sour cream, but should be cooked slowly and
lengthily to make it tender. Be careful to keep the spines clean while picking them!
COMMENTS Also known as Hydnum repandum, this late bloomer resembles a dull-
colored chanterelle when first spotted amongst the needlesandhumus. However, the
white to pale orange spines on the underside of the cap immediately distinguish it, making it
one of the safest of all edible mushrooms. The cap color, though variable, is typically some
shade of pale orange to pinkish-orange to reddish-tan, with wounded areas darker orange.
The white form (var. album) does not seem to occur in our area, but is common farther
north under conifers, especially Sitka spruce. Other species: Var. macrosporum has larger
spores but is otherwise similar; D. umbilicatum is a closely related, equally edible conifer-
lover with a smaller (usually less than 5 cm) umbilicate cap, a slimmer stalk (typically less
than I cm),andlarger spores. It is similar in colorandwidely distributed.andsometimes
mingles with D. repandum. Two edible white or whitish southern species should also be
mentioned: D. albomagnumandD. albidum. The first has a mild tasteandnon-staining
flesh, while the latter has an acrid tasteandsmaller spores.
Hydnum imbricatum
(Shingled Hedgehog)
Color Plate 159
CAP 5-20 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, buff to pale brown
or dull reddish-brown, but covered with large, coarse, broad, raised or shingle-like,
darker brown to nearly black scales that are often upturned in age; becoming darker
brown throughout in ageandsometimes cracking, with the scales sometimes wearing off
except at the center. Flesh thick, firm but brittle; pallid to grayish, tan, or brownish; odor
mild or when dry somewhat smoky or chocolate-like; taste mild to bitter. SPINES pale
brown or grayish or pallid becoming dark brown in age, 2-15 mm long; soft, brittle, often
slightly decurrent. STALK 4-10 cm long, 1.5-3.5 (5) cm thick, central or off-center, often
enlarged below; some shade of brown, often hollow toward the top in age; usually more or
less smooth. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 6-8 x 5-7 microns, nearly round but promi-
nently warted (angular-nodulose or shaped like a Maltese cross).
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in woods; widely distributed-it is pro bably
the most common Hydnum in North America. In many regions it is abundant under
conifers in the late spring, summer,andfall. In our area it occurs under hardwoods in
the late fallandwinter, but is rare. I have seen enormous fruitings under spruceandfir.
EDIBILITY Edible, but of poor quality. Many collections have a bitter tasteandpar-
boiling does not necessarily help, plus it causes indigestion in some people. The European
version is apparently better because it is often sold in markets there.
COMMENTS Also known as Sarcodon imbricatum, this arresting hedgehog is easily
identified by the prominent brown to blackish scales on its cap. The stalk base is not olive-
black as in the H. scabrosum group,andthe cap is scalier-even when young. In old age the
central depression of the cap may become perforated, i.e., join up with the hollow in the
upper portion of the stalk. For similar species, see the H. scabrosum group.
Hydnum scabrosum group
(Bitter Hedgehog)
CAP (20) cm broad. convex to plane or slightly depressed; surface dry, at first smooth
but soon becoming crackedandscaly, the scales cinnamon-brown to reddish-brown
becoming dark chocolate-brown to vinaceous-brown at maturityandthe background
dingy yellowish-brown or darker. Flesh thick, brittle, firm, white or buff, but olive-gray
to olive-black in base of stalk; odor farinaceous or smoky; tastestronglybitterand/oracrid
to farinaceous. SPINES often unequal in length, 2-10 mm long, pallid or buff, darken-
ing to tan with paler tips, then darker brown in old age; usually slightly decurrent. STALK
2.5-10 cm long, 1-3.5 cm thick, usually tapered below, central or off-center, often curved,
flesh-color becoming brown or dark brown in age, the base blackish-oliveto grayish-olive,
olive, or dark bluish-green; firm, solid. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 6-7.5 x 4-5.5
microns, elliptical to round, prominently warted. Cap tissue staining blue-green in KOH.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or gregarious on ground under conifers or sometimes
hardwoods; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the late summerandfall in the
Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Unequivocallyandindisputably inedible due to the awful taste.
COMMENTS The scaly reddish-brown to brown cap, blackish-olive to blue-green stem
base,andbitter taste distinguish this species from most other Hydnums. The scales are
usually quite conspicuous, but not as large as those of H. imbricatum. H.fennicum is a
very similar species with a scaly reddish-brown to brown capandblackish stem base.
However, it does not stain blue-green in potassium hydroxide (KOH)andit has an even
more intensely bitter taste. It grows under both hardwoodsandconifersandis wide-
spread. Three other somewhat similar species are quite common in the West: H. sub.
incarnatum is usually bitter-tastingandsimilarly colored or more vinaceous, but its flesh
usually stains pinkish or lilac when cut, its spines are pallid or whitish becoming buff or pale
brown only in old age,andits stalk base mayor may not be olive-tinted. In California it
grows under both hardwoodsandconifers, sometimes in the company of H. scabrosum.
H. rimosum (see photo below) is also similar, but has a more or less mild (or rarely slightly
acrid) taste, is not normally olive at the stem base,andhas a vinaceous-or purple-tinged
cap that usually develops cracks in age but is not scaly when young. It is fairly common
under conifers in the Pacific Northwest,andI have found it in our area in the winter and
in the Sierra Nevada in the spring. Finally, there is H. laevigatum, a widespread but
infrequently-encountered species that has a smooth to minutely cracked cap and, like
H. rimosum. often stains purplish when cut open. None ofthese are worth eating.
Hydnurn calvaturn group (Robust Hedgehog)
CAP (5) 10-25 (35) cm broad, convex to nearly plane or somewhat irregular; surface dry,
soon breaking up into small, flattened scalesandusually cracking in age; creamy-buff to
yellowish-tan or pale cinnamon-brown, the scales slightly darkerandbecoming brownish
where bruised; margin often lobed. Flesh very thick, firm, pallid to pinkish-buff or pale
brownish, or grayer near the spines; odorandtaste variable: mild to spicy-fragrant to
farinaceous. SPINES pallid, soon darkening to brown or grayish-brown, the tips usually
paler; 2-12 (15) mm long, usually very uneven in length or many aborted or fused together
or forked or with small swellings; sometimes decurrent. STALK 2-9 cm long, 2-4 (6) cm
thick, central or off-center, usually narrowed at the baseandsometimes rooting; solid,
firm, colored like cap or slightly paler, the base often whitish from mycelium. SPORE
PRINT brown; spores 4-5.5 x 3-5 microns, nearly round to elliptical but prominently
warted (angular-nodulose). Cap surface staining blue-green to olive-black in KOH.
HABITAT In groups or dumps, often with small or aborted fruiting bodies present, on
ground in mixed woodsandunder conifers; known only from western North America.
I've found it in August under spruce in New Mexico; it is also fairly common in Oregon.
EDIBILITY Unknown-but fleshy enough to warrant cautious experimentation.
COMMENTS The large size, thick flesh, tendency to grow in groups or dumps, whitish
stalk base,andpresence of small appressed (flattened) scales on the cap distinguish this
species from most other Hydnums. The color is never asdarkas that of H. imbricatum. nor
the cap as coarsely scaly; the stalk is not olive or blue at the base as in the H. scabrosum
group. A similar species, H. crassum, is slightly brighter in color, has larger spores, and
its flesh may stain yellow-green when cut. Its cap surface stains brownish in KOH and
it also occurs under conifers. A somewhat similarandwidespread species, H. mar-
tioflavum, has bright cinnamon-orange spines when younganda cinnamon to tawny cap.
Hydnumfuscoindicum (Violet Hedgehog)
CAP 4-18 cm broad, convex to plane or centrally depressed; surface dry, at first smooth
but usually cracking to form scales in age; violet-black to bluish-black, black, or raisin-
colored; margin often somewhat paler or purplerandwavy. Flesh thick, firm but brittle,
deep slate-purple or violet; odorand taste mild to somewhat farinaceous or cinnamon-like.
SPINES deep violet to deep bluish-violet to deep lavender, the tips usually paler or lilac;
soft, brittle, 2-6 (15) mm long, usually decurrent. STALK 2-10 cm long, 1-2 (3.5) cm thick,
equal or more often tapered below, central or off-center, firm, colored more or less likethe
spines (deep purplish). SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 5-7 x 4.5-6.5 microns, broadly
elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods; locally common but
erratic in its fruiting behavior-absent some yearsandabundant others; known onlyfrom
western North America. In our area it fruits in the fallandwinter under tanoak and
madrone at higher elevations in the coastal mountains; in the Pacific Northwest, however,
it favors conifers, especially hemlockandpine. It is yet another example of a conifer-lover
that crosses over to tanoak-madrone (others include Armillaria ponderosa, Cantharel/us
subalbidus, Hygrophorus chrysodon,andTricholoma aurantium).
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Although not exactly bitter-tasting, small pieces which
I sampled caused a peculiar burning sensation in the back of my throat. It would be
interesting to see what color it yields as a dye.
COMMENTS The striking deep violet color, which is reminiscent of Corlinarius vio-
laceus, sets apart this attractive Hydnum (see photo at bottom ofp. 621 ).Itscolormakesit
hard to pick out in the forest gloom,andeven the most eagle-eyed Hydnum-hound is likely
to miss it or else mistake it for an old, blackened Russula albonigra. Phel/odon alralus is
somewhat similar, but is bluish-blackandmuch smallerandtougher. Other purplish
Hydnums include: H. cyanellum, with a similarly colored cap but paler("lilac-gray") flesh,
a bitter taste,andcinnamon-brown spines with whitish tips (it was originally described
from California, but I have not seen it); H.fulig;neo-v;olaceum, with a vinaceous-brown
cap, brown or cinnamon-brown spines, an acrid taste,andgray flesh in the base of the
stalk;andH. rimosum (see comments under the H. scabrosum group), which is vinaceous-
brown to vinaceous-buff rather than deep purple.
Hydnellum suaveolens (Fragrant Hydnellum)
CAP (3) 5-15 (30) cm broad when mature, top-shaped becoming plane to somewhat
depressed, often with needles or other debris incorporated into it; surface whiteandthinly
felty or velvety at first, often bumpy and/or pitted in age, soon becoming yellowish to tan,
brownish, olive-brown, or violet-gray from the center outward (margin often paler);
usually staining brown where bruised. Flesh duplex, whitish to yellowish-buff zoned with
blue lines in the cap, entirely deep blue to purple-black in the stalk; odor often strongly
fragrant (like anise or peppermint). SPINES whitish to creamy when young, becoming
grayish-brown with pallid tips in age; short (up to 3 mm long), irregularly decurrent.
STALK 1-5 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central or slightly off-center, very tough, the base
usually swollen, rooting; grayish-blue to bluish-black. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores
4-6 x 34 microns, elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or in fused clusters under northernandmontane
conifers, late summer through early winter; widespread but especially common in the
Rocky Mountains. I have seen large fruitings under spruceandfir in IdahoandNew
Mexico, but have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too fibrous to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS The blue-lined flesh in the capandblue-black flesh in the stalk plus the
flagrantly fragrant (fragrantly flagrant?) odor make this an easy species to identify. In
some collections the fragrance is absent, but in others it is overpowering-I once had to
remove two specimens from my car because their aroma was so heady! H. peck;; is often
fragrant but much different in color, while H. caeru/eum shows orange-red flesh in the
stalk. Other species: H. cruentum, described from Nova Scotia, has a menthol odor,
but when youngandfresh its cap has red dropletsandit spines are lilac-or bluish-tinged.
Hydnellum caeruleum (Blue-Gray Hydnellum)
CAP 3-12 (17) cm broad, often with leaves or needles incorporated into it; top-shaped
becoming plane or slightly depressed; surface felty or velvety at first, often bumpy and/or
pitted in ageandwith matted hairs; mauve to pale blue, whitish, or tan when young,
becoming light to dull dark brown or even blackish from the center outward (often a
mixture ofthese colors), the soft, felty growing margin white or pale blue to bluish-gray.
Flesh duplex: upper or outer layer spongy, inner core toughandfibrous; zoned variously
with bluish, blue-gray, mauve,andbrown in the cap; bright rusty-colored to orange-red
in stalk; odorandtaste farinaceous. SPINES whitish when young or tinged blue, becoming
brown to dark brown with pallid tips in age; rather short (1-5 mm long), often decurrent.
STALK 2-9 (12) cm long, 1-3 cm thick, central or off-center, very tough, often rooting
deeply in humus; equal or thicker ateitherend, buff to brown or orange-brown, but usually
covered with debris. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 4.5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, nearly round
to ellipticalandirregularly lobed or warted.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground in woods; widely dis-
tributed. It is common in the Pacific Northwest under pinesandother conifers, but in our
area I find it under oak, tanoak.andmadrone, usually early in the fall.
EDIBILITY Indisputably inedible.
COMMENTS Like most Hydnellums this species develops over a period of several weeks
and undergoes a number of confusing color changes. Young specimens are more or less top-
shaped,andhave a thick, felty cap margin that shows white and/or bluish tints. In age,
however, or after being battered by rain, the cap becomes depressed (wouldn't you?), the
margin thins out,andthe color becomes darker or duller brown. However, the bluish lines
in the flesh of the cap (though sometimes faint)andthe bright rusty-to orange-red flesh
in the stalk (which distinguishes it from H. suaveolens) are fairly constant characters.
Other species: H. ferrug;pes of eastern North America has an orange-red stalk, but fa vors
hardwoods. H. cyanopod;um has a vinaceous-blue cap shading toward lavender (or
whitish at margin) that is often beaded with red droplets in wet weather, flesh that is
zoned bluish-black,andspores shaped like jacks. H. reg;um often forms compound
fruiting bodies (with several caps); its cap is violet-black with a paler marginandthe flesh
is brown to pale orange in the stalkandbrownish to grayish with violet tones in the cap.
The latter two species occur under conifers (mainly spruceandpine) in northern Cali-
fornia, the Pacific Northwest,andthe Rocky Mountain region.
Hydnellum aurantiacum (Orange Hydnellum)
CAP 3-15 cm broad, columnar or somewhat top-shaped becoming plane or depressed in
age; often with pine needlesandother debris incorporated into it; surface velvety and
suedelike when freshandoften roughened by projecting knobsandlumps when mature, or
in some forms with radiating ridges; white when young or on actively growing margin,
otherwise orange to rusty-orange to rusty-cinnamon (or mixture of these colors), and
eventually darker (brown) in old age. Flesh thick, toughandcorky except for frequent
presence of a spongier outer or upper layer; orange to rusty-cinnamon to orange-red in
both the capandstalk; odor mild, taste bitter to farinaceous. SPINES shortandblunt
(1-4 mm long), whitish to grayish or orange, becoming brown in age with the tips often
paler. STALK 2-6 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, usually central, very tough or woody, equal or
tapered downward or in one form enlarged at base; orange to bright rusty-cinnamon
becoming dark brown in age, with a large mat of pine needlesanddebris usually stuck to
the base. SPORE_PRINT brown; spores 5.5-7.5 x 5-6 microns, nearly round, promi-
nently warted.
HABITAT Solitary or in grou ps on ground under pinesandother conifers, sometimes also
in fused clusters; widely distributed. It is one of the two most common Hydnellums in our
area (from late fall through early spring), but does not often occur in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedible.
COMMENTS The tough texture, knobby or lumpy cap surface,andbright orange to
rusty-cinnamon colors of the capandflesh are the fallible field marks of this speciesandits
close relatives. It never exudes the red droplets characteristic of H. peck ii, but might be
casually mistaken for a polypore such as Phaeo/us schweinitzii. However, a close look
at its underside reveals the presence of small "teeth" instead of pores. Closely related
species include: H. complectipes, usually with many caps fused to form large, complicated
masses or rosettes, found in the Pacific Northwest under conifers;H. conigenum, with very
thin flesh in the cap, also found under conifers;andH.JerrugipesandH. earlianum, found
under hardwoods in eastern North America, the latter with a nearly smooth cap.
Hydnellum peckii Color Plate 160
(StrawberriesandCream; Bleeding Hydnellum)
CAP 2.5-15 cm broad, often with needlesandother debris incorporated intoit; top-shaped
becoming broadly convex to plane or finally depressed; surface felty or velvetyandwhite
to pink in young specimens or on actively-growing margin; in age becoming nearly hairless
and lumpy or jagged with projecting nodules,andoften ridged and/or pitted; darkening
to brown, dark brown, or vinaceous-brown from the center outwardandalmost entirely
these colors in old age; beaded with or exuding bright ruby-red to dark red droplets when
freshandmoist. Flesh in both capandstalk toughandfibrous-corky, faintly zoned;
pinkish-buff to cinnamon-brown, dark reddish-brown, or dingy brown; odor mild to
fragrant or pungent; taste typically extremely acrid (peppery). SPINES rather short (1-6
mm long), dull pinkish becoming brown or purplish-brown, often with paler tips; some-
times decurrent. STALK 0.5-7.5 cm long, 1-2 (3) cm thick, central or off-center, equal or
tapered belowandsometimes rooting, or occasionally swollen at base; felty or velvety
and colored more or less like cap or darker; solid, tough or woody . SPORE_PRINT brown;
spores 4.5-5.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, round or nearly round, prominently warted.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered, gregarious, orin fused clusters on ground under conifers;
widely distributed, but particularly common in the Pacific Northwest in the late summer
and fall. I've recorded only one questionable collection from our area, but have seen it
farther north under pineandfir.
EDIBILITY Indubitably inedible due to the burning-acrid tasteandtough, corky texture.
COMMENTS The bright red droplets that cling to the surface of the cap in moist weather
make this a strikingandeasily-identified mushroom (see color plate!). As in other Hyd-
nellums, the cap varies considerably in colorandtexture according to ageandenviron-
mental conditions. When young, white,andbeaded with droplets it looks like a Danish
pastry topped with strawberry jam. Older, battered specimens, on the other hand, are
scarcely recognizableandeasily confused with other species. Intermediate stages are
typically brown or dark reddish-brown with a white to pink, beaded margin. Other species
exuding red droplets in wet weather include: H. diabolum, very similar if not the same,
with a hairier cap at maturityandstronger odor;andH. pineticola, common under pines
in northeastern North America, with a rather unpleasant but not acrid tasteanda cap that
sometimes has pink droplets. See also H. scrobiculalum.
Hydnellum scrobiculatum (Rough Hydnellum)
CAP 3-10 cm broad, more or less top-shaped when young becoming plane to depressed in
age, sometimes with smaller caps on top; surface usually roughenedandirregular from
numerous pitsandprojecting warts or blunt spikes, often also with radial ridges; pallid
to pale salmon-buff or pinkishandplushlike or felty when young or on growing margin of
older specimens; darkening in age from the center outward to buffy-brown, then dull
cinnamonandfinally darker brown, but lacking conspicuous concentric zones; sometimes
beaded with dark red droplets when youngandmoist,andbruising reddish-black to black
when rubbed, especially at margin. Flesh zoned, sometimes also with white dots; usually
duplex, the upper layer spongy when freshandcolored like cap, the lower layer or core
brown to dark reddish-brown; often exuding dark red juice when squeezed (if moist and
fresh); odorandtaste mild to farinaceous. SPINES short (1-5 mm long), usually decurrent,
sometimes fused; pallid or colored like cap margin, becoming buffy-brown to cinnamon-
brownandfinally purple-or dark brown in old age. STALK 1-4 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick,
usually tapered downward but often with a swollen, buried, spongy base; central or off-
center; tough; cinnamon-brown or colored more or less like cap. SPORE_PRINT
brownish; 4.5-5.5 (7) x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, prominently warted.
"tuber" on the stalk. When older it can be mistaken for various other brownish to reddish
Hydnellums. H. zonatum (=H. scrobicu/atum var. zonatum, H. concrescens-COLOR
PLATE 157) is a closely related, similarly colored species with a smooth or radially cor-
rugated (but not lumpy) cap that is usually zoned concentrically (at least somewhat). It is
quite common under hardwoods in eastern North America but also occurs on the west
coast both in its normal formanda diminutive one whose cap is 4 cm broad or less. Both
H. zona turnandH. scrobiculaturn are quite distinct in their typical forms, but appear to
intergrade. Other similar species: H. subsuccosum resembles H. zona turn. but is more
irregular in shapeandjuicier when fresh,andexudes a pinkish to reddish juice when
squeezed; it also has yellowish-gray to yellow-green mycelium at the base of the stemandits
cap is often flecked with yellowish spots or particles.H. cumulatum has many caps built on
top of one another,andlittle or no stalk. Both of these occur under conifers.
Phellodon tomentosus (Zoned Phellodon)
CAP 1.5-4 (5.5) cm broad, often fused with others, plane to depressed or broadly funnel-
shaped; surface dry, smooth to ridged or corrugated, minutely hairy (tomentose), white
when very young, soon becoming concentrically zoned with yellow-brown, cinnamon-
brown, darker brown, etc., the growing margin usually remaining whiteandfelty to the
touch, but bruising brownish. Flesh thin, leatheryandfibrous, brownish (darker brown
in stalk); odor usually fragrant (like fenugreek); taste mild or slightly bitter. SPINES short
(1-3 (5) mm), crowded, delicate, whitish becoming pale cinnamon to brown with paler tips;
slightly decurrent. STALK 1-5 cm long, 2-5 (8) mm thick, usually central, equal or tapering
downward, colored more or less like cap, arising from spongy pad of brownish mycelium.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-4.5 microns, round or nearly round. minutely spiny.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered (several caps often fused together
but the stalks usually separate) under conifers; widely distributedandfairly common. I
have found it in Mendocino County, California, in the fallandearly winter,andit is some-
times abundant in the Pacific Northwest; just how far south it occurs is unclear.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too smallandtoo tough to be of value.
COMMENTS The small size, beautifully zoned yellow-brown to cinnamon-brown to
dark brown cap, brown flesh, slender stem,andfrequently fragrant odor are good field-
marks. It bears an uncanny resemblance to polypores of the genus Coltricia (see C.
cinnarnornea), but the underside of the cap features minute spines or "teeth" instead of
pores. Hydnellurn zonaturn (see comments under H. scrobiculaturn) is also somewhat
similar, but has darker spinesandbrown spores. Other species: P. confluens is quite
similar, but more common under hardwoods. It is more irregular in shape, with an often
roughened or pitted, whitish cap that darkens to creamy or dark tan from the center
outward,andspines which are grayish at maturity.
Phellodon atratus (Blue-Black Phellodon)
CAP 1-5 cm broad but often fused with others; plane to depressed or irregular; surface dry,
usually at least faintly zoned concentrically; bluish-black to purple-black or black, the
margin often slightly paler or purpler. Flesh in both capandstalk purple-black to bluish-
black; thin, tough, fibrous, pliant, sometimes with a thin outer or upper spongy layer; odor
mild or faintly fragrant; taste mild. SPINES very short (1-2 mm), irregularly decurrent;
gray to dark purplish-gray-brown, darker where bruised. STALK 2-5 cm long, 3-5 mm
thick, usually central, sometimes compound or branched; tapering downward but usually
thickened at ground level by a feIty mycelial layer; rough, often flattened, colored more or
less like cap. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4-5 x 3-5 microns, round or nearly round,
minutely spiny. Cap tissue staining blue-black in potassium hydroxide (KOH).
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, often forming compound or fused clusters, on
ground under conifers (particularly Sitka spruce); apparently endemic to the Pacific
NorthwestandCaliforniaandquite common in the fallandwinter in second-growth
forests. It has been found in Big Basin State Park, but is rare south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but like myself, too toughandtoo small to be of value.
COMMENTS The small size, tough texture,andbluish-black color distinguish this
conifer-lover. Hydnum fuscoindicum is somewhat similar in color but largerandfleshy-
brittle rather than pliantandtough. A closely related species, P. melaleucus, has purplish-
black to purple-gray flesh, but its cap is dark brown to purplish-gray with a pallid margin,
the spines are whitish to gray,andthe stalk is very thin, dark brown to black,andsometimes
deeply rooted. It also occurs under conifers but has a wider (albeit northern) distribution.
In eastern North America a similar species, P. niger, is common. It is largerandthicker
than P. atratus, with a white to brownish, gray, or black capandblack flesh (in both the
capandstem). Hydnellum nigellum, another eastern species, is smallandslate-gray to
black, but has brown spores.
A uriscalpium vulgare (Ear Pick Fungus)
CAP 1-2 (4) cm broad, more or less kidney-shaped in outline, broadly convex to plane or
slightly depressed; surface dry, covered with dense fibrils or hairs, brown to dark brown,
sometimes blackish in age; margin often fringedandpaler. Flesh thin, tough, pliant, white
to pale brown. SPINES whitish to flesh-colored, sometimes darkening to brown; very
fineandcrowded, short (1-3 mm long). STALK 2-10 cm long, 0.5-3 mm thick, very slender,
equal or slightly enlarged below, usually attached to side of cap (lateral), densely hairy,
especially toward base, rusty-brown to dark brown or blackish. SPORE_PRINT white;
spores 4.5-6x 3-3.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely spiny, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in twosandthrees on rotting, often buried cones of conifers, or
sometimes on thick mats of debris made up partly of decaying cones; widely distributed,
but rare in our area (or else frequently overlooked). In my experience it favors Douglas-
fir cones, at least on the west coast.
EDIBILITY Much too smallandmuch too tough to be of value.
COMMENTS The small sizeandgrowth on decaying cones plus the thin, hairy, lateral
stemandfine spines that line the underside of the cap are the forthright field marks of
this unique, petite fungus. The stem, though lateral, may occasionally appear to be central
when the cap is deeply indented. The stem is usually longer than the width of the cap and
far thinner than that of any other fungus with spines. The dark colorandsmall size make
it very difficult to see unless you are specifically looking for it.
Clavariadelphus pistillaris (Common Club Coral)
FRUITING_BODY simple, erect, unbranched or sometimes forked; club-shaped or
tapering downward, the apex rounded or somewhat flattened but not normally depressed'
6-20 (30) cm high, 0.8-4 (6) cm broad; surface smooth or often longitudinally wrinkled or
grooved in age; usually pallid at first, but soon dull pinkish-brown to reddish-brown, flesh-
colored, or ochraceous-brown; staining brown to vinaceous-brown when handled or
bruised; apex often yellowish at first but soon colored like the rest of the fruiting body;
base usually pallid, with white hairs. Flesh tough, fibrous or pithy, whitish, bruising brown;
taste mild or bitter SPORE_PRINT white or tinged yellow; spores 9-16 x 5-10 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under hardwoodsandin mixed
woods; widely distributed. It is common in our area from the late fall through early spring,
especially under live oak, tan oak,andmadrone.
EDIBILITY Harmless. The tasteandtexture are reminiscent of stale rope.
COMMENTS The ochre-brown to flesh-colored, club-shaped fruiting body that stains
brown when handled is characteristic of this cosmopolitan club coral. It is the commonest
Clavariadelphus in our areaandthe only one found under hardwoods. Its apex is some-
times quite broad, but not as flagrantly flattened as that of C. truncatus. Other species:
C. subJastigiatus is a brownish-orange species found under conifers in northern California
and elsewhere; it does not discolor as much when handledandturns bright green in
potassium hydroxide (KOH).
Clavariadelphus ligula (Strap Coral) Color Plate 171
FRUITING_BODY simple, erect, unbranched or rarely forked, cylindrical to flattened-
cylindrical or club-shaped, the apex usually rounded or bluntly pointed; 2-10 cm high and
0.3-1 (1.5) cm broad at apex. Surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, dull-colored (buff to
dull yellowish, ochre-buff, pale reddish-brown, orvinaceous-buff); base whitishandhairy,
often with white mycelial threads penetrating the surrounding humus. Flesh white, pithy
but tough; taste mild or bitter. SPORE_PRINT white to pale yellowish; spores 8-18 x 3-6
microns, elongated-elliptical. smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or tufted in humus under conifers; widely
distributed. It is common throughout much of the West in the summerandfall, but
absent or very rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Worthless.
COMMENTS This species is smallerandslimmer than C. pistil/arisandtypically occurs
under conifers rather than hardwoods-often in large troops (see color plate). The apex of
the club is not noticeably flattened or depressed as in C. truncatus.andis not brightly
colored. Other species: C. sachalinensis is a macroscopically identical species with larger,
buff to ochraceous spores; it also grows gregariously in humus under conifers. Another
conifer-lover, C. mucronatus, differs in its whitish, sharply nip pled apex. Still another,
C. subJastigiatus, is somewhat thickerandstains green when touched with potassium
hydroxide (KOH). None of these are worth eating.
Clavariadelphus truncatus (Truncate Club Coral) Color Plate 166
FRUITING_BODY simple, erect, unbranched or occasionally forked; club-shaped or
more often with a broadly flattened or depressed apex (a rudimentary cap); 5-15 (I8) em
highand2.5-8 em broad at apex. Surface smooth or often wrinkled or veined (especially
near apex), more or less pinkish-brown to ochre or brownish-orange, the apex usually
brighter (yellow to golden-yellow or yellow-orange), at least when young; base often pallid,
with white hairs. Flesh rather tough or pithy, white to ochre; taste mild to sweetish or
bittersweet. SPORE_PRINT pale ochre; spores 9-13 x 5-8 microns, elliptical. smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in duff under conifers; widely distributed, but not
nearly as common in our area as C. pistillaris. I have seen large fruitings ofthis species and
its look-alike, C. borealis (see comments), in the fallandwinter in northern California and
in the summer in the Rocky Mountains.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious when sweet. It can be sauteed by itselfandserved for
dessert!
COMMENTS The broad, golden, flattened top distinguishes this species from its cousins
C. pistillarisandC. ligula. The color ofthe fruiting body actually varies considerably from
dull pinkish-brown to bright golden-orange,andthe apex can be quite inflated so as to
resemble a chanterelle (Gomphus or Cantharellus). Other species: C. borealis is a white-
spored version of C. truncatus that sometimes shows a lilac tinge to the fruiting body; it is
commonandwidespread under conifers. C. lovejoyae of the Rocky Mountains is also
similar, but red to reddish-orange in color.
Multiclavula mucida (Scum-Lover)
FRUITING_BODY simple, unbranched or sometimes forked, erect; small (only 0.5-1.5
cm highand1-2 mm thick); cylindrical or tapered; surface smooth, white to creamy, buff,
or yellowish, but often aging salmon to brick-red. Flesh rather waxyandtough, pliant,
white. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-7.5 x 2-3 microns, oblong to elliptical, smooth.
Cystidia absent.
HABITAT In groups-but not clusters-on wet algae-covered wood or occasionally on
soil; northern in distribution. I have seen it in our area in the fallandwinter, but it is in-
conspicuous because of its small size.
EDIBILITY Utterly inconsequential.
COMMENTS The small sizeandassociation with green algae typify the genus Mu/ti-
clavu/a,andthe whitish color of the fresh fruiting bod yandtendency to grow on wood are
characteristic of this species. C/avaria mucida is an older name for it. Other species:
M. verna/is (=C/avaria phycophi/a) is similar but pale orange, has cystidia,andgrows on
algae-covered soil; C/avicorona taxophi/ais smallandwhitishbuthasa widened,flattened
apexandgrows on twigs, needles,andother debris rather than with scum. All of these are
smaller than C/avaria vermicu/arisandshorter than Macrotyphu/ajuncea.
Macrotyphula juncea (Fairy Hair)
FRUITING_BODY simple, unbranched or rarely forked, erect, very thin (up to 2 mm
thick), 3-10 cm high when mature; cylindrical or tapering upward; leather-colored to
yellowish-buff or pallid, smooth; tip acute or in age sometimes blunt; base somewhat
fibrilloseandoften creeping horizontally, often with large whitish mycelial threads (rhizo-
morphs) attached. Flesh very thin; taste sometimes acrid. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
6-12 x 3.5-5.5 microns, elliptical or almond-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in humusandleaf litter, on rotting twigs, etc.; widely
distributed. It occurs in our area on oakandtanoakleavesand redwood needles, butiseasy
to overlook. It is fairly common in the fallandwinter, especially along streamsandin other
dank places.
EDIBILITY Utterly irrelevant-a couple hundred would be needed for a mouthful!
COMMENTS This species is so thin that it can be mistaken for the bare stem of anherba-
ceous plant or a small agaric that has lost its cap. Its slimness alone separates it from our
other common coralandclub fungi. Its generic disposition is problematic-some authors
place it in Typhu/a (other Typhu/a species are similar in sizeandshape but arise from a
small beadlike body or sclerotium); it has also been placed in Clavariaand Clavariadelphus
and may eventually merit a genus of its own. Other species: M. j;stulosa (=Clava,;a-
delphus f;stulosus) has a very long (7-30 cm), slender (2-8 mm), hollow fruiting body
that is yellowish to brownish; it grows on dead sticksanddebris, especially of alder.
Clavaria vermicularis (Fairy Fingers)
FRUITING_BODY simple, unbranched (but usually clustered) or rarely forked at the tip,
erect or often curved, slender, soon withering; 3-12 (15) cm tall, 3-5 mm thick; surface pure
white to translucent white or often stained yellowandyellowing in age from the tip down-
ward; cylindrical or flattened somewhat, smooth or sometimes grooved, usually tapered
toward the tip, which is acute or sometimes bluntandoften discolored. Flesh thin, white,
very brittle or fragile. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5-7 x 3-4 microns, elliptical to nearly
round, smooth.
HABITAT In tufts, clusters, or groups, often with solitary fruiting bodies interspersed, on
ground in woods or grassy places; widely distributed. Common in our area throughout the
mushroom season, but most prevalent in DecemberandJanuary, especially in dank
wooded areas.
EDIBILITY Edible but insubstantial; the fragile watery flesh has little or no flavor and
dissolves when chewed.
COMMENTS The distinctive clumps of slender white "fingers" make this species most
attractive. It is by far our most common Clavaria. growing wherever moisture is sufficient.
It is not as deeply wrinkled as C. fumosa or Clavu/ina rugosa (see comments under the
Clavu/ina cristata group),andit crumbles seemingly without provocation.
Cia varia purpurea (Purple Fairy Club) Color Plate 167
FRUITING_BODY simple, unbranched but often clustered, erect, 2.5-12 cm tall, 2-6 mm
thick; gra yish-purple to deep purple or purple when fresh, fading as it ages to la vender-gray,
lavender-buff, purple-brown. smoky-brown, etc.; cylindrical or tapered; tip acute or blunt;
base usually paler and/or with white hairs. Flesh white or purplish, brittle. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 5.5-9 x 3-5 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth. Cystidia inter-
mingled with basidia.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious (often in tufts or clusters) on ground in wet
areas, usually under or near conifers; common during the summer under spruceandfir
in the Rocky Mountains, also found in the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia (but not in
our area). I have seen large fruitings in New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Edible, but thin-fleshedandfragile.
COMMENTS The purple color immediately distinguishes this beautiful species from
other fairy clubs. Clavaria (=Clavulina) zollingeri is a sparingly to profusely branched
purple species occasionally found in eastern North America. For other branched purple
coral fungi, see Clavulina cinerea. C. amethystina.andRamariopsis pulchella (under
C. cinerea)andRamaria fumigata.
C/avariafumosa (Grayish Fairy Club)
FRUITING_BODY simple, unbranched (but usually clustered), erect, 3-10 (14) cm tall,
2-7 mm thick; surface grayish to yellowish-gray (color variable), usually grooved or
wrinkled longitudinally, often somewhat flattened or twisted and/or hollow in age; tip
usually blunt, sometimes brownish; base often paler or whitish. Flesh brittle, whitish.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 5 x 34 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT In tufts or clusters on ground in woods or grassy areas; widely distributed but
not common. I ha ve found it several times under oakandmadrone in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Harmless, fleshless, flavorless.
COMMENTS The gray to yellowish-gray (or occasionally brownish-gray) color, fre-
quently wrinkled surface,andclustered but unbranched fruiting bodies typify this forget-
table fairy club. Other species: C. rubicundula is just as forgettable but more fragile, and
usually slightly pinker (dingy flesh-colored to pinkish-gray to vinaceous-buff).
C/avu/inopsis /aetic%r (Golden Fairy Club)
FRUITING_BODY simple (unbranched or occasionally forked once) but often tufted;
erect, small, cylindrical or often somewhat flattened, grooved, and/or twisted; 1.5-6.5(10)
cm tall but usually about 34 cm, 1-5 (10) mm thick; surface bright orangetoyellow(some-
times yellower below) to yellow-ochre or in some forms orange-red, often duller(yellow-
ish-buff) as it dries or fades; extreme base whitish; tip usually acute, often brownish in age
or when dry. Flesh thin, somewhat pliant, pallid or yellowish; odorandtaste mild.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores 4.5-7 (9) x 3.5-5.5 (6.5) microns, broadly elliptical to nearly
round to triangular or pear-shaped, smooth, prominently apiculate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, tufted, or in groups on mossy banks, wet soil,andwood-
land humus; widespreadandcommon, fruiting in our area in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Inconsequential.
COMMENTS Also known as Clavariapulchra, this dainty fairy club can be distinguished
from all but a few close relatives (see below) by its bright yellow to orange or sometimes
reddish-orange 'color. It is not viscid like the coral-like jelly fungi (Calocera).anddoes
not usually grow on wood. Certain earth tongues (e.g., Microglossum rufumandNeo-
lecta irregularis) are similarly colored, but have more enlarged fertile "heads"andbear
their spores in asci rather than on basidia. There are a number of closely related, brightly
colored fairy clubs, including: Clavulinopsis helvola, with anguar-warty spores; C.Jusi-
Jormis, taller (5-15 cm)andbright yellow with round spores, usually found in bundles in
grass or humus (common in eastern North American, also found in California); C.
gracillima (=c. luteoalba), with a well-defined sterile base or "stalk"; C. appalachiensis,
creamy to creamy-yellow with a deep ochre "stalk"; C. miniata, pale pinkish-orange or
apricot-colored; C. aurantio-cinnabarina, a rare but widely distributed striking blood-
red to orange or pinkish-orange species with only slightly apiculate spores;andC. sub-
australis, with a delicate pink fertile portionanddark yellow to orange "stalk." Finally,
there is Clavaria rosea, a beautiful rose-pink species that occurs occasionally in eastern
North America but hasn't yet been found in California. None of these are worth eating.
C lavulinopsis corniculata
FRUITING_BODY branched {sometimes sparingly)fromacommon base or stalk, usually
smallanddelicate-looking; 2-9 cm highandbroad (but usually 2-5 cm). BRANCHES
smooth, mostly hollow, bright yellow to yellow-orange or egg-yellow to deep ochraceous,
sometimes fading when dry or in age to creamy-buff; tips acute. STALK 24 mm thick,
colored like branches or duller, often with a coating of downy mycelium at base. Flesh
rather tough, thin, whitish; odor mild or farinaceous; taste mild or bitter. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 4.5-7.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth, apiculate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or dead wood in forestsandat
their edges, in grassy areas, etc.; widely distributed. I have found it locally under cypress
and oak in DecemberandJanuary, accompanied by C. /aetic%randnumerous waxy
caps (HygrocybeandCamarophyllus species).
EDIBILITY Probably edible, but too small to be of value.
COMMENTS The bright yellow to ochre colorandmodest size make this branched coral
fungus fairly easy to recognize. Other yellow to orange coralandclub fungi are either
unbranched (see C. laeticolor) or much largerandfleshier(see Ramaria). The jelly fungus
genus Calocera is somewhat similar, but usually has a viscid fruiting body. Other small
branched species include: C. umbrine//a (=C/avaria cineroides), a dingy buff to grayish
or brownish species with round sporesandseveral primary branches that arise from a
common base or "trunk," occasional in our area in the fallandwinter(usually in forests),
but more widely distributed; C. ho/mskjo/dii, which resembles C. umbrinella but has
purplish branch tipsandan aniselike odor when fresh; C. dichotomaandC. subti/is, which
are both white to faintly yellowish;andC/avu/ina (=C/avaria) ornatipes, with pallid to
pinkish-gray to brownish branchesanda hairy brown stalk or "trunk."
Clavulina cinerea (Ashy Coral Mushroom) Color Plate 169
FRUITING_BODY erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched, 2-11 cm tall and
broad. BRANCHES often irregular in shape, often resulting in a somewhat tangled ap-
pearance; pallid soon becoming grayish to ashy-gray, purple-gray, bluish-gray, dark gray,
or even brownish-gray; smooth or wrinkled to somewhat flattened; tips acute or blunt,
often forked. STALK present as a short, fleshy sterile base or "trunk"; colored like the
branches, or often whitish at the very base. Flesh white, brittle; taste usually mild. SPORE
PRINT white; spores 6.5-11 x 5.5-10 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round, smooth.
Basidia 2-spored.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground in mixed woodsandunder
conifers; widely distributed but mainly northern. In California I have seen it in the fall and
winter, but have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly rated by some authorities, but rather fragileandinsipid
in my experience.
COMMENTS The ash-gray to dark gray or purple-tinged fruiting body separates this
conifer-lover from other branched coral fungi. Microscopically it is distinct by virtue
ofits2-spored basidia withcurvedsporestalks(sterigmata). Thee. crislalagroup is closely
related but paler in color. C. (=Clavaria) amethystina is a beautiful purple branched
species; it is found occasionally in easternN orth AmericaandI have found it( or something
very similar) near Aptos, California, under redwoodandtanoak. R amariopsis pulchella
is a very small, sparingly branched, lavender species. Clavaria zollingeri (see comments
under C. purpurea) is also smallandpurple, but has 4-spored basidia.
Clavulina cristata group (Crested Coral; Wrinkled Coral)
FRUITING_BODY erect but extremely variable in shapeandform, 2-7 (l2)cmhigh, upto
5 cm broad; "typical" form branched, but other forms sparsely or irregularly branched and
still others unbranched. BRAN CHES smooth in typical form, uneven or knobby or longi-
tudinally wrinkled or flattened in other forms; tip(s) acuteandoften finely toothed in
"typical" form, but bluntandoften enlarged in others; color usually white, but some-
times tinged gray, buff, yellowish, or pinkish; tip(s) often darkening in age or dry weather.
STALK present as a sterile base; slender, white or darkened by a paraite. Flesh white,
brittle to rather tough. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-11 (14) x 6.5-10 (12) microns,
nearly round, smooth. Basidia 2-spored.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or densely gregarious on ground in woodsandgrassy
areas; widely distributedandcommon from sea level up to timberline. In our area this
group fruits throughout the mushroom seasonandis especially prevalent under pine.
EDIBILITY Edible. Some rate it highly, others do not.
COMMENTS This species "complex" is extremely polymorphic (variable in shape and
form),andas a result is likely to confound the beginner. The"typical"formisdistinguished
from Ramariopsis kunzei (which is also whiteandbranched) by its frequently crested
(finely toothed) branch tips, smooth spores,andtendency ofthe stalk to darken in age when
attacked by a fungal parasite. The unbranched to sparingly branched, wrinkled or knobby
form, which is often called C. rugosa, is also common in our area (see photo at top of next
page). It is likely to be confused with species of Clavaria. which are differently colored
and/or smoothandmore regular in appearance. It also seems to intergrade with "typical"
C. cristata. Another closely related species, C. cinerea. is usually darker (see description
on p. 641). Also see Clavulinopsis dichotomaandC. subti/is (under C. corniculata).
Clavicorona pyxidata (Crown Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a common base or "stalk"; 5-12.5 cm high
and 2-8 cm wide. BRANCHES usually arising in tiers from the enlarged tips of lower
branches; whitish to pale yellow when young, becoming dull ochre to tan or tinged pinkish,
but lower portion often darkening to brownish or grayish-brown in age; tips usually
enlargedandpyxidate(i.e., crownlike or terminating in fringed cups). STALK presentasa
slender, short sterile base or "trunk"; colored like lower branches. Flesh white, tough and
rather pliant; taste often somewhat acrid (peppery). SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3.5 x
2-3 microns, elliptical, smooth, amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on dead hardwoods, especially aspen, willow, and
cottonwood; very widely distributedandcommon in some regions. I have seen it often in
the southern Rocky Mountains. It also occurs in northern California, but I have yet to
find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible, but rather stringyandtough.
COMMENTS The crownlike branch ti ps, pale color,andgrowth on wood distinguish this
widespread coral mushroom. Several RamariaandLentaria species grow on wood (see
R. stricta), but do not have crownlike branch tips. Other species: C. avellanea is grayish-
brown with paler crownlike tips; it grows on rotting conifers.
Ramariopsis kunzei (White Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched, 2.5-10 cm tall and
3-8 cm wide. BRANCHES white to creamy-white, often tinged pinkish in age; smooth,
not usually compact; tips blunt or acute. STALK absent or present only as a short, fragile,
sometimes hairy base. Flesh white, fragile; taste mild. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 3-5.5
x 2.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptical to round, minutely spiny. Basidia 4-spored.
HABITAT Scattered todensely gregarious on ground in mixed woodsandunder conifers,
frequently hidden in the duff; widely distributed. Itiscommonin our redwood forests from
late fall through early spring, but is not restricted to that habitat.
EDIBILITY Harmless, fleshless, flavorless.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Clavaria kunzei, this ubiquitous branched coral
fungus is best recognized in the field by its white colorandmarked fragility. It is more
profusely branched than typical Clavu/ina cristataandlacks the toothed branch tips
often found in that species,andhas ornamented spores. Other species: R. californica is
a rare, smooth-spored, branched, white to yellowish species.
Tremellodendropsis tuberosa
FRUITING_BODY rather sparsely branched from a tough base (stalk) or sometimes
scarcely branched; 2-7 (10) cm high, 0.54 cm broad. BRANCHES usually somewhat
flattened (especially the lower ones), erect, tough, whitish to buff, brownish, or grayish,
sometimes with a purple or pinkish tinge (caused by a parasite?); tips often paler and
brighter (whiter) when actively growing. STALK well-developed, usually one-third to one-
half the height of fruiting body; colored like branches or paler, often with a coating of
white mycelial down. Flesh white, tough, not staining. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
13-20 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elongated-elliptical or spindle-shaped, smooth. Many or all of
the basidia appearing partially septate (partitioned) longitudinally at their apices.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on ground in woods or clearings; widely distributed. It is
fairly common in coastal California in the late fallandwinter, especially with bracken fern,
redwood, or cypress, but is easily overlooked because of its humble appearance.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS This rather nondescript coral fungus is included here because it represents
a possible "bridge" between the coral fungi, which have" normal" club-shaped basidia, and
the jelly fungi, some of which are coral-likeandhave longitudinally septate (partitioned)
basidia. In the field it can be told by its rather long stalk or trunk, pale or dingy color,
tough texture,andgrowth on the ground. Lentaria. byssiseda (see comments under
Ramaria strict a) is a rather similar whitish to pinkish-tan species that often grows on wood,
has less flattened branches, "normal" basidia,andwhite mycelial threads at the base of the
stalk. It is widely distributed, but in California is more common in the Sierra Nevada than
on the coast. Other species: T remellodendron pallidum (= T. schweinitzii) of eastern North
America is a beautiful whitish branched species that is classified as a jelly fungus because
it has longitudinally partitioned basidia. It is common under hardwoods along with a
smaller relative, T. candidum,andcan be distinguished from other whitish coral fungi by its
tough or tenacious textureandflattened branches (see photograph). Another eastern
hardwood-lover, Tremella reticulata, has very blunt, hollow, somewhat gelatinous,
white branches.
Ramaria stricta (Strict Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a poorly developed base or stalk; 4-12 cm
highand3-10 cm broad. BRANCHES erect, slender, mostly parallel, usually compact
but sometimes openly branched, sometimes grooved or flattened slightly; pale yellow
becoming pinkish-tan to tawny-buff, orangish, or sometimes light brown, usually
staining slowly brown or vinaceous-brown when bruised; branch tips fine, pale yellow to
pale greenish-yellow when fresh. STALK rudimentary or practically absent, not well-
developed. Flesh tough, pliant; odor often faintly sweetish; taste often somewhat metallic
or bitter. SPORE_PRINT cinnamon-buff to yellowish; spores 7-10 x 3.5-5.5 microns,
elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or tufts on rotting logsandbranches (mostly of hard-
woods but also conifers); widely distributed. It is common in our area in the late fall and
winter, but seldom fruits in large numbers.
EDIBILITY Inedible-there is very little fleshandthe flavor is not pleasing.
COMMENTS This is one of several Ramarias that grow on wood, though it may form
"log lines" (i.e., grow in rows originating from buried or extremely decomposed logs). The
upright, parallel orientation of the branches (see photo on p. 631) plus the yellowish branch
tips are distinctive. The form that grows on conifers is often rather bushyandyellowish
when young, while the one that grows on hardwoods is usually oranger. Other wood-
inhabiting species: R. apiculata favors conifers but is dull buffy-tan to dull orange-brown
or vinaceous-cinnamon (often with whitish tips when young). It is widespread and
common, also bruises brown,andin one form exhibits green to blue-green tints on the
branch tips and/or stalk base. R. acris (=R. rubella) is usually acrid-tastingandpinkish-
tinged when young with paler tips but becomes reddish-brown or darker throughout
in age. Lentaria pinicolaandL. byssiseda (both placed in Ramar;a by some authorities)
grow on logs (mostly coniferous) or lignin-rich humusandhave smooth whitish spores.
The former is tan to yellowish with spores shorter than 10 microns, while the latter is
pallid to pinkish-tan, sometimes has greenish branch tips,andhas longer spores. Both
species have white mycelial threads or cottony material at the base; L. byss;seda is espe-
cially common in the Sierra Nevada (but is widespread). None of these are worth eating.
R amaria myceliosa
FRUITING_BODY abruptlyandprofusely branched from a slender base (stalk); 2-6 (10)
cm highandbroad. BRANCHES slender, spreading, pliant, yellowish to tan, ochraceous,
olive-ochre, cinnamon-buff, or dull orange, etc.; tips same color. STALK slender, pliant,
not very fleshy; same color as branches or paler, with abundant white mycelial threads
(rhizomorphs) attached to base and/or permeating the surrounding humus. Flesh thin,
whitish, pliant; taste usually bitter. SPORE_PRINT yellowish or pale ochraceous; spores
3.5-6x 2-4 microns, elliptical to nearly round, minutely spiny.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in duff under conifers; known only from the
west coast, but similar species (see comments) are more widely distributed. In our area it
is often abundant under redwood in the fall, winter,andearly spring.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but hardly worth experimenting with because of its small size
and bitterish taste.
COMMENTS This is one of several small (usually less than 10 cm high), dull, pliant,
terrestrial Ramarias with a conspicuous white mycelial matandminutely spiny spores.
Other members of the club include: R. pusilla, an eastern version of R. myceliosa; R.
invalii, with golden to dull yellowish-orange branchesandspores 6-8.5x 4-6 microns; R.
flaccida, pale creamy-ochre with paler tipsandspores 5-8 microns long; R. suecica, pallid
to pinkish-tan with spores 8-10 microns long; R. gracilis, with minutely roughened rather
than spiny sporesanda frequent licorice-like odor; andR. murrillii, with cinnamon-brown
to dark reddish-brown branchesanda whitish base plus spiny spores, found in south-
eastern North America. None of these grow on wood like R. str;ctaandrelatives, nor
do they develop the greenish or blue-green stains typical of R. ab;et;na.
Ramaria abietina (Green-Staining Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a slender base (stalk); 2-10 cm high and
broad. BRANCHES slender, pliant, ochraceous to pale cinnamon becoming olive-brown
to dingy brown in age, slowly staining greenish or blue-green when bruised or as it matures,
especially the lower branches. STALK up to 2.5 cm long, slender, white to ochraceous or
colored like branches, with white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at base and/or in
surrounding humus. Flesh pliant, often discoloring slightly vinaceous-brown; taste usually
bitter. SPORE_PRINT pale yellowish-tan; spores 5.5-8 x 3-4.5 microns, elliptical, minutely
spiny.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in duff under conifers (less commonly hard-
woods); widely distributed. It is common in our area from the fall through early spring,
especially under redwood.
EDIBILITY Too small, tough, and/or bitter to bother with.
COMMENTS The tendency of the lower branches to develop greenish stains distinguishes
this species, which is also known as R. ochraceov;rens, from the throngs of other small,
pliant, buff to dingy ochraceous, terrestrial Ramarias (see R. myceliosa). The green-
staining is especially evident in cold weather,andcan be enhanced-if there is any doubt-
by placing the fruiting body in a freezer. R. apiculata (see comments under R. stricta)
may stain greenish, but normally grows on wood.
Ramariafennica (Bitter Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY typically with two to four large primary branches arising from a
common base (stalk),andmany smaller secondary branches arising from the primary ones;
6-18 cm highand5-12 cm broad. BRANCHES smooth, mostly erect, olive-gray to olive-
umber to smoky-yellow, grayish-tan, Or yellow-brown, the basal (primary) branches
dark olive-brown with a violet tinge when fresh; tips olive-yellow to dingy buff. STALK
large, fleshy, white below, upper portion colored like the branchesandusually tinged
violet when fresh. Flesh white, firm but brittle; taste often bitterish. SPORE_PRINT pale
ochraceous; spores 8.5-12 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical, roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus under both hard woodsand conifers;
widely distributed. In our area it is usually associated, like other fleshy Ramarias, with
tanoak. It is not normally a common species, but occasionally fruits in great abundance
in the fallandearly winter.
EDIBILITY Unknown; the bitterish taste (when present) is a deterrent.
COMMENTS One of our most lovely coral fungi, this species is easily told by its overall
shape (see photograph)anddull color, plus the subtle violet tinge to the lower branches and
top of the trunk (when fresh). In contrast to many of the larger Ramarias, it is typically taller
than it is wide. R.fennn;ca var. v;olaceibrunnea is a more precise name for the west coast
variant. Other species: R.Jumos;avellanea is a rare similarly-colored species with a much
smaller base. R. acr;s;ccescens, called the "Blah Ramaria" by Kit Scates in her extensive
key to Ramarias of the Pacific Northwest, is a common dull-colored species with slender,
erect branchesanda slim, tapered base plus an acrid or bitter taste, at least when cooked.
It is common under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but I have not seen it in our area.
Ramariafumigata (Violet Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY typically with two to four large primary branches arising from a
common base (stalk),andmany smaller secondary branches arising from the primary ones;
5-12 cm highand8-12 cm broad. BRANCHES smooth, violet or lilac, slowly discoloring
dingy yellowish-brown or smoky-yellow in old age; tips also violet. STALK distinct as
a white fleshy base or "trunk" below the main branches. Flesh white, firm; taste slightly
bitter or acrid. SPORE_PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8.5-11 x 34 microns, elliptical,
roughened.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on ground in woods; widely distributed, but
apparently very rare in California. I have found it only once in our area, near Boulder
Creek, under tanoakandDouglas-fir, in December.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The violet branchesandbranch tips make this beautiful Ramaria un-
mistakable. It is closely allied to R. jennica. but is somewhat smaller in my experience,
and more vividly colored. Other distinctly purple coral fungi are more sparsely branched
and/or have white spores (see comments under Cia varia purpureaandClavu/ina cinerea).
Other species: R. cedretorum, reported by Kit Scates from northern Idaho, is another rare
amethyst-colored species. It does not discolor as much in ageandhas slightly larger spores.
Ramaria rasilispora (Yellow Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY abundantly branched from a fleshy base or stalk, 540 cm high and
broad. BRANCHES smooth, mostly erect, creamy to pale yellow (var. scatesiana) Or
yellow to yellow-orange Or pale orange (var. rasilispora), but the lower branches often
whitish when very youngandbranches in both varieties often pale Or dull orange to ochra-
ceous in old age; tips yellow or same color as branches, sometimes brownish in age. STALK
fleshy, tapering to a point or rooting; white or whitish. Flesh brittle or fibrous, often with
watery areas, white; taste mild. SPORE_PRINT pale orange-yellow or ochraceous; spores
8-12x 34.5 microns, cylindrical, smooth Or slightly roughened.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered Or in groups or rings on ground in woods; common in
the Westandprobably more widely distributed. In Our area it fruits in the fallandwinter
under tanoak Or less commonly live oak, but in other regions it is common under conifers,
especially fir. In mountain ranges such as the Sierra Nevada it usually fruits in the spring
and early summer, as does R. magnipes (see comments), which is common from the Siski-
you Mountains northward under hemlock, fir,andother conifers.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite popular, but difficult to cleanandsometimes lacking in
flavor. Coral fungus connoisseur Herb Saylor says it's good raw in salads or candied like
grapefruit rinds. Some people, however, are adversely affected by it,andR. magnipes
(see comments) is sometimes bitter when cooked.
COMMENTS The fleshy, terrestrial, yellowish Ramarias do not lend themselves to glib
categorization. As a group, however, they are easily recognized by their shapeandcolor,
and none appear to be dangerously poisonous. The names R. flavaandR. aurea have
traditionally been applied indiscriminately to practically all yellow coral fungi, but are
inadequate for the many variants in the group. R. rasilispora is probably the most com-
mon yellow species in California. R. magnipes is a very similar, characteristic feature
of the springtime mushroom flora of western mountains. It differs in having a larger
(7-14 x 4-6 cm), rooting, steeply tapered Or broadly conical stalk, yellow (never orange) ==
branches,andslightly longer spores. Other fleshy, terrestrial. yellow Ramarias include:
R. flavobrunnescens, which usually has a sweet odor, yellow branches that become
brownish-yellow (or brownish-tipped) in age,andis very common at times in the Pacific
Northwest under western hemlock; R.flavigelatinosa(see comments under R. gelatinosa),
with watery-gelatinous or sometimes cartilaginous flesh; R. aurantiisiccescens, with
yellow-orange to orange branchesanda yellow zone near ground level;andR. aurea,
a pale orange to yellow species that is said to be common under hardwoods in eastern
North America. None of these bruise wine-red at the base as in the R. sanguinea group
(or the "true" R. flava),andnone are choice edibles.
Ramaria sanguinea group (Bleeding Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or"stalk";4-25 cmormore high
and broad. BRAN CHES smooth, mostly erect; pale or clear yellow, the ti ps usually slightly
brighter yellow; lower (primary) branches turning dark red or vinaceous to reddish-or
vinaceous-brown when bruised. STALK fleshy, tapered below, often very short; white or
whitish, typically staining dark red or wine-red to vinaceous-brown when bruised or
already with such stains. Flesh white or yellowish, rather brittle; taste mild. SPORE
PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8.5-12 x 3.54 microns, oblong or elongated-elliptical,
roughened or smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground under both hardwoodsandconi-
fers; widely distributed. In our area this species "complex" fruits in the late fallandwinter
under tanoak. but is not as numerous as R. rasilispora. In the Pacific Northwest and
northern California several similar species (see comments) are common under conifers in
the fall,andI have also seen large fruitings near Lake Tahoe in October.
EDIBILITY Presumably consumable; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS The yellow branchesandtendency to stain vinaceous or reddish-brown
plus the mild tasteandnon-gelatinous flesh are the telltale traits of this lovely coral mush-
roomandits close relatives. R.Jlava is a very similar, longer-spored species that has not
yet been reported from the west coast. Actually, there is considerable doubt as to whether
the "true" R. sanguinea occurs in the West, but there are a number of similar vinaceous-
staining species, including: R. v;nos;maculans, with creamy to light yellow branch tips
and vinaceous stains at the base (and sometimes on the branches),andR. rub;g;nosa, a
fleshy species with darker yellow tipsandprominent vinaceous or purplish-brown stains at
the base. Both of these species are common under conifers in Californiaandthe Pacific
Northwest, particularly in the fall. Two other yellow, vinaceous-staining species. R.
cyst;d;ophoraandR. synaptopoda, differ in possessing a coating of cottony white fuzz
at the base. The former is often fragrant while the latter resembles a bundle of strings with
"ox-blood red" spots at the baseandusually has a pungent-sweet odor. For vinaceous-
staining species with oranger or pinker branches, see comments under the R. formosa
group,andalso check R. conjunctipes (couplet #21 of the key to Ramaria)andthe species
discussed under R. ge/atinosa.
Ramariaformosa group (Pinkish Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base (stalk); 5-20 cm highandwide.
BRANCHES smooth or grooved, mostly erect; pinkish to pinkish-orange, salmon,
pinkish-tan, or even reddish, fading to pinkish-buff, tan, Or dingy ochraceous in age; tips
yellow or colored like branches when fresh, also fading. STALK fleshy, usually tapering
downward; white at base, otherwise colored like branches (or paler). Flesh brittle to
fibrous, whitish or becoming pinkish to orange in age, not gelatinous; taste usually mild
but often astringent or bitter when cooked. SPORE_PRINT pale ochraceous; spores
9-12.5 x 3.5-6 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or rings on ground in woods, widely
distributed. In the Pacific NorthwestandRocky Mountains it is one of the most common
Ramarias, fruiting mainly under conifers, but also hardwoods. In our area it favors tanoak
(like just about every other fleshy Ramaria)andis fairly common in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Said to have cathartic effects on some (or many) individuals. Until the
identity of our variety (or varieties) is definitely established, it is best left alone.
COMMENTS The above description encompasses several forms that pose great dif-
ficulties to the avid coral-categorizer but have collectively passed under the name R.
formosa in North America. The pinkish to pinkish-orange to pinkish-tan branches and
non-gelatinous flesh are the main field marks, but older specimens are easily confused with
other species. The European R. formosa is said to stain cinnamon to vinaceous-brown or
blackish when bruised (at least at the base). Several forms in the Pacific Northwest do,
whereas the one in our area does not. Which is the "true" R.formosa is for the Ramaria-
researchers to decide! Similar species which stain include: R. rubr;brunnescensandR.
maculat;pes, both bruising vinaceous or burgundy (the former often fragrant); the R
formosa of the Pacific Northwest already alluded to, which bruises brown;andR. testa-
ceoflava var. brunnea (=R. brunnea), a handsome, bitter-tasting conifer-lover of the
Pacific Northwest with "apricot-buff' to golden-yellow branches that soon become
brownishandquickly stain reddish-brown, plus a brown-staining base. Similarly-colored
western species that do not stain include: R. leptoformosaandR. rubr;carnata, common
in the Pacific Northwest under conifers, the latter with a stout, chunky fruiting body and
salmon-tinged flesh inside the branches; R. long;spora, with a yellow zone or band near
or at ground-level when young; R. cyane;granosa, whose fruiting body is often flattened
(somewhat fanlike);andR. largent;;, a beautiful species that is orange to deep orange
throughout (never pinkishandnot yellow-tipped).
Ramaria gelatinosa (Gelatinous Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or "stalk"; 5-15 cm high and
wide. BRANCHES mostly smoothanderect, orange to pinkish-orange to orange-buff,
pinkish-brown, or occasionally yellow-orange, sometimes developing a faint purple-gray
tinge in age. STALK or main trunk whitish, rather tough. Flesh colored like branches or
palerandshowing translucent, often gelatinous pockets or streaks when stalk is sectioned
lengthwise; taste often bitter. SPORE_PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 7-10 x 4.5-6
microns, elliptical, roughened (warted).
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in duff under conifers (hemlock, fir, etc.);
common in the fall in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but more widely
distributed. I have yet to find it south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Poisonous to some people (causing diarrheaanddigestive upset); apparently
edible for others, but hardly worth the risk.
COMMENTS The gelatinous interior of the baseandoverall dingy pinkish to dull orange
color are the forthright features of this fungus. It is most likely to be mistaken for the
R. formosa group, which does not have gelatinous flesh. The above description is for
R. gelat;nosa var. oregonens;s. The typical variety, which was originally collected under
hardwoods in the southeastern states, is similar but paler (creamy) when young. Other
western species with gelatinous or semi-gelatinous flesh include: R .flav;gelat;nosa, which
is yellower in colorandquite common on the west coast; R. gelat;n;aurant;aandR. san-
darac;na, both with orange to deep orange branchesandorange to yellow tips,anda band
of yellow just above ground level (near the bases of the branches);andR. cartilag;nea,
a yellowish-tan to tan or brownish-yellow species with cartilaginous to very slightly
gelatinous flesh. N one of these are worth eating.-
Ramaria araiospora (Red Coral Mushroom) Color Plate 168
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base (stalk); 4-13 cm high, 3-10 cm
broad or more. BRAN CHES smooth. brilliant coral-red to red, crimson, or even magenta,
but often fading to coral-pink, light red, orange, or even paler in old age; tips red to
yellowish, fading slightly in age. STALK usually rather short, white or whitish (or dis-
colored) at base, colored like branches (or paler) above. Flesh brittle; taste mild or slightly
krautlike. SPORE_PRINT pale ochraceous; spores 8-13 x 3-5 microns, elliptical to
cylindrical, roughened. Flesh in base of stalk not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups on ground in woods; known
only from the west coast. I find it every year in the fallandwinter under tanoak, but it is
not as common in our area as some of the other fleshy Ramarias. Farther north it fre-
quently occurs with hemlockandother conifers.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible, but not as fleshy as R. botrytisandR. rasilispora. Be sure
not to confuse faded specimens with the R.formosa group!
COMMENTS The brilliant red color of fresh specimens makes this gorgeous coral
mushroom unmistakable. It used to pass under the name R. subbotrytis. but that species
is apparently eastern in distribution. There are at least two distinct varieties of R. araio-
spora: var. ara;ospora, with yellowish branch tips in age,andvar. rubella, with red tips.
As in other Ramarias, the color tends to fade with age,andold specimens barely hint at
their former splendor. R. cyane;granosa is a somewhat similar species that has broader
sporesandis usually more peach-colored when fresh. R. stuntz;;, common in northern
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest, is similar to R. araiospora in color or can show
more yellow below, deep red or magenta near the tips,andorange in between, but it has
amyloid flesh in the stalk. R. subbotryt;s is an eastern species with salmon-orange to pink
branchesandbranch tips when fresh, but it becomes duller or slightly yellower in age.
Ramaria botrytis (Pink-Tipped Coral Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY profusely branched from a fleshy base or stalk; sometimes massive,
7-20 cm highand6-30 cm broad or more when mature; usually very compact when young,
but less so in age. BRANCHES often crowded, white or pallid when young, gradually
becoming buff to dull ochraceous or tan in age; tips typically short, clef ted, blunt, pink to
purple, vinaceous, or red when fresh (but orange to brownish-orange in var. aurant;;-
ramosa), fading in age. STALK thick (1.5-6 cm), fleshy, the base often rounded and
swollen at or above ground level; white or whitish when fresh, tan to ochraceousin old age.
Flesh firm, solid, white; taste mild in some forms, somewhat bitter in others. SPORE
PRINT pale ochraceous to ochre-buff; spores 11-16 (20) x 4-6 microns, oblong-elliptical to
nearly cylindrical, longitudinally lined (striate).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or rings on ground in woods, often partially
buried in the humus; very widely distributed. Along with R. strasseri (see comments) it is
common in the Pacific NorthwestandSierra Nevada under conifers in the summer, fall,
and spring (but is less common in the spring than R. rubripermanens-see comments). In
our area it favors tanoakandother hardwoodsandfruits in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, according to some. However, it has laxative effects on
some individualsandbitter look-alikes (see comments) occur. It is one of the largest and
fleshiest of all the Ramarias, so it is definitely worth trying.
COMMENTS This handsome, compact coral mushroom is reminiscent of a cauliflower
-more so, in fact, than the cauliflower mushroom (Sparassis). Young specimens with
stubby pink-or purple-tipped branches are the most readily recognized of all the Ramarias
(see photo). In age, however, the fruiting body discolorsandofte loses its compact form,
and it is then easily confused with other Ramarias. The longitudinally striate spores,
however, are distinctive. There are several closely related species with longitudinally striate
spores. One,R. strasser;, is quitecommon(at least in western North America), but typically
has a tapered, rooting stalkanda frequently fragrant or spicy-sweet odor; it is whitish to
ochraceous or tan with whitish to ochre, tan, dull orange, or brownish tips. A second,R.
secunda, closely resembles R. strasseri, but has shorter spores. A third,R. rubr;permanens,
is colored like typical R. botrytis, but has shorter spores (less than 13 microns long). A
fourth, R. rubr;evanescens, also has short spores, but shows pink on the branch tips only
when very youngandis often entirely white or creamy at maturity. All ofthese occur in
western North America, mainly (but not exclusively) with conifers. Finally, there is R.
botryto;des, a widespread species that mimics R. botrytis in color (whitish with pink
to purplish branch tips) but has an exceedingly acrid taste that can linger in one's mouth
for up to twelve hours after tasting it! This species, which occurs occasionally in our area,
also differs in having non-striate (or only very faintly striate) spores, suggesting a closer
kinship to R. araiospora than to R. botrytis.
Sparass;s cr;spa (Cauliflower Mushroom) Color Plate 172
FRUITING_BODY a compactly branched mass of flattened, leafy lobes arising from a
tough, rooting base or "stalk"; 12-60 cm or more highandbroad. BRANCHES (lobes)
flattened, thin, usually leafy in appearance; wavy, crisped, or crimped, pliant; surfaces of
lobes smooth, whitish to creamy or yellowish, often becoming cinnamon-buff or tan in age
or dry weather, sometimes with darker brown stains on the edges. STALK 5-13 cm long,2-5
cm thick, usually tapered downward, fleshy but very tough, buried deep in ground (or
wood). Flesh firm, white, fairly tough or elastic; odor spicy-fragrant. SPORE_PRINT
white; spores 5-7 x 3-5 microns, broadly elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Parasitic on the roots of conifers, usually growing solitary at or near the bases
of trunks or stumps; found in the coniferous forests of western North America. It is not
uncommon in our coastal pine forests, fruiting in the same spot year after year (or some-
times twice a year), usually in the late fall or winter. It also grows on Douglas-firandother
members of the pine family. It produces a brown or yellow carbonizing rot in its host, and
is economically significant in some regions. The best place to look for it is in older forests
where there are plenty of mature trees. S. spathu/ata (see below) can grow on hardwoods.
EDIBILITY Edibleandexceptional. The perfect mushroom for a special occasion, it is as
elegant as it looks intelligent. Thorough cooking is necessary, however, to render it tender,
and it is a royal pain-in-the-posterior to clean! Gentle sauteeing or parboiling followed by
baking or stewing is best. Fresh specimens can be stored for a week or two in a cool dry
place, but be sure to check first for maggots!
COMMENTS Better known as S. radicata, this fantastic fungus looks more like a
sea sponge or "bouquet of egg noodles" (Alexander Smith) than a cauliflower. The
flattened, ribbonlike lobes or "branches", plus the overall white to yellowish color and
tough, rooting base distinguish it from other coral fungi. The spicy odor is also distinctive,
but difficult to characterize. In the Pacific Northwest, 20-30( oreven50!) pound specimens
are not unheard of, but in our area the size range is generally 1-5 pounds-orabout the size
of a human head (a cross-section, coincidentally, reveals brainlike convolutions or
"canals"). Certain cup fungi (e.g., Peziza proteana form sparassoidesandWynnea sparas-
soides) sometimes mimic it, but are brown or lilac-tinted and/or smallerandbear their
spores in asci rather than on basidia (a microscopic distinction). The name S. crispa has
also been applied to the equally edible cauliflower mushroom of eastern North America,
which favors oakandpine, has thicker, more erect, rigid-looking branches or lobes, and
lacks a rooting base. However, recent studies indicate that its "correct" name isS. spathu-
lata or S. herbstii,andthat the western species, which has been called S. radicata, is the
""true"-So crispa. (I'm tempted to say that mushroom taxonomy is as intricately twisted
and convoluted as a cauliflower mushroom, but I won't!)
Gomphus clavatus (Pig's Ears) Color Plate 176
FRUITING_BODY 6-20 cm or more high, nearly cylindrical to more or less club-shaped
but with a flattened top; often growing in fused or compound clusters. CAP(s) 2-10 (15)
cm broad, plane or depressed with an uplifted, often wavy or lobed margin that is often
more highly developed on one side than the other; surface moist or dry but not viscid,
smooth or breaking up into minute scales, light purplish to purplish-tan to olive-brown,
olive-buff, tan, or yellowish-buff. Flesh thick, firm, white or buff; odor mild. UNDER-
SIDE (fertile surface) with numerous shallow, blunt, deeply decurrent, forking veins
or wrinkles which occasionally give it a poroid appearance; color variable but usually dull
purple to purplish-tan or showing at least some purple tints below (near the stalk), slowly
fading to dull ochre, tan, or buff. STALK(s)3-5(IO)cmlong, 1-3 cm thick, continuous with
cap, central or off-center, often fused together below, equal or narrowed at base (if soli-
tary), often curved; solid, firm, buff to pale purple. SPORE_PRINT pale tan to pale ochre;
spores 10-13 x 4-6.5 microns, elliptical, slightly wrinkled or warted.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious, often in fused pairs or clusters, on ground under
conifers; widely distributed in northern North America, fruiting mainly in the late summer
and fall. It is common in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California, but I have not
seen it south of San Francisco.
EDIBILITY Edibleandconsidered choice by some, but I am not particularly fond of it.
COMMENTS Also known as Cantharellus clavatus, this northern conifer-lover is easily
distinguished by its overall shape (like a chopped-off, frequently lopsided club), dull
purplish veined spore-producing surface,andgrowth habit in fused clusters. It is aptly
characterized in one book as "that funny looking thing which is purplish underneath. "The
common name, ..pig's ears," is also applied to an Ascomycete, Discina per/ata. Other
species: G. (=PseudoCTaterellus) pseudoclavatus is said to be similar, but has smooth
sporesandfavors hardwoods. It is apparently quite rare; I have not seen it.
Gomphus floccosus group Color Plate 174
(Scaly Chanterelle; Woolly Chanterelle)
FRUITING_BODY nearly cylindrical, soon becoming more or less trumpet-or vase-
shaped, 5-20 cm high. CAP 3-15 cm broad, depressedandsoon hollow in the center; surface
reddish to bright orange, buffy-, oryellow-orange(but often fading! ), with large cottony or
woolly scales, the ones at the center often recurved in age; margin often wavy or lobed.
Flesh rather fibrous, whitish; taste mild to sour. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) milky
white to creamy, buff, dingy yellowish, or pale ochre; with blunt, shallow, frequently
forking, deeply decurrent veins or ridges, sometimes with a somewhat poroid appearance
in age. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-3 cm thick, continuous with cap, central or off-center,
tapering downward, solid becoming hollow in age, white to orange or yellowish. SPORE
PRINT ochraceous; spores 10-16 x 5-8 microns, elliptical, slightly wrinkled or warted.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or sometimes clustered on ground under conifers;
widely distributed in northernandmontane North America. Along with G. bonari (see
comments), it is common in northern Californiaandthe Sierra Nevada in the summer,
fall,andeven spring, but like G. clavatus, it does not seem to occur on the coast south of
San Francisco. It is also common in the Southwest, Pacific Northwest,andRockies.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some people pronounce it delicious, but others are
adversely affected by it (they suffer gastric upsets)andthe specimens I've sampled had
an unpleasant sour taste. Its only asset is its distinctiveness-it would be very difficult
to confuse it with anything other than its close relatives (see comments).
COMMENTS Also known as Cantharellusfloccosus, this striking mushroomandits
close relatives are easily told by their vase-shaped fruiting body with a reddish-orange to
orange-buff scaly ca pandpallid veined exterior. The name G. bonar; has been given to the
western variety with milky white exterior, smaller spores, tendency to grow in clusters, and
duller, paler, or more cinnamon-colored cap; it is often common under mountain conifers.
Another western conifer-lover, G. kauffman;;, is similar but has a tan to brown or ochre-
tawny cap up to 35 cm broad with very prominent, brittle scales. It is sometimes common
in northern Californiaandthe Sierra Nevada as well as in the Pacific Northwest and
Southwest. Like G.floccosusandG. bonari, it should be eaten very cautiously if at all.
Cantharellus subalbidus
(White Chanterelle)
CAP 4-15 cm broad, plane to broadly depressed with an often wavy or irregularly lobed
margin; surface smooth or breaking up into small scales in age, moist to dry but not viscid;
dull white or whitish, bruising yellowish-orange to orange-brown. Flesh thick, firm, white;
odor mild or faintly fragrant. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced,
shallow, blunt, deeply decurrent, foldlike gills which are usually forked orveined between;
dull white or pinkish-tinged, often staining yellowish to orange in age or where bruised.
STALK2-7 cm long, 1-5 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, central oroff-center, solid,
firm, smooth, dull whitish, discoloring yellowish-orange to orange-brown in age or where
bruised. SPORE_PRINT white; spores 7-9 x 5-5.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground in woods; known only from
the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia. It is quite abundant under second-growth conifers
in the late summer, fall,andwinter in Washington, Oregon,andnorthern California, and
I have also seen large fruitings in Idaho. In our area it fruits in the fallandearly winter, but
is only occasionally common. The best places to look for it are on the high, exposed ridges
of our coastal mountains under tanoakandmadrone or in manzanita thickets mixed with
knobcone pine. It often grows with Armillaria ponderosa, another choice edible.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-as good as C. cibarius or even better,andlike that
species, rarely attacked by maggots. In the Pacific Northwest the buttons are firm, meaty,
and very compact-ideal for marinating or prolonged refrigeration. Unfortunately, it is
not nearly so common in our areaandthe fruiting bodies, when found, are often water-
loggedandoverripe.
COMMENTS The white chanterellecan be mistaken fora Clilocybeor Hygrophorus, but
the gills are distinctly "chanterellesque"-thick, shallow, blunt,andusually veined. It
differs from the common chanterelle (c. cibarius) in itsdull whitishcolorand white spores,
but in sizeandshape the two are quite similarandcan even be found growing together.
Cantharellus cibarius
(Chanterelle)
CAP (2) 3-15 (25) cm broad, broadly convex when young, becoming plane to depressed or
vase-shaped in age; surface smooth or occasionally cracked, not viscid; orange to bright
golden-orange, egg-yellow, or yellow (but in dry weather or direct sunlight often bleached
outandcracked or even greenish from algae); margin usually lobed or wavy, at first in-
curved. Flesh thick, firm, whitish or tinged yellow to orange under the cuticle; odor mild or
faintly fruity (like pumpkins or apricots); taste mild to somewhat peppery or occasionally
bitter. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced to close, shallow (narrow),
blunt, foldlike, deeply decurrent gills which are often forked or cross-veined; colored like
cap or more often paler (but brighter if cap has faded); not fading, but sometimes
developing dingy orange-brown stains in old age. STALK 2-10 cm long, 0 .5-3 (5) cm thick,
equal or tapered downward orsometimesenlargedat base, solid, dry, firm, colored like cap
or paler, often staining ochraceous to orange-brown. SPORE_PRINT creamy or yellow in
most forms, but pinkish in one variety; spores 7-11 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, occurring throughout the
north temperate zoneandvery common on the west coast in the fall, winter,andspring.
In northern Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest it grows mainly with conifers, but in our
area it favors live oaks, especially those at the edges of pastures. It hasa long growing season
and is ajoy to find-brilliant splashes of gold against the subdued backdrop of decaying
leaves. If you see one, probe aroundandyou'll probably uncover more-they often hide
under the humus. If rainfall is sufficient, successive crops are prod uced over a long period
of time, so check your patches regularly (but don't check mine!).
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-the best known wild mushroom in California, if not in
North America. It is so plentifulandpopular on the west coast that it is now being harvested
commerciallyandshipped abroad or sold to restaurantsandmarkets. A few tips for the
uninitiated: Chanterelles should always be cooked as they are somewhat fibrous raw. Pick
selectively-firm specimens will keep in the refrigerator for a week, whereas waterlogged
individuals will rot rapidlyandcook up slimy. Even firm ones have a high water content
and should be sauteed slowlyandthoroughly in an open pan. You waste them if you can't
taste them, so don't just mix them in with a bunch of other vegetables. They are best in
simple dishes that highlight their delica te fla vorandfruity fragrance-cream of chanterelle
soup is a traditional favorite. On the west coast chanterelles are virtually free of maggots,
an asset keenly appreciated by those who hunt them-but they're often full of dirt, a quality
deeply detested by those who have to clean them! (If your "chanterelles" are pristine and
wormy, they may not be chanterelles!). Curiously, it's just the opposite in the eastern
United States, where they are usually quite spotless, but often lunched on by maggots!
Imported chanterelles can be purchased in small tins at delicatessens-for an outrageous
price, of course. They are low in protein but high in vitamin A. Attempts to cultivate
them commercially have not been successfuL
COMMENTS Cantharellus cibarius is the proud possessor of a plethora of popular
names-more than any other mushroom with the possible exception of Boletusedulis. The
best known are chanterelleandgirolle (both French)andPfifferling (German). From
region to region the chanterelle varies considerably in size, stature, color,andfruiting
habits (several forms have been described), but is easily identified by its yellow-orange cap
and "primitive" gills (blunt, thick, shallow, veined or forking,andfold like rather than
bladelike). The firm whitish fleshandwavy cap margin are also characteristic. On the west
coast it fruits in cool weatherandis often very largeandthick-stemmed (one pound
specimens are not uncommon), with an orange cap, faintly fruity odor,andpale, copiously
veined gills (although a smaller. slimmer, cleaner form grows under Sitka spruce). In
eastern North America it is commonest in the summerandis usually much smaller (caps
average 3-6 cm broad)andoften yellower, with a slender, well-developed stalkandlittle
or no odor (see Color Plate 175). Also, the gills may be less "primitive" (deeper, with
thinner edgesandfew if any cross-veins, as shown in Color Plate 177),andare sometimes
brightly colored. In the southern Rocky Mountains, on the other hand, the fruiting bodies
are often packed closely togetherandare smallandstubby, with bleached-out caps
(if growing in sunlight)andbrilliant yellow to yellow-orange gills.
Mushrooms most likely to be mistaken for the chanterelle include the false chanterelle
(Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca), various waxy caps (Camarophyllus pratensis, Hygrocybe
flavescens, etc.). Lactarius alnicola, Leucopaxillus albissimus, the Gymnopilus
spectabilis group, Hypomyces lactifluorum,andthe jack-o-Iantern mushrooms
(Omphalotus species). The latter are poisonous, but have brightly colored fleshandthin,
crowded, unforked, bladelike ("true") gills,andusually grow in clusters on or near wood.
Except for the Hypomyces, which is a parasitized gilled mushroom, the others also have
bladelike gills. (It is sometimes said that true chanterelles have "false" gills, while false
chanterelles have "true" gills.) Aside from the many variations within C. cibarius, there is
C. Jormosus, a northern conifer-lover with a convex, yellow to brownish capandpinkish-
tinged gills,andthree similar edible species with a smooth to only slightly wrinkled
fertile surface. These are common in eastern North Americanandare often mistaken for
C. cibarius. The most commonandwidespread of the three, C. later;t;us (=Craterellus
cantharellus) has a yellow-orange to pinkish-orange fruiting body; C. confluens has a
yellower, often compound fruiting bodyanda tropical-subtropical distribution; C.
odoratus (=Craterellus odoratus) is a gorgeous trumpet-shaped, yellow-orange-capped
southern species that is usually strongly fragrantandcespitose (clustered). C. lateritius
has also been reported (but not verified) from the Pacific N orthwes.t.
Cantharellus c;nnabar;nus (Red Chanterelle) Color Plate 181
CAP 1-4 (7) cm broad, convex to nearly plane at first, plane to shallowly funnel-shaped
in age, the margin often lobed or wavyandoften remaining incurved for a long time;
surface more or less smooth, dry, bright red to red-orange to flamingo-pink when fresh,
often paler (or even whitish) in age or sunlight. Flesh thin, whitish below, usually tinged
cap color above; odor typically mild, taste mild to peppery. UNDERSIDE(fertilesurface)
with thick, shallow, blunt, decurrent gills which are fairly close to well-spaced, usually
forked or veined,andcolored like the fresh cap or slightly paler (or pinker). STALK
1-4 (6) cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or tapered downward, often curved, solid, firm, dull
red or colored like fresh cap (or pinker), the base sometimes whitish. SPORE_PRINT
usually pinkish-tinged (pinkish-cream); spores 6-9 (11) x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered on ground in woods or at their edges, open
areas, in beds of moss, etc.; fairly common in eastern North America (especially south-
ward) in the summerandearly fall. I have seen large fruitings under oakandpine in Michi-
gan, Pennsylvania,andNorth Carolina. It apparently does not occur in the West, but is
to be looked for in Arizona (one unverified report places it in the Pacific Northwest).
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good, though delicate in flavor. It sometimes grows with
C. cibarius,andthe two species make colorful companions in the same dish.
COMMENTS The modest sizeandbright pinkish-red to orange-red color make this
chanterelle practically unmistakable. It is vaguely reminiscent of a waxy cap (Hygrocybe),
but the blunt, veined or forked gills distinguish it.
Cantharellus ;nfund;buliform;s group Color Plate 180
(Funnel Chanterelle; Winter Chanterelle)
CAP 1-6 (11 cm broad, convex to plane with a depressed center or becoming broadly
depressed to funnel-shaped (often with a perforated or hollow center) in age; surface
smooth to slightly wrinkled or finely fibrillose-scaly, not viscid, dark brown to brown to
dingy yellow-brown, sometimes fading to paler brown or the yellowish background color
becoming dominant as it dries or ages; margin usually wavy or irregularly lobed.-Flesh
thin, rather toughandpliant, colored like ca p or paler; odor mild or slightly fragrant; taste
mild or bitterish. UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with shallow (narrow), thick, blunt, well-
spaced, decurrent, forked or veined gills; pale yellow or pale orange-yellow becoming
grayish, brownish, or violet-tinted in age. STALK 2-8 cm long, 0.3-1 (2) cm thick, equal or
tapered at either end, smooth, often grooved and/or flattened, becoming hollow; orange-
yellow to yellow, duller in age (dingy yellow or yellow-brown to grayish-orange). SPORE
PRINT creamy-buff to yellowish (or white in one form); spores 9-12 x 6.5-8 microns,
elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious in mossandhumusandon rotting wood in cold, damp
coniferous forestsandbogs throughout northern North America; fruiting from late
summer through the winter, common. The farthest south I've seen it is in Mendocino
County, California, in December, January,andFebruary.
EDIBILITY Edible, but smallandthin-fleshed. Some people relish it nevertheless,
and in Finland it is harvested commercially.
COMMENTS This characteristic feature of northern bogsandcold coniferous forests
can be recognized by its modest size, dark brown to dingy yellow-brown cap, yellowish to
gray or purple-tinged gills,andslender, hollow, yellow to yellow-orange stalk. The gills
have a somewhat waxy look (leading to possible confusion with HygrocybeandCamaro-
phyllus), but are characteristically "chanterellesque": thick, blunt, shallow,andcon-
spicuously forked or veined and/or wavy. The name C. tubaeformis has been used for
the white-spored variety, but many cantharellologists treat it as a synonym for C. infun-
dibuliformis. In eastern North America there are numerous other small, edible, hollow-
stemmed chanterelles, including: C. ignicolor, very similar but with a brighter cap when
fresh ( orange to yellow-orange to ochraceous-ta wny or salmon-buff), growing under both
hardwoodsandconifers; C. minor, smallandentirely yellow to orange ( including the gills),
favoring hardwoods;andC. xanthopus (also called C. lutescens), widely distributed
(also found in the West), similar to C. infundibuliformis in cap color or brighter, but with
a smooth to slightly veined (rather than gilled) orangish to yellowish underside.
Craterellus c;nereus (Black Chanterelle)
FRUITING_BODY more or less funnel-or vase-shaped but not tubular; 3-12 cm high.
CAP 1.5-5 cm broad, shallowly to deeply depressed, surface smooth or minutely scaly-
scurfy, not viscid; black when moist, becoming dark gra yish-brown inage or as it dries out;
margin usually wavy, lobed, or torn. Flesh thin, tough, colored more or less like cap.
UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) with thick, well-spaced, shallow, blunt, foldlike gills which
fork frequently near the cap margin and/or have cross-veins; bluish-black becoming
bluish-gray to gra y, or paler from spore dust. STALK 2-8 cm long, 0 .4-1.3 cm thick, nearly
equal or tapering downward, central or off-center, tough, hollow except at base, colored
like cap or underside. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptical,
smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in groups or clusters in mixed woodsandunder oaks;
widely distributed but not common. In our area it fruits in the winterandearly spring, often
in the company of C. cornucopioides, or a few days before it.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelectable-as good or even better than C. cornucopioides. It is
delicious simply sauteed in butter.
COMMENTS This species, which has also passed under the name Cantharelluscinereus,
closely mimics its commoner cousin, Craterel/us cornucopioides. but has primitive gills
on the underside of the capandis not as brown in dry weather. Other species: C. caeruleo-
fuscus of eastern North America is similar, but has smaller spores; C. foetidus, also
eastern, has a sickeningly sweet odor, veined fertile surface,andthicker stalk (1-3
cm thick at apex); C. (=Pseudocraterellusj sinuosus has a gray to dark grayish-brown cap,
slightly larger spores,anda veined or copiously wrinkled (but not gilled) underside that
is grayish at first but acquires a distinct yellowish or ochre tinge as the spores mature; it
is edibleandwidely distributed, but rather rare (Craig Mitchell has found it in mixed
woods near Felton, California, in February).
Craterellus cornucopioides
(Horn of Plenty)
FRUITING_BODY 3-14 cm high, tubular becoming trumpet-or funnel-shaped. CAP
2-8 (10) cm broad, hollowat the center with the marginatfirst decurved (folded down), then
spreading outandbecoming wavy, split, orlacerated(sometimes witha lacy appearance or
convoluted to form small "suction cups"); surface not viscid, usually minutely scaly or
scurfy, grayish-black to very dark brown or black when moist, paler (brown to grayish-
brown) when dry (but one form sometimes developing a yellowish margin or
yellowish blotches). Flesh thin, brittle but tough, colored like cap Or paler; odor pleasant.
UNDERSIDE (fertile surface) smooth to uneven or with slight, deeply decurrent wrinkles
(but not gills); colored like cap but usually paler Or grayer, in age or dry weather with a
whitish to yellowish or buff coating of spore dust. STALK 1-5 cm long, 0.5-1 (1.5) cm thick,
continuous with capandtapering downward, central or offenter, hollow except at very
base, tough, often twisted; colored like cap or underside. SPORE_PRINT whitish to buff
or pale yellow; spores 8-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups, clumps, Or lacy clusters in woods; widely distributed.
It is common in our area in the winterandspring under hardwoods( live oak, tanoak, man-
zanita, madrone, huckleberry), but farther north it fruits in the late fall under conifers.
South of San Francisco it rarely appears before Christmas, usually peaks at the same time
that the fetid adder's tongue blooms,andmayfruitonintoApril. IneasternNorthAmerica
it is largely replaced by C.fallax (see comments), which also occurs in our area. Though
terrestrial, it often fruits near fallen branches or at the bases of trees or manzanita burls.
EDIBILITY One of my fifteen "five favorite flavorful fleshy fungalfructifications." Like
myself, it is thin, tough,anddark,andlike myself, it goes largely unappreciated. It is
forever being passed up in favor of the larger, fleshier, more colorfulandimpressive types,
yet its flavor is superbandits potential unlimited. It is partly to blame for this sad state of
affairs, for its appearance is admittedly drabandrather somber,andit shuns attention,
blending unobtrusively into the dark, secretive situations where it thrives.
But though it takes an accomplished eye to detect its presence in the woods (from the top
it looks like a hole in the ground), anyone can detect its presence in a dish-for it cooks up
black, announcing itself with unmistakable earthy authenticity. It can play any culinary
position with equal finesse, from first base to second fiddle, enhancing practically any dish,
be it soup, souffle, or sauce. Like its more popular cousin the chanterelle, it is not often
inhabited by maggots. Driedandpowdered it has a cheesy odorandis known, quite
appropriately, as ..Poor People's Truffle."
COMMENTS This cryptically-colored fungus usually occurs in large groups. It is hard to
pick out in the forest gloom, but once you locate one, you're bound to find more. In France
it is sometimes called trumpet de mort (trumpet of death)-a tribute to its somber ap-
pearance, not its edibility. Actually, it is quite lovely when fresh-fully-grown specimens
look more like black or brown petunias than anything else,andclusters often have a lacy
look. The horn of plenty that is so common in the summerandfall in eastern North Amer-
ica, C. fallax, looksandtastes identical but has a salmon-or yellow-tinted underside in
ageandlonger, salmon or ochre-yellow spores; it also occurs in California. Otherwise,
there is little that C. cornucopioides can be confused with-the dark trumpet-shaped
fruiting body with smooth or slightly wrinkled exteriorandhollow center is unique. C.
cinereus (the black chanterelle) is somewhat similar but has primitive gills; Polyozellus
multiplex is also similar but is dark blue or violet-tinted, while C. sinuosus (see comments
under C. cinereus) has yellowish-ochre sporesanda more copiously wrinkled or veined
hymenium (underside). Several Ascomycetes are black, but not trumpet-shaped
(Plectania species are cup-shaped; Urnula is urn-shaped). Thelephora terrestris is
sometimes funnel-shaped but is thinner, smaller,andpurple-brown rather than gray or
black. Occasionally hollow, deformed, club like specimens of C. cornucopioides occur
alongside normal ones. These are identical in colorandedible. Other species: C. calyculus
of eastern North America is one of several similar but much smallerandthinner( cap less
than 2 cm broad, stalk 1-3 mm thick), solid-stemmed, mostly southern species.
Polyozellus multiplex (Blue Chanterelle) Color Plate 183
FRUITING_BODY usually compound-in compact, clustered masses 5-15 cm high and
up to I meter broad (but usually smaller). CAP(s) 2-10 cm broad, spoon-shaped to fan-
shaped, often centrally depressedandlop-sided; surface dull purple to purple-gray to
black, deep blue, or frosted blue; margin usually irregularly lobed or wavy. Flesh deep
violet to bluish-black, softandrather brittle; odor mild or fragrant. UNDERSIDE(fertile
surface) nearly smooth or more often with shallow, crowded wrinkles or veins or at times
nearly poroid (but lacking gills); colored more or less like cap or slightly paler. STALK(s)
2-5 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, central to off-center or lateral, usually shortandoften fused at
base; colored more or less like cap or underside, often grooved; solid or becoming hollow.
SPORE_PRINT white; spores (4) 6-8.5 x 5.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical, warted
or appearing angular. Cap tissue staining olive-black in KOH.
HABITAT Clustered on ground under conifers (usually spruceandfir) or aspen in late
summerandfall; known only from northernandmontane North America. It is usually
listed as rare, but is locally common in the Rocky Mountains. I have seen it in the Oregon
Cascadesandit occurs very rarely in northern California. It was originally described
from Maine,andthe color photograph was taken near Santa Fe, New Mexico, in an
aspen-spruce forest, in August.
EDIBILITY Edible,andaccording to some sources, delicious. I have tasted it only once-
the texture was reminiscent of Craterellus, but the flavor was far inferior.
COMMENTS This strikingly beautiful mushroom is easily told by its unusual deep
violet to bluish-black colorandclustered growth habit. It might be mistaken at first glance
for a Craterellus, but the caps are spoon-to fan-shaped rather than tubular or trumpetlike.
The warty-angular spores suggest a closer relationship to the genus Thelephora (or per-
haps to the teeth fungi) than to other chanterelles, but it has traditionally been treated
as a chanterelle because of its superficial resemblance.
Pseudohydnum gelatinosum (Toothed Jelly Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY flexibleandflabby, rubbery-gelatinous, more or less tongue-shaped
to spoon-shaped or fan-shaped (with a capandusually a stalk). CAP 1-6 (7.5) cm broad;
surface minutely roughened or downy to nearly smooth, not viscid; translucent white to
watery gray or bluish-gray, or sometimes dingy brownish (or spotted brown). Flesh
rubbery-gelatinous. UNDERSIDE lined with small pallid spines or "teeth" that are 0.5-3
(5) mm long. STALK up to 6 cm long, usually lateral, continuous with capandsimilar in
colorandtexture. SPORE_PRINT white; spores borne on the ""teeth," 5-8.5 microns,
round or nearly round, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate, elliptical to nearly round.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on rotting logs, twigs,andhumus under
conifers; widely distributed. It is sporadically common in our area in the late fallandwinter,
especially in dank, dark, damp situations under Douglas-fir.
EDIBILITY Edible. It is said to be fairly good with honeyandcream-but what isn't? It
can also be marinated for use in salads. The texture is interesting, the flavor nonexistent.
COMMENTS Also known as Tremellodon gelatinosum, this denizen of dank places is
one of my fifty "five favorite fleshy fungal fructifications." The rubbery or flabby tongue-
shaped fruiting bodies with small "teeth" on the underside are as attractive as they are
unique,andlook funnier than they do fungal-in fact, it is hard to take them seriously!
(They remind me of the "Creepy Crawlers" I used to buy at the dime store with my lunch
money.) The small teeth resemble those of the teeth fungi (Hydnaceae), hence the name
Pseudohydnum, which means "false tooth fungus." Specimens on the west coast tend to
have a well-developed, often vertical stalk whereas those in eastern North America tend
to have little or no stalk, especially when growing from the sides of logs.
Phlogiotis helvelloides (Apricot Jelly Mushroom)
FRUITING_BODY flabby or rubbery, with a capandstalk; spatula-shaped to somewhat
funnel-shaped, but usually indented or split down one side; 2-8 (18) cm high. CAP 1-7 (10)
cm broad, pale to deep rosy-pink to reddish-orange, apricot ,or salmon-colored; surface
more or less smooth, margin often wavy, Flesh rubbery to somewhat gelatinous.
UNDERSIDE smooth to faintly veined or coarsely wrinkled, colored like cap or paler.
STALK 1-6 cm long, off-center or lateral but usually vertical (upright); continuous with
cap, with the same colorandtexture, or the base whitish. SPORE_PRINT white; spores
borne on underside of cap, 9-12 (16) x 4-6,5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth. Basidia
longitudinally septate.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground, debris,androtten wood under conifers;
widely distributed, but uncommon in most regions. In California I have seen impressive
fruitings in Yosemite National Parkandthe Trinity Alps, but have found it only once in
our area, near Big Sur. The fruiting bodies do not decay readilyandseem to like cool
weather (either late in the season or in the spring).
EDIBILITY Highly prized by some people-presumably for its colorandtexture-for it
has no flavor that I can detect. It can be eaten raw in salads, pickled, or candied , but should
not be cooked because of its high water content. Larry Stickney says if it is sucked on a
hot day it "cools you right down."
COMMENTS The pink to orange color, rubbery texture (similar to that of Pseudo-
hydnum gelalinosum),andoverall shape-which is sometimes reminiscent of a miniature
calla lily-identify this fetching little fungus. Actually, the word "little" is not always
appropriate, as specimens 7 inches (18 cm) high have been reported by Sam Ristich ofN ew
York. These apparently developed over a period of two monthsandhad smaller ones
riding "piggy-back" on top of them! The normal size range, however, is 1-3 inches high.
Exidia glandulosa (Black Witch's Butter; Black Jelly Roll)
FRUITING_BODY flabby or gelatinous, beginning as a pallid or translucent blister but
soon becoming cushion-shaped to irregularly lobed; reddish-black to olive-black soon
becoming jet-black (or black from beginning); 1-2 cm broad but often fusing with others
to form rows or masses up to 50 cm long; upper surface smooth to minutely roughened or
warty. Flesh gelatinous, black. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT whitish; spores borne on
the lobes, warts, or wrinkles, 10-16 x 3-5 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth. Basidia longi-
tudinally septate.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or in fused rowsandmasses on rotting hard-
wood logsandbranches; widely distri buted. It is fairly common in our area throughout the
mushroom season, but is usually overlooked because of its dark color.
EDIBILITY Unknown,andlike most of us, likely to remain so.
COMMENTS This sinister-looking black jelly fungus can be confused with little else.
Individual fruiting bodies are quite small but usually fuse to form rows or sheets that look
like black gelatin or slime. The frequently roughened spore-bearing surfaceandsausage-
shaped spores help distinguish the genus Exidia from Tremella. Other species: E. alba is
smallandwhitish; E. nucleata varies from white or colorless to pinkish-or vinaceous-
brown, but is sprinkled with small white granules or "nuclei." Both are widely distributed.
Tremellafoliacea (Brown Witchs Butter) Color Plate 173
FRUITING_BODY flabby or gelatinous when moist, bone-hard when dry; 2.5-20 cm
broad or more, typically consisting of a complicated mass of wavy or leaflike folds, lobes,
and convolutions; reddish-cinnamon to brown, vinaceous-brown. or tinged purple; often
paler when waterlogged. Flesh gelatinous. STALK absent. SPORE_PRINT white to
yellowish; spores produced on the upright lobes, 7-9 (13) x 6-9 microns, round to broadly
elliptical, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate.
HABITAT Solitary or several on hardwood stumps, logs,andfallen branches (occasion-
ally on conifers as well); widely distributed. In our area it is not uncommon on oak in the late
fall, winter,andearly spring, but is not nearly as numerous as T. mesenterica.
EDIBILITY Harmless, but mostly water. As for the flavor-well, I once encountered an
Asian-American gathering this speciesandT. mesenterica in a live oak woodland. "How
do you prepare them?" I said. "With garlicandsoy sauce," she said. "And how do they
taste?" I said. Slight hesitation. "Like garlicandsoy sauce," she said.
COMMENTS This brown version of T. mesenterica is our largest Tremellaandis quite
strikingandseaweed-like when fresh. The fruiting body is never cuplike or earlike as in
Auricularia auricula,andis much more gelatinous. T. jrondosa is a somewhat similar
yellowish to buff species. T. encephala is also similar but smaller (1-6 cm)andflesh-colored
to brownish. It is thought to be parasitic on Stereum, a wood-inhabiting bracket or parch-
ment fungus. Most Tremellas, in fact, are frequently found withStereum, suggesting some
kind of relationship between the two. The 10 bed, brainlike, or convoluted fruiting bodies of
Tremellas are reflected in their names: foliacea means "leaflike"; mesenterica means
"middle intestine";andencephala means "brainlike."
Tremella mesenterica
(Witchs Butter)
FRUITING_BODY flabby or gelatinous when fresh, bone-hard when dry; 1-10 cm broad,
typically consisting of several to many convoluted or brainlike lobes or folds, but in wet
weather or old age often bloblike or amorphous; clear yellow to golden-yellow to bright
orange, paler (to nearly colorless) when old or waterlogged. Flesh gelatinous. STALK
absent. SPORE_PRINT pallid to yellow; spores produced on the upright lobes or folds,
7-18x 6-14 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth. Basidia longitudinally septate.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups on hardwood sticks, logs, etc.; very commonandwide-
spread. In our area it favors dead oakandfruits throughout the mushroom season, often
on the same branches as Stereum species. Shrivelled up specimens are inconspicuous, but
usually revive in wet weather. In colder climates it may appear during winter thaws.
EDIBILITY Harmless but flavorless (see comments on edibility of T. foliacea)-it is
mostly water. My one attempt at cooking it was a failure: most of it evaporated!
COMMENTS Also known as T. lutescens, this fungusandits look-alikes (see below) are
a familiar sight in rainy weather across the continent. At first the fruiting body is lobed or
brainlikeandrelatively firm, but as it swells with water it often loses its original shape and
looks like a dollop of melting butter on a log. Also common is Dacrymyces palmatus,
which closely mimics T. mesenter;ca but is slightly smaller (1-6 cm broad), tends to be
oranger in color, favors conifers,andhas a small, tough, whitish, basal point of attachment.
The resemblance is only superficial, however, for Dacrymyces species have V-shaped
basidiaandlong narrow spores that develop cross walls, while Tremella species have
longitudinally septate basidiaandsimple (non-septate) spores. Other species: T.Jrondosa
is buff to yellowish but largerandleafier (like T.foliacea); D. deliquescens is a small (1-5
mm broad), yellow-orange to reddish species that grows on decaying wood, usually in
large masses or rows. Like most jelly fungi, the above species are not worth eating.
Guepiniopsis alpinus (Alpine Jelly Cone; Poor Man's Gumdrop)
FRUITING_BODY flabby or gelatinous; top-to cone-shaped or sometimes cup-shaped,
0.3-2.5 cm broad; yellow to orange or occasionally reddish-orange; surface smooth. Flesh
gelatinous. STALK present only as a small, narrowed point of attachment. SPORE
PRINT yellowish; spores borne on the concave surface of the cone, 11-18 x 4-6 microns,
sausage-shaped, developing 34 cross walls. Basidia Y-shaped.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on coniferous logs, stumps, branches, twigs, etc.;
fruiting in the spring (usually as or just after the snow melts) at higher elevations from the
Rocky Mountains westward (rarely in the summer or fall); sometimes abundant.
EDIBILITY Presumably consumable, but of negligible value.
COMMENTS The golden cone-shaped fruiting bodyandfondness for dead conifers
typify this omnipresent "snowbank" mushroom of western mountains. The gelatinous
texture distinguishes it from the cup fungi,andthe gumdrop-like fruiting body separates
it from TremellaandDacrymyces. The Y-shaped basidia place it in the Dacrymycetales,
alongside DacrymycesandCa/ocera. G. chrysocomus is a closely related species with a
yellow cup-shaped fruiting body, larger spores,anda preference for hardwoods. Exidia
recisa resembles G. a/pinus in sha pe, but has longitudinally septate basidiaandis brownish-
yellow in color; it grows on hardwoodsandis exceptionally abundant in some regions
(especially the southern United States).
Calocera viscosa (Staghorn Jelly Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY erect, branched (antler-or coral-like); 2-7 (10) cm high, 1-3 (5) cm
wide. BRANCHES tough, pliant, usually somewhat viscid, the tips usually forked (with
2-3 tips); bright yellow to deep yellow to orange. STALK presentasa yellow to whitish base
or "trunk", often rooting. Flesh tough but often somewhat gelatinous. SPORE_PRINT
dingy yellowish to ochraceous; spores produced on the branches, 9-14 x 3-5 microns,
elongated-elliptical to sausage-shaped, smooth, developing one cross wall at maturity.
Basidia Y-shaped.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on or near coniferous logs, stumps,
roots,anddebris; widely distributed. I have found it several times in our coastal pine
forests in the winterandspring, but never in quantity.
EDIBILITY Inconsequential.
COMMENTS This dainty little jelly fungus looks like a coral mushroom (especially
Clavulinopsis corniculala)andis keyed out as one. However, it is usually viscidandhas
Y-shaped basidia, plus it typically grows on or near wood. Another widespread species,
C. cornea, is smaller (up to 15 mm high), yellow,andclub like or very sparingly branched;
it grows in groups or clusters on twigsandbranches of both hard woodsandconifers. The
forked basidia place Calocera in the Dacrymycetales.
Auricularia auricula (Wood Ear; Tree Ear)
FRUITING_BODY rubbery to pliant or flabby to somewhat gelatinous when fresh, hard
when dry; 2-15 cm broad; cup-shaped to ear-shaped or sometimes with several earlike
lobes originating from a central point of attachment. Outer surface sterile, often
veined or ribbed, minutely silky or with fine downy hairs, pale brown to brown to liver-
brown, drying blackish. Inner (fertile) surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, somewhat
gelatinous when wet, tan to yellow-brown, grayish-brown, brown, liver-brown, or tinged
purple; blackish when dried. Flesh thin, rubbery. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPO RE
PRINT white; spores borne on inner (usually the lower) surface, 12-18 x 4-8 microns,
sausage-shaped, smooth. Basidia transversely septate (with 3 cross walls).
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters on logs, dead branches, stumps, etc. (attached
centrally or laterally); very widely distributed on both hardwoodsandconifers,andoften
common in cool weather. I have seen it in the springtime in the Cascades, but it seems to
be rare in our area.
EDIBILITY Edible, but I haven't tried it. A similar but hamer speCIes, A. polytr;cha, IS
prized in the Orientandcan be purchased dried in many stores. Along with the shiitake
(Lenrinus edodes) it is the mushroom most often served in Chinese restaurants, usually
under the name Y ung N go or M uk N go. Dried specimens of A. auriculaandA. polytricha
are quite dark, hard,andunappetizing, but billow up like clouds when soaked in water,
showing off their delicate curvesandconvolutions to great effect.
COMMENTS This species can be mistaken for a cup fungus, but has a more rubbery
texture, bears its spores on basidia (a microscopic feature),andusually-but not always-
grows with its fertile (concave) surface facing downward. Cup fungi, on the other hand,
bear their spores in asci with the concave (fertile) surface facing upward,andusually have
a brittle or fragile texture. Sometimes Auricularia is irregularly lobed rather than cuplike,
and I have found old specimens which looked more like pieces of soggy seaweed than
anything else. H;rneola aur;cula-judae is a sinister-sounding synonym. It also used to be
called "Judas' Ear" because it was believed that when Judas' hanged himself on an elder
tree, these ear-shaped "excrescences" were condemned to appear on elders thereafter.
Auricularia is the most prominent genus in the Auriculariales.1t embraces several similar
brownish species, including: A. mesenter;ca, which is more or less bracketlike with a
hairy, concentrically zoned sterile surfaceandveined fertile surface;andA. del;cata,
a striking gelatinous tropical species with large honeycomb-like pits or "pores." For a
photo of Auricularia, see p. 958.
Calvat;a g;gantea group (Giant Puffball) Color Plate 184
FRUITING_BODY softball-to basketball-sized (8-60 em or more in diameter), round
or sometimes lobed or occasionally somewhat flattened on top in age. Outer layer of
peridium(skin) thick when young(24 mm), at first smooth (with texture of kid glove) and
pure white or brownish-stained (but in the California version often breaking up into
brownish scales even when young), then cracking up into flat scales or plates which
eventually flake off to expose the thin olive-brown inner layer-which soon disintegrates
-or both layers falling off together. STERILE_BASE absent or rudimentary, but a cord-
like "root" often present. SPORE_MASS at first whiteandfirm or cheesy, becoming
greenish-yellowandmushy with an unpleasant odor (like old urine), finally deep olive-
brown to brownandpowdery. Spores 3.5-6 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or
minutely spiny, apiculate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or large circles in fields, pastures, open
woods, cemeteries, on exposed hillsides, along roads, in drainage ditches, etc.; fairly
common in eastern North Americaandthe Midwest. The west coast form, which is slightly
different (see comments), is sometimes abundant in our area after the first fall rains and
again in the spring. In fact, when conditions are favorable it is not unusual to find 30-40
pounds on a casual jaunt through a "puffball pasture." Because of its preference for open
hillsides, it can often be spotted from the road, Large specimens, in fact, have been mis-
taken by passersby for herds of grazing sheep! (Mushroom hunters, on the other hand,
are more likely to mistake grazing sheep for giant puffballs.) Dried specimens found
under houses have been mistaken for bleached skulls, while a sinister-looking individual
found in England during the war was labelled "Hitler's Secret Weapon"andused for
propaganda purposes at an exhibition to raise war funds!
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice when the flesh is firmandwhite, but with laxative
effects on certain individuals. It can be slicedandfried like pancakes, or better yet, cubed
like tofuanddropped into clear soups or eaten raw in salads. The tough outer skin should
be peeledandthose which have begun to ripen should be discarded. Size it not necessarily
an indication of maturity, so slice them open in the field. This will enable you to check for
maggots, which are fanatically fond of them. Infested areas can be trimmed awayandthe
solid portions carried home. Dried giant puffballs have been used as sponges, tinder
(before matches were invented), toys,anddyes. They were burned under beehives to
stupefy beesandused to squelch bleeding.
COMMENTS The giant puffball is one of the best knownandmost familiar of all the
fleshy fungi-and it is fleshy-5 foot, 50 pound specimens have been recorded! (Alas,
the largest one I've found weighed "only" 7 pounds.) The exact identity of our local giant
puffball, strangely enough, is a minor mystery. It does not seem to be either the "true"
C. gigantea of Europeandeastern North America, or C. booniana of arid regions. The
former is smootherandwhiter than our giant puffball, while the latter is wartier and
broader. To most people, however, its "true" identity is an academic problem best left
to the puffball pundits, who are paid to pore over such matters-after all, any large puff-
ball is a giant puffball,andany giant puffball is a giant meal! Langermann;a g;gantea
and Ca/vat;a maxima are synonyms for C. gigantea. C. bovista can also be quite large, but
has a prominent sterile base, while C. cyathiformis has purple spores at maturity Also see
C. pachyderm aandC. lepidophora (under C.fumosa).
Ca/vatia booniana
(Western Giant Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY 15-{)0 cm or more broadand7-30 cm or more high; sometimes round
or lobed, but more often somewhat flattened or depressed on top. Outer layer of peridium
(skin) thick, white to buff or tanandfinally brown; at first sculptured with large warts which
soon separate to form flattened scales, plaques, or platesandeventually disintegrate along
with the thin inner layer. STERILE_BASE absent or rudimentary. SPORE_MASS firm
and white at first, then turning yellow or greenishandmushyandstinky, finallly becoming
powderyandolive-brown to brown. Spores 4-6.5 x 3-5.5 microns, round or nearly round,
smooth or minutely spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups or "flocks" in fields, under sagebrush
or juniperandin other open areas; confined to the aridandsemi-arid regions of western
North America,andsometimes common, especially in the late springandsummer. I
have seen it in New MexicoandIdaho,andin the mountains of southern California. A
similar but less warty species is common along the west coast (see the C. gigantea group).
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice when firmandwhite inside, but with laxative effects on
certain individuals. Like C. gigantea, it was apparently eaten by pioneers as well as by
some Native Americans. Be sure to check for maggots when gathering them,andre-
member. any specimens whose flesh shows the slightest traces of color (yellow, greeen, or
brown) are no longer good to eat (unless you're a maggot!).
COMMENTS This giant puffball is approximately the same size as C. gigantea (50 lb.
specimens have been reported), but is not normally as roundandhas larger plaques or
warts-even when young. Calbovista subsculpta (see comments under Calvatia sculpta)
is somewhat similar but much smaller (softball-or grapefruit-sized).
Ca/vatia scu/pta (Sierran Puffball; Sculptured Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY more or less egg-shaped, pear-shaped, top-shaped, or somewhat
irregular, (4) 7-18 cm high and/or broad. Outer layer of peridium composed of long,
pointed, white pyramidal warts (up to 2.5 cm long) which are erect or bentandjoined at
their tips; warts often lined or groovedandarising from angular plaques which soon crack
and fall away, exposing a fragile inner layer which soon disintegrates. STERILE_BASE
present, often prominent but sometimes inconspicuous, white to yellowish, often with
a purplish interior (especially in age). SPORE_MASS whiteandfirm at first, turning
yellowandthen deep olive-brown as it ripens, eventually powdery. Spores 3.5-6.5 microns,
round or nearly round, minutely spiny.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups under conifers or sometimes in the open; known
only from the mountains of the West. It is fairly common in the Sierra Nevada in the late
spring, summer,andfall; I have not seen it on the coast.
EDIBILITY Edible when immature,andbetter than most puffballs.
COMMENTS This is easily the most spectacular of all the puffballs,andis well known
to hikers in the Sierra Nevada. The white pyramidal "peaks" make fresh specimens look
like a cross between a geodesic domeanda giant glob of meringue. Amanita magni-
verrucata can sometimes resemble it superficially (especially in the egg stage), but has
gillsanda stalk. Other species: Calbovista subsculpta is a common edible western moun-
tain puffball that is similar in size but has flatter (but sometimes pointed), less flagrant
warts. It used to be placed in Ca/vatia, but its capillitium have thornlike branches-a mo-
mentous enough difference in the eyes of puffball specialists to merit a genus of its own.
It is quite common in the spring, summer,andearly fall in openandgrassy places or at the
edges of woods in the Sierra Nevada, Cascades,andother western mountains.
Ca/vatia bovista
FRUITING_BODY 10-25 cm highand5-25 cm broad, top-shaped or pear-shaped with a
broad, often flattened top in ageanda large, prominent stemlike sterile base. Outer layer
of peridium (skin) white to grayish or occasionally yellowish-brown, covered with pointed
scurfy warts or soft particles, slowly breaking up into flat scales that slough off, exposing
the thin inner layer which soon disintegrates. STERILE_BASE very large, constituting
up to one half the total height of the fruiting body; chambered; exterior white when young,
brown in age; smooth, persisting long after the spore case has decomposed. SPORE
MASS whiteandcheesy, then yellow or oliveandfinally olive-gold to olive-brown or
dark brownandpowdery. Spores 4-6.5 microns, round, minutely warted or spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in pastures, exposed soil, open woods, etc.;
widely distributed. It is fairly common in our coastal pastures from fall through spring,
sometimes mingling with the giant puffball rCalvatia gigantea group).
EDIBILITY Edible when immature, but rather softandin my experience insipid or even
bitter. According to puffball scholar William Burk, it has been used to stop up holes in
drafty dwellings as well as nosebleeds.
COMMENTS Also known as C. utriformisandC. caelala, this is the second largest of
our local puffballsandis easily recognized by its flattened topandlarge sterile base (see
photograph). It looks something like a gigantic Lycoperdon perlalum, but does not form a
pore at the top. The bowl-shaped base persists long after the rest of the spore case has
disintegrated,andold bowls are often found filled with rainwater, mosquito larvae, and
spores, or they may be windblownandcompletely empty. In the latter condition you may
not recognize them as puffballs, but don't let this faze you-a special genus, Hippoperdon.
was once erected based on these empty bowls!
C. excipuliformis (=c. saccata)andC. elata are two similar species which have a nar-
rower spore case (3-10 cm broad) that is granular or coated with small spinesandpale buff
to brownish, plus a narrowerandgreatly elongated (stemlike) sterile base. Both are wide-
spread in woodedandopen areas; the latter has practically smooth spores. C. tatrensis
is a western species with a purplish to purple-brown sterile base; it occurs under sagebrush
and in other arid waste places, or occasionally under conifers,andusually has a wrinkled
or furrowed base. C. pallidaandC. candida are two small species (up to 5 cm broad) with
a sterile baseandpowdery spore mass; the former has a wrinkled baseandgrows in woods
and mountain meadows, while the latter prefers more arid habitats. Finally, there is C.
lloydii, a fairly common species in the dry coniferous forests of the Sierra Nevada and
other western mountains. It is also rather small (less than 10 cm broad)andhas a sterile
base, but features warts or blunt spines on the top, at least in age. It sometimes grows
with C. fumosaandC. subcretacea, but is easily separated from those species by its thinner
skin,andfrom C. sculptaandCalbovista subsculpta by its smaller warts.
C alvatia cyathijormis (Purple-Spored Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY 5-20 cm high and/or broad; nearly round when young, becoming top-
shaped or pear-shaped, or round with a flattened topandnarrowed base. Outer layer of
peridium (skin) smooth at first, but soon cracking into small, flat scales or patches, at
least on top; white to tan or pinkish-tan becoming purplish or purple-brown in age; inner
layer dark purple or purple-brown, smooth, thinanddelicate; both layers flaking off
in old age. STERILE_BASE usually present (but see comments), chambered, white to
dingy yellow or darker, persisting as a deep purplish to purple-brown cuplike structure
after the spores have dispersed. SPORE_MASS firmandwhite when young, becoming
yellowish, then brownishandfinally dull purpleandpowdery. Spores 3.5-7.5 microns,
round, spiny or warty to nearly smooth.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious or in rings in pasturesandother grassy places,
widely distributed. It is common locally in the fall, occasional at other times.
EDIBILITY Edibleandquite good when firmandwhite inside. It is not quite as tasty
as the giant puffball, but is not as rich either.
COMMENTS The striking purple color of the mature spore mass sets apart this Calvatia
from its brethren. It frequents the same habitats as C. bovistaandour version of C. gigan-
tea, but there is normally only one major fruiting (at least locally)-in the fall. It is smaller
and firmer than C. bovista,andusually darker in color than the C. gigantea group. Fairy
rings of this species in the prairies of Colorado are estimated to be 420 years old-or older
than most trees! C. cyathijoTmis form/Tagi/is (also called C./Tagi/is) is very similar, but has
only a rudimentary sterile base; it is also common in grassy areas on the west coast,andis
widely distributed. Other species: C. TubTotincta has purplish spores, but is pallid with red
spots when young; it has been found in Oregon under ponderosa pine.
Calvatia lycoperdoides (Cotton-Spored Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY 1.5-5 cm highandbroad, more or less round to somewhat cushion-
shaped. Outer layer of peridium (skin) white or pallid becoming brownish in age, at first
with soft granules, flakes, or spines ( or often with small warts on top); adhering to the inner
layerandbreaking up into large flakes at maturity. STERILE_BASE absent or
rudimentary. SPORE_MASS firmandwhite when young, olive-brown to brown at
maturity, with a cottony texture that causes it to remain intact for a long time. Spores
4-6.5 microns, round, with small warts.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on ground in woodsandunder trees; known only
from western North America, but C. craniiformis( see comments) is common in the eastern
states. It can be found in our area in the late fall, winter,andspring, but is not common.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible when immature, but not big or plentiful enough to
warrant collecting. I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This is one of several Calvatias with acottony(instead of powdery) mature
spore mass. Others include: C. umbrina, a dark brown to black species; e. diguetii, a
smooth-spored westerner with an ochre gleba;ande. rubroflava, with a greenish-orange
mature spore massandyellow-staining exterior, found mostly in cultivated soil( especially
in southern latitudes). In these species an apical pore is not formed as in Lycoperdon. and
there is no sterile base (except in C. rubroflava). Another species with a cottony spore mass,
e. craniijormis, is often wrinkled, softball-sized,andwhite to tan when young, with a
well-developed sterile baseandyellow-green to yellow-brown spores. It is quite common in
southernandeastern North America in open areasandunder hardwoods, but to my
knowledge does not occur on the west coast. It is edible, like most Calvatias, when firm
and white inside. There are several other species with a sterile base that mayor may not
have a cottony spore mass when mature. These include C. elata, C. excipuliformis. and
C. lloydii(see comments under C. bovista for more details).
C a/vatia subcretacea
(Small Warted Mountain Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY golfball-to baseball-sized, 1.5-5 (7) cm in diameter, round or more
often cushion-shaped to somewhat flattened. Peridium (skin) thickandwhite when fresh,
the outer layer composed of white to smoky-gray or grayish-tipped warts which break up
into plates or polygonsandthen flake off, exposing the yellowish to brownish inner layer,
which breaks up irregularly. STERILE_BASE absent or rudimentary. SPORE_MASS
whiteandfirm becoming yellowish, then olive-buff to olive-brown or brownandpowdery.
Spores 3.5.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely ornamented.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or in small groups in duff under mountain coni-
fers, especially spruceandfir; fairly common in the mountains of western North America
from late spring through early fall. I have seen it several times in the Sierra Nevada ( often
with C.fumosa), but never on the coast.
EDIBILITY Edible when young, but difficult to find in sufficient quantity for a meal.
COMMENTS The modest size, warty peridium,andgrowth under mountain conifers
help to distinguish this commonplace Calvaria (see photo at top of p. 689). It is not as
smooth-skinned as C. fumosa,andis usually much smaller than Calbovista subsculpta
(see comments under Calvatia sculpta). Mature specimens lack the apical pore charac-
teristic of Lycoperdon.andtheir habitat is also distinctive; Sclerodermas are different in
colorandtexture. e. cretacea is a similar but larger species of arcticandtundra regions.
Ca/vatia fumosa
FRUITING_BODY golfball-to baseball-sized, round to oval, 3-8 (10) cm broad.
Outerandinner layers of peridium (skin) adhering to each other, thick (1-5 mm) and
persistent (not disintegrating); at first smoothandwhite, but soon becoming grayish to
brownishandoften areolate (cracking to form small scales), the undersurfaceandcracks
white. STERILE_BASE absent or rudimentary, but a mycelial cord often present. SPORE
MASS firmandwhite at first, then yellowish or olive, finally dark brownandpowdery (or
yellow-brown in one variety); odor often unpleasant ("a combination of sour milk, diesel
oil,andpit toilet"-Robert Ramsey). Spores 4.5-8 microns, round or nearly round, spiny.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in duff(sometimes buried) under spruce, fir,andother
mountain conifers; common in the western United States, spring through early fall. A
similar species occurs in our area under cypress,andothers occur in cultivated or hard-
packed soil (see comments).
EDIBILITY Bitter-tasting according to Orson K. Miller; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS The thick, tough, persistent skin (peridium)andmodest size plus the
absence of warts distinguish this Ca/valia from most others. Old specimens might be
mistaken for Sclerodermas, but possess capilliitumandare differently colored. The
peridium seldom disintegrates of its own accord, but rodents are apparently fond of
chewing on it, thus enabling the spores to escape. There are several similar Calvatias
with a thick, persistent peridium, including: C. hesperia, similar in size but white to gray-
ish, with smooth sporesandgrowing mostly in open places (farmland, deserts, etc.); C.
pachyderma, larger (5-15 cm in diameter)andwhitish when young, with smooth to
minutely warted spores, found in open, cultivated,andarid places;andC./epidophora of
the Midwest prairies, which is even larger (15-20 cm)andhas densely warted spores. See
also Mycenaslrum corium.
Mycenastrum corium
FRUITING_BODY 4-20 cm broad or more, round to somewhat pear-shaped when young,
eventually rupturing in irregular fissures to form rays or plates which may bend back
somewhat in a star-shaped pattern. Outer layer of peridium (skin) a thick, white, felty
coat which becomes areolate(separates into blocklike areas), forming thin, grayish, fibril-
lose patches which eventually wear away to expose the tough, hard, persistent, smooth
inner layer, which is brown to purple-brownandabout 2 mm thick. STERILE_BASE
rudimentary or absent, but mycelial fibers often present. SPORE_MASS firmandwhite
becoming olive-yellow to olive-brownandfinally dark brown to purple-brown and
powdery. Spores 8-12 microns, round, warted-reticulate. Capillitium branched, thorny.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground (sometimes partially buried) in horse
corrals, composted areas,andfields where livestock have been grazing; widely distributed,
but especially common in the West. In our area it occurs year-round. The tough spore
cases persist for months, sometimes breaking loose to blow about in the wind.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible when firmandwhite inside; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This peculiar puffball is easy to recognize but difficult to describe. The
thick, tough inner peridium (skin) distinguishes it from Bovistaandthe thin-skinned
Calvatias, while the white, felty outer layer separates it from Sclerodermaandthe thick-
skinned Calvatias. The presence of capillitium in the spore mass indicates a much closer
kinship to the true puffballs (Calvatia, etc.) than to the earthballs (Scleroderma). Its
tendency to fruit in localities where livestock loiter is another helpful (but fallible) field-
mar k. A bstoma towne;andA. ret;culatum are smalleranddirtier puffballs (2-6 cm broad)
with reticulate sporesandunbranched capillitium. The first is said to occur in old pastures
and other waste places; the latter has been found in coastal California under cypress.
Lycoperdon pyriforme (Pear-Shaped Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY pear-shaped to nearly round, but usually with a stemlike sterile
base; 1.5-5 cm highandsometimes almost as broad in the widest part. Peridium (skin)
whitish to pale brown when young, yellowish to dark rusty-brown in age; at first smooth
or with a few small scattered spines on top, then becoming finely cracked to form small
patches or minute granules or particles (making it rough to the touch), this rough outer
layer slowly but eventually falling away to expose the smooth inner layer in which an
apical pore or tear is very slow to form. STERILE_BASE small or well-developed,
spongy when fresh, occupying the stemlike base (if base is present); chambers very small;
conspicuous white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) usually radiating from the base and
connected to others in the surrounding wood or humus. SPORE_MASS at first firm and
white, then yellow to oliveandfinally deep olive-brownandpowdery. Spores 3-4.5
microns, round, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on stumps, rotting logs, sawdust,
and in lignin-rich humus; widely distributedandcommon, fruiting mostly in the fall and
winter in our area, but old bleached-out fruiting bodies can be found most any time. It
sometimes forms dense clusters "as large as a loaf of bread" (to borrow a phrase from
Alexander Smith).
EDIBILITY Edible when young, but only worth collecting when it occurs in quantity.
In my fickle fungal opinion it is one of the better puffballs, but is not as good as "a loaf of
bread"andis apt to be bitter if not absolutely whiteandfirm inside.
COMMENTS The tendency to grow on rotting wood is a distinctive feature ofthis pear-
shaped puffball, but it often appears to be terrestrial (when growing from buried wood
or humus rich in lignin). The white rhizomorphs or "roots" that emanate from the base of
the fruiting body plus the narrowed or stemlike baseandabsence of prominent spines
are also good field marks. I t is one of the few L ycoperdons that occurs in sufficient quantity
to merit collecting for the table. Other species: L.pedicellatum also grows on rotten wood.
but has longer spinesandornamented spores.
Lycoperdonfoetidum (Dark Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY pear-shaped to nearly round, but usually with a narrowed base; 1.5-6
cm highand1.5-4 cm broad. Outer layer of peridium (skin) composed of fine pointed
black to dark brown spines (especially dense on top) interspersed with granular material,
the spines persisting or eventually falling away; background (inner layer) thin, grayish-
tan to yellowish (usually distinctly yellow in age), developing an apical pore or tear at
maturity. STERILE_BASE well-developed, chamberedandspongy when fresh; exterior
usually paler than the rest of fruiting body, at least when young. SPORE_MASS white
when young, then yellow, finally dull cinnamon-brown to dark brown or sepia,andpow-
dery. Spores 4-5 microns, round, minutely spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humusanddebris in deep woods along
the west coast (also Europe). Fairly common in our area from fall through early spring-
especially under conifers-but easily overlooked because of its dark color.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible when firmandwhite inside; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known as L. nigrescens, this attractive puffball is our only Lyco-
perdon with dark brown to black spines when immalure (several species may be quite
dark in age, however-see L. per/alum). The dark spines contrast nicely with the white
flesh,andthe yellowish background color that develops in age is also distinctive. The
species epithet is something of a misnomer, for I have never found it to have an odor other
than the usual slightly unpleasant smell that all ripening puffballs develop.
Lycoperdon per/alum (Common Puffball; Gemmed Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY pear-shaped or top-shaped (broader above) or with a flattened lop,
or at times practically round with a narrowed, often wrinkled stemlike base; 1.5-6 (9) cm
broad, 3-7 (10) cm high. Outer layer of peridium (skin) consisting of slender, short, cone-
shaped spines interspersed with smaller spines or granules, the larger ones leaving scars
or pockmarks when they fall off; spines white to gray or in one form brown. Inner layer
at first with scars, but often smooth in old age, white to tan becoming yellowish-brown
to grayish-brown or dark brown in old age; eventually rupturing through a pore at the
top. STERILE_BASE large, well-developed, chambered, forming a stalklike base beneath
the spore mass; at first whiteandspongy, then yellow, olive, brown, or chocolate-colored.
SPORE_MASS firmandwhite but soon becoming softandturning yellow, then olive, and
finally becoming dark olive-brown to chocolate-brown or brownandpowdery. Spores
3.5-4.5 microns, round, minutely spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or clustered on ground in woodsandunder
trees, along roads, or sometimes in the open; very widely distributed. It is probably the
most abundant woodland puffball in North America,andour region is no exception. It
can be found most any time in our area, but usually fruits in the fall or winter.
EDIBILITY Edible when firmandwhite inside, but specimens showing the slightest
traces of yellow should not be eaten. It occasionally occurs in enough quantity to merit
collecting, but in my experience it is bland at bestandbitter at worst.
COMMENTS Also known as L. gemmatum, this cosmopolitan puffball is easily told
by its white to gray or brownish, slender, cone-shaped spines which leave small scars behind
when they fall off. As pointed out in the description, however, the pockmarks may
eventually disappear. It is one of the most variable of all puffballs, especially in color and
size, but the well-developed sterile base, dark olive-brown mature spore mass, and
ubiquitousness help to identify it. Very large specimens are occasionally found, but these
can be distinguished from Calvatia by the apical pore which forms in old age. There are
several similar species, including: L. umbr;num (=L. molle), widely distributed and
common, with spines that do not leave scars plus a dark brown to purple-brown mature
spore massanda purplish-tinged sterile base at maturity; L. muscorum, smallandrare,
found in deep moss; L. peck;;, with lavender-tinged spines when young; andL. r;mulatum,
with purplish sporesanda nearly smooth peridium. See also L. pyriforme.
Lycoperdonpulcherrimum (Long-Spined Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY more or less pear-shaped or rounded above with a narrowed, stem-
like, often wrinkled base; 2-5 cm broadandhigh. Outer layer of peridium (skin) with a
dense coating of long (3-6 mm), slender, white spines which typically form numerous
fascicles (by uniting at their tips); spines eventually wearing away to expose the smooth
brown to dark purple-brown inner layer; pore forming at the top in age. STERILE_BASE
occupying up to one half the height of fruiting body, chambered, white when young, brown
to purple-brown in age. SPORE_MASS whiteandfirm at first, becoming yellow and
eventually dark purple-brownandpowdery. Spores 4-4.5 microns, round, minutely spiny,
with a long pedicel ("tail") 10-13 microns in length.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in humus or on very rotten wood, usually under
hardwoods. It is not uncommon in eastern North America (especially the southern states),
and I occasionally find it ( or something very similar) in our area in the fallandearly winter.
EDIBILITY Edible when young, but too smallandinfrequent to be of value.
COMMENTS The long white spines that are frequently joined at their tips distinguish
this small puffball from the more common L. perlalUmandother small species. L. ech;-
natum (now called L. amer;canum by some puffball pundits) is a similar but more common
species with white spines that soon turn brownandleave small marks or reticulations on
the inner layer of the spore case when they fall off. A third puffball that often has united
-albeit shorter-spines, Bov;stella rad;cata, strikes a much different pose: it is larger
(3-10 (14) cm), with a thick, rooting baseandpreference for disturbed or open ground.
Though widespread, it is not particularly common, at least in our area.
Lycoperdon marginatum (Peeling Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY at first round to somewhat flattened, at maturity often broader than
it is tall, the underside usually wrinkled (at least in age)andsometimes witha short, rooting
base; 1-5 cm in diameter. Peridium (skin) white or tinged pinkish when young, the outer
layer composed of short erect warts or spines which peel off in sheets, exposing the smooth
to slightly scurfy or faintly pitted, pale to dark olive-brown inner layer; an apical pore
eventually forming. STERILE_BASE chambered, usually well-developed but sometimes
inconspicuous. SPORE_MASS whiteandfirm at first, then olive to grayish-brown and
eventually powdery. Spores 3.5-5.5 microns, round, minutely ornamented or smooth,
sometimes with a broken pedicel ("tail").
HABITAT Scattered or in groups or clusters on ground, usually in sandy soil or waste
places; widely distributed. I find it regularly in sandy soil under oak, pine, madrone, and
manzanita, usually in the late fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Edible when firmandwhite inside. In Mexico, this speciesandL. mizte-
corum are used to induce auditory hallucinations. It is known as "gi-i-sa-wa," meaning
..fungus of the second quality"(L. miztecorum being the fungus offirst quality). However,
no intoxicating substances were found when these puffballs were analyzed.
COMMENTS The peculiar manner in which the outer layer of the peridium separates
completely from the inner layerandpeels off in sheets is the hallmark of this pleasing
puffball. L. cand;dum is a synonym.L. nettyana, known only from the Pacific Northwest,
also peels off in sheets, but is more or less pear-shaped (with a well-developed, stalklike
sterile base). Vascellum (=Lycoperdon) curtis;; is also quite similar, but usually grows
in grassandhas little or no sterile base. L. rimulatum (see comments under L. perlarum)
sometimes peels off in sheets, but has a smooth (spineless) peridium.
Vascellum pratense (Field Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY typically top-shaped (broader above) or round with a narrowed base,
often wrinkled somewhat below; 2-6 cm highand2-4 cm broad. Outer layer of peridium
(skin) scurfy from a coating of particles or fine spines (especially on top) which disappear
in age, exposing the smooth inner layer; white when young, yellowish-tan to metallic
brown in age ( or the inner layer grayish); rupturing at the top to form a large pore that soon
widens so that only the baseandlower portion of the spore case remain, forming a..bowl."
STERILE_BASE usually well-developed, chambered, white becoming brownish or
purplish in age, separated from the spore mass by a thin membrane (but see comments).
SPORE_MASS white but rather soft when young, then greenish-yellowandfinally olive-
brownandpowdery. Spores 3-5 microns, round, minutely warted, more or less apiculate.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in grassy places-la wns, golf courses, pastures,
etc; widely distributed, but especially common on the west coast(along with V./loydianum
-see comments). In our mild climate it occurs year-round, but is most abundant in the
fall. I have also seen large fruitings in Oregon.
EDIBILITY Edible when immature, but of mediocre quality.
COMMENTS This undistinguished grassland puffball can be distinguished by its modest
size, the presence of a sterile baseandsoft, deciduous, scurfy spines or granules,andthe
bowl-or urnlike remains of ruptured specimens. It is often found in the company of Bo-
vista p/umbea, which is rounderandsmootherandlacks a sterile base. It used to be called
Lycoperdon h;emale, but was transferred to the genus Vascel/um because of microscopic
differences. However, now that taxonomists have settled upon its genus name, they cannot
seem to agree on a species epithet. Some hold out for V. pratense, others for V. depressum,
while Alexander Smith has described the common western variant as a "new" species, V.
Iloyd;anum, because the membrane separating the spore mass from the sterile base is not
very distinct. It hardly matters what you call it, however, since it belongs to that vast army
of fungi that are "better neglected than collected." Other species: V. (=Lycoperdon) curtis;;
is a small (0.5-2 cm) widespread species with numerous spines when younganda distinct
apical pore at maturity. It somewhat resembles Lycoperdon marginatum when fresh, but
usually grows gregariously in grass.
Bovista plumbea (Tumbling Puffball; Tumble Ball)
FRUITING_BODY round or slightly flattened, 14 (8) em in diameter, usually with a
small patch of dirt (held together by fibers) at base. Outer layer of peridium (skin) white,
smooth, felty, or with small flattened scales, peeling away or shrivelling up in age to reveal
the smooth, papery inner layer which is blue-gray to purplish-brown or lead-colored in
ageandusually has a metallic luster; inner layer rupturing at the top to form a large
circular ""mouth." STERILE_BASE absent. SPORE_MASS whiteandfirm at first, then
yellow-oliveandmushy, finally powderyandolive-brown to deep chocolate-brown.
Spores 5-7 x 4-5 microns, oval or broadly elliptical to nearly round, minutely spiny to
nearly smooth, with a long pointed pedicel (""tair') 8-14 microns in length.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in grassy places; widely distributed and
very common. In our area it fruits mainly in the fallandwinter in pastures, year-round
on lawns, golf courses,andcemeteries. The thin, papery windblown spore cases can be
found most any time.
EDIBILITY Edible when immature, but mediocre. It is bland,anda great many would
be needed for a meal.
COMMENTS This paltry puffball is a common fungal feature of our lawnsandpastures.
In the immature stage it can be distinguished from Vascel/um pratenseandother grass-
loving puffballs by its small size, smooth white skin,andabsence of a sterile base, while
older specimens are easily told by their lustrous, paper-thin spore cases. Another wide-
spread cosmopolitan species, B. pila, is slightly larger (3-9 em in diameter)andattached to
the ground by a small cord or "root." It has a dark brown to bronze mature spore case,
smooth apedicellate (tail-less) spores,andgrows in cultivatedandmanured soil as well as
in grassandopen woods. I have found it several times in our area, but it is not nearly as
numerous as B. plumbea. Another larger species with a cordlike root, B. nigrescens, is
lead-gray when matureandis of questionable occurrence in North America. A cosmopoli-
tan species, B. pusilla (=Lycoperdon pusillum), is one of our smallest puffballs. It is
marble-sizedandmore or less round aboveandpinched below to a cordlike root. It also
lacks a sterile baseandthe sporesare not pedicellate. It usually grows ingrass, bare ground,
vacant lots, sandy soil, etc.; it is also known asB. cali/ornica. Other small species include:
B. longispora, similar to B. pusilla, but with a slight sterile baseandelliptical spores;
B. leucoderma, reddish-to bronze-brown when mature with a patch of fibers at the base
when young; B. minor, rare, with a trash-or dirt-covered spore case, found in poor soils
and usually developing underground; B. colorata (=Lycoperdon coloratum), easily told
by its bright yellow to golden-orange color;andB. dakotense, one of the few members
of the genus to have a sterile base (leading to confusion with Lycoperdon, but usually
growing in grassy or open areas). None of these are worth eating.
Disciseda candida (Acorn Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY round to somewhat flattened or irregular, 0.8-3 cm broad. Outer
layer of peridium (skin) dirt-incrusted, composed of white mycelial matter that is cottony
when young but tough in age; inner layer minutely granulose or scurfy, pallid to tan or
grayish, forming a basal pore at maturity. Outer layer rupturing around its periphery,
the upper portion retaining the inner layer (spore case) within it,anddetachingandflip-
ping over so as to resemble an acorn in its cup (thereby causing the pore to appear apical).
STERILE_BASE absent. SPORE_MASS white when very young, soon yellowish to olive,
finally olive-brown to brownandpowdery. Spores 3.5-4.5 microns, round, minutely
warted, with a short stubby pedice1("tail").
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in pasturesandother grassy or open areas, along paths,
in barnyards, etc; usually developing at or beneath ground levelandthen flipping over or
breaking free to tumble about in the wind. It is widely distributed, but not common. It
has been found in southern California on sandyandgrassy soil. In eastern North America
it is sometimes found with Arachnion album (see the key to Lycoperdales). D. sublerranea
(see comments) has been reported from Washington, Colorado,andWyoming.
EDIBILITY Worthless-it is rarely found when white inside,andis insubstantial anyway.
COMMENTS This peculiar puffball is easily told by its small sizeandacornlike mature
fruiting body. Other species: D. subterranea is similar, but has a grayish to bluish-gray
spore caseandlarger spores, while D. pedicellata has spores with long "tails." Several
other species occur in sandy or exposed soil in CaliforniaandtheSouthwest, butare rarely
collectedanddifficult to identify because they are not necessarily acornlike. They have very
thin spore cases (as in Bovisla) that usually retain vestiges of the outer peridium. Some
of them are: D. ater, which has a blackish outer peridium; D. luteola, originally described
from Lake Tahoe, California, with a yellowish to dull yellow-brown spore case;andD.
brandegeei, a desert species with smooth spores.
GeastrumJornicatum (Acrobatic Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round or flattened when youngandincrusted with debris, the outer
wall (peridium) then splitting into 3-6 (usually4 or 5) rays which peel backandunder until
they're more or less erect. Mature fruiting body 3-6 cm broadand5-10 cm high, usually
poised on the pointed tips of its rays, the tips joined to a concave mycelial mat or "cup"
which has a grayish interioranddebris-incrusted exteriorandmay be broken into rays
itself. RAYS not hygroscopic; underside usually smoothandtan to brown; upper surface
chocolate-brown to dark brown or nearly blackish, but peeling off in patches to reveal the
smooth, paler brown or tan undersurface. SPORE_CASE 1-2.5 cm broad, round or
somewhat flattened to urn-shaped, mounted on a pedicel (short stalk), often with a
compressed collar underneath it (at the top of the pedicel); surface brown to dark choco-
late brown, finely velvety; rupturing at the top to form a fairly large, irregularly torn or
lacerated pore. SPORE_MASS chocolate-brown to blackish-brownandpowdery at
maturity. Spores 3-5 microns, round, warted.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in humus under trees, on rubbish, around
stablesandother waste places, etc.; widely distributed, but apparently rare except in
southern Californiaandthe Southwest, where it is quite common. In our area] have
found it in only one locality-under oaks where there is run-off from a bathing area for
horses-but it fruits there by the hundredsandcan be found every month of the year. In
New Mexico it is quite common under juniper.
EDIBILITY Inedible, but makes an extraordinary ornament or conversation piece (it
is easily dried).
COMMENTS One of the most distinctive of all fleshy fungi, this earthstar is a true
pleasure to find. Mature individuals defy description, but look something like a cross
between a flat tireanda ballet dancer. The tendency of the rays to stand erect on their tips
(like a ballet dancer) plus the membranous mycelial cup ("flat tire") to which they're
attached are the principal field marks. Because of the likeness to a human figure, it
was named Fungus anthropomorphus when first described in 1688. Specimens are some-
times found with only one or two "arms" extended, as ifthey were putting out tentative
"feelers" before committing themselves completely (and irrevocably) to exposure. Other
species: G. quadrifidum (also called G. coronatum) is a similar but somewhat smaller
species with a well-defined, conical mouth that is paler than the rest of the spore case; it is
also equipped with a mycelial "cup"andis widely distributed. G. minimum, which mayor
may not be a diminutive form of G. coronatum. has8-12 raysandusually lacks a mycelial
cup; it occurs commonly in the Southwest under pinyon andjuniper. For other species with
a pedicel beneath the spore case, see G. pectinatum.
Geastrum pectinatum (Beaked Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall (peridium) then split-
ting into 5-12 rays ( usually 6-10) which peel backandunder or stand upright; 3-6 cm broad
when expanded. RAYS not hygroscopic, copiously incrusted with mycelial matter and
debris on underside (exterior); upper surface brown to grayish-brown, fleshy, cracking
irregularly or flaking off as it dries, revealing the smooth undersurface. SPORE_CASE
0.5-2 cm broad, round to somewhat urn-shaped, mounted on a prominent pedicel; sur-
face more or less smooth, lead-colored to purple-brown, but often appearing paler from a
hoary sheen; underside sometimes striate or grooved near the pedicel; rupturing to form
a prominent apical pore that is beaklike (more or less conical)andstrongly grooved or
furrowed longitudinally. Pedicel slender, 2-6 mm long, sometimes with a collar or ring
around its middle or base. SPORE_MASS brownandpowdery when mature. Spores
4-6 (7) microns, round, warted.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in humus under trees, especially conifers such asjuniper,
or less commonly in the open; widely distributed but not common, fruiting after rains but
persisting for weeks or months. I have found it (or something very similar) in New Mexico.
EDIBILITY Too tough to be edible.
COMMENTS The prominent pediceland"beaked" mouth of the spore case distinguish
this earthstar from most others. The rays are not hygroscopic,andtheir tips are not joined
to a mycelial "cup" as in G. fornicatum. Other earthstars with a pedicelandgrooved
mouth include: G. striatum (=G. bryantii), similar but typically with a prominent collar
at the base of the spore case (where it meets the pedicel); G. nanum (=G. schmide/ii), also
similar but much smaller (up to 2.5 cm broad)andmore common, with a shorter "beak"
and a short, thick pedicel; G. smithii, common in the Southwest, with a flattened-conical
mouth seated in a well-defined, depressed area;andG. xerophi/um, also common in the
Southwest (but usually growing in the desert), with a short pedicel (if any)anda granular
spore case. Two species with a non-grooved mouth should also be mentioned: G./imbatum
is a medium-sized to fairly large species with a well-defined fibrillose (but not grooved
or beaked) mouthand6-12 rays (more than G.fornicatum-see photo on p. 703). It comes
in a striking dark brown to black version that is common in the Southwest,anda paler
(pinkish-buff to brown) form that is more widely distributed. G. ruJescens, on the other
hand, has a poorly-defined, often fringed or torn mouthanda short or indistinct
pedicel. It is fairly large (5-10 cm broad)andis more common in eastern North America
than in the West. All of these are better eyed then fried.
Geastrum triplex (Saucered Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round to flattened or bulblike when young, the outer wall splitting
at maturity into 4-8 rays which unfoldandthen bend under the spore case; 3-10 cm broad
when expanded. RAYS not hygroscopic, usually free of adhering debris on underside;
upper surface with a rather thick, fleshy, pinkish to tan or brown layer that cracks into
patches, the central region usually breaking loose to form a broad cup or saucer around
the spore case. SPORE_CASE 1-3 cm broad, round or flattened, sessile (nol mounted on
a stalk); pale to dark tan, grayish, or even red4ish-brown, rupturing through an apical
pore which is often paler, slightly raised,andradially fibrillose. SPORE_MASS deep
brown to smoky-brownandpowdery when mature. Spores 3.5-4.5 microns, round,
warted.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in forest humusandunder trees (usually hardwoods);
widely distributedandcommon in some regions. I have found it only twice in our area
(in the fallandwinter), but have seen large fruitings under aspen in the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Supposedly edible when immature (white inside), but like all earthstars,
rarely found in that stage,andtoo toughandfibrous to eat when older.
COMMENTS Also known as G. indicum, this relatively large, attractive earthstar is
distinguished by the shallow cup or"saucer" that often forms around the base ofthe spore
case. There seems to be a great deal of variation in the extent to which the fleshy upper
surface of the rays cracks,andthose which don't crackandlack a saucer can be confused
with G. saccalurnandG. firnbriaturn (which, however, are often smaller). For other
relatively large, non-hygroscopic earthstars, see comments under G. peclinaturn.
Geastrum saccatum (Sessile Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round, flattened, or bulblike when young, the outer wall splitting
at maturity into 4-8 rays which unfoldandthen bend back under the spore case; (1.5) 2-5
cm broad when expanded. RA YS not hygroscopic, rather rubbery when fresh, relatively
cleanandbuff to pale tan on underside; upper surface fleshy, pallid becoming pale tan,
pinkish, or ochre-brown; sometimes cracking. SPORE_CASE 0.5-2 cm broad, round to
somewhat flattened, smooth, sessile (without a stalk or pedicel), papery, pallid to buff,
dull grayish, or brownish; rupturing through an apical pore that is often paler in color
and set off from the rest of the spore case by a circular line, ridge, or groove; pore usually
raisedandfibrillose. SPORE_MASS brownandpowdery when mature. Spores 3.5-5
microns, round, warted.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in humus under trees (especially conifers),
in woods, or occasionally in the open; widely distributed. This speciesandG.fimbriatum
(see comments) seem to be the most common Geastrums in our area. They fruit mainly
in the fallandwinter, but persist for weeks or months without decaying.
EDIBILITY Inedible in the mature state in which it is usually found.
COMMENTS The spore case in this species has neither the pedicel (short stalk) of G.
fornicatumandG. pectinatum. nor the saucer of G. triplex.andthe rays are not hygro-
scopic. There are several similar species, including: G. fimbriatum (=G. sessile), often
slightly darker, with a torn or fringed apical pore that is not set off by a circle, usually
growing under treesandwidely distributed;andG. rufescensandG. xerophilum. both
of which may have a slight pedicel (see comments under G. pectinatum for more details
on these species,andalso note the hygroscopic Geastrums discussed under Astraeus
hygrometricus, most of which lack a pedicel).
Myr;ostoma coliforme (Saltshaker Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall (peridium) splitting
int05-14 pointed rays which open out; 2-12 cm broad when expanded. RAYS not hygro-
scopic; more or less smooth on underside (exterior), but often covered with dirt near base;
inner (upper) surface with a brown to cinnamon fleshy layer that weathers or peels away,
revealing the paler (buff) undersurface. SPORE_CASE 1-5 cm broad, round to somewhat
flattened, usually mounted on several slender, short, sometimes inconspicuous pedicels
(columns); surface minutely roughened, brown to silvery-brown or grayish in age, rup-
turing through several to many mouths or pores, mostly on the upper portion (the number
of mouths often corresponding to the number of pedicels). SPORE_MASS powdery and
brown at maturity. Spores 4-6 microns, round, warted.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in sandy soil, sometimes under trees, fruiting after
heavy rains but persisting year-round; widely distributed. It is usually listed as rare, but
is not uncommon in New Mexico, where I have seen it in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Not edible.
COMMENTS This fungal rarity can be recognized with clarity by its saltshaker-like
spore case mounted on several short columns. Most taxonomists place it alongside
Astraeus in the Sclerodermatales because of certain microscopic features. Geastrum
pluriosteum is a rare southwestern earthstar that forms one to several pores on a stalkless
spore case.
A straeus hygrometricus (Hygroscopic Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round to flattened when young, the outer wall splitting at maturity
into 6-15 pointed rays; 1-5 (8) cm broad when fully expanded. RAYS hygroscopic (un-
folding in wet weatherandclosing up over the spore case in dry weather), often unequal in
length, toughandleathery when moist, hard when dry; underside (exterior) fibrillose,
usually with adhering sandandsometimes with black hairlike threads (rhizomorphs) at
base; upper surface (interior) at first smooth, but often developing numerous cracks,
pale tan darkening to brown, gray, or blackish-brown. SPORE_CASE 0.5-3 cm broad,
round or somewhat flattened, sessile (without a stalk), thinandpapery; surface whitish
to grayish or brownishandroughened by particles (and/or finely reticulate); rupturing
at maturity through an irregular or poorly defined apical pore or slit. SPORE_MASS
brown to cocoa-brownandpowdery when mature. Spores 7-11 microns, round, finely
warted.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in old fields, sand or sandy soil, pastures,
roadsides, waste places, etc.; worldwide in distribution. It grows from sea level to above
timberline, from verdant pastures to desert wastelands. In our area it fruits mainly in the
fall, but the tough fruiting bodies persist for months without decaying. I have seen hundreds
of spiderlike fruiting bodies in Arizona under pinyon pine, but when the weathered,
blackened outer skins (rays) are found without their spore cases, they look like old tire
patches.
EDIBILITY Indisputably inedible because of its toughness.
COMMENTS This veritable barometer is the most theatrical of all the earthstars. A few
minutes' immersion in water will open up old, dried-up specimens that seem as tightly
closed as clenched fists. It is distinguished from A. pteridis by its smaller size (but see
comments under that species). There are also several hygroscopic species of Geastrum
that have spores less than 7.5 microns in diameter. They grow mainly in arid climates( e.g.,
the deserts of the West), but a few are more cosmopolitan. Several of these Geastrums can
be distinguished from A. hygrometric us by the presence of a prominently grooved apical
pore, e.g., G. drummondii, with a granular spore case; G. umbilicatum, with a smooth
spore case;andG. campestre, with a roughened spore caseandsometimes a short pedicel
(stalk). Others have a fibrillose or fringed pore, e.g., G. mammosum, especially common
in the Southwest under pinyonandjuniper; G. recolligens, very similar, but found in sand
or waste places;andG. arenarium, also in sand or deserts, but only slightly hygroscopic.
Still others have a naked mouth (merely a puncture or slit) like that of A. hygrometricus.
One ofthese, G.JloriJorme(=G. delicatus) is widely distributedandoccurs in our area, but
can be separated from A. hygrometricus by its small ( up to 1.5 cm broad), smoother spore
caseandsmaller spores.
Astraeus pteridis (Giant Hygroscopic Earthstar)
FRUITING_BODY round or somewhat flattened when young, the outer wall then split-
ting into 6 or more rays;5-15 cm or more broad when fully expanded. RAYS hygroscopic
(unfolding in wet weather, closing up overthe spore case indryweather), thick (3-6 mm),
toughandleathery becoming hard or woody when dry; exterior (underside) with a thin
coating of matted brownish fibrils which mayor may not wear away; upper surface (in-
terior) often conspicuously cracked or fissured transversely to form a checked pattern;
tan when fresh (but dark brown in the cracks), darker overall in age(but weathered speci-
mens sometimes whitened). SPORE_CASE2.5-5 cm broad, round or somewhat flattened,
sessile (not seated on a stalk); at first roughened, veined, or fibrillose, but soon smooth or
merely roughened; grayish-brown to brown; rupturing irregularly in age, i.e., not forming
a distinct pore. SPORE_MASS dark brownandpowdery when mature. Spores 8-12
microns, round, warted.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups on ground, usually along roads, rail-
road tracks, in waste places, old fields, etc., but sometimes in woods; known only from
western North America. In our area it is fairly common year-round.
EDIBILITY Much too leathery or woody to be edible.
COMMENTS The thick rays which are frequently checkered like a crooked crossword
puzzle plus the large sizeandirregular rupturing of the spore case distinguish this im-
pressive species from its more mundane cousin, A. hygrometricus.andother hygroscopic
earthstars. However, the two species seem to intergrade in our area (e.g., you can find
fairly large, uncheckered specimens),andconsequently some earthstar authorities "re-
duce" A. pteridis to a variety of A. hygrometricus. For some inexplicable reason, the
fructifications remind me of "tribbles"-those lovable but relentlessly prolific creatures
of "Star Trek" renown.
Scleroderma citrinum (Common Earthball) Color Plate 190
FRUITING_BODY 2-10 (12) cm broadand2-6 cm high, round or somewhat flattened,
the underside often with a stemlike base composed of ridges, mycelial fibers, and/or
adhering debris; eventually cracking into lobes to form an irregular pore, the lobes nol
normally bending outward or unfolding appreciably. PERIDIUM (skin) hardandfairly
rigid (rindlike), 1-3 mm thick, white when sectioned but usually staining pinkish (if fresh);
surface yellow-brown to dingy yellow to ochre or tanandcracked or arranged into
prominent, inherent scales which often have a smaller, central wart. SPORE_MASS
white when very young, soon gray to purple-gray with whitish veins often running through
it, then dark purple-gray to purple-black or blackandstill solidandfirm; eventually
becoming powderyandblackish-brown. Spores 8-13 microns, round, strongly reticulate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clumps on groundandrotten wood,
usually in forests but sometimes in gardens or in sandy or disturbed soil; widespread and
the most common of all Scleroderma species. Although it is more typically a northern
than a southern species, I have seen enormous fruitings in the Great Smoky Mountains
of Tennessee. In our area I have found it in a garden in October, but it is rare-at least
in comparison to other species.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! If eaten raw or consumed in quantity it causes nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea,andeven chills or cold sweats. Nevertheless, it has been used by some unscrupu-
lous individuals to adulterate truffles.
COMMENTS Also known as S. aurant;umandS. vulgare, this earth ball is easily
recognized by its scaly, yellow-brown, rindlike skin that tends to stain pinkish when cut,
and the purple-black spore mass (see color plate). It might be mistaken for an edible puff-
ball, but is only rarely found while still white inside: The scales often looked embossed
(i.e., with a central wart), a character that helps distinguish it from scaly specimens of
S. cepa. S. bovisla. etc. (see comments under S. cepa). Other species: S. macrorhizon has a
long "stalk" composed of tough strandsandfibersandgrows exclusively in sand (often
in sand dunes!). It is widely distributed in northern latitudesandhas spores similar to
those of S. cilrinum. but slightly larger. S. verrucosumandS. areolatum (=S. lycoper-
do;des) are smallish species with a thin (up to I mm thick), delicately scaly peridium that
usually ruptures in old age through an apical pore or tear. Both have spiny rather than
reticulate spores,anda stalklike, fibrous base,andare widely distributed under hard-
woods or sometimes conifers. (In S. verrucosum the spores are 7-11 microns in diameter;
in S. areo/alum they are 10-18 microns.)
Scleroderma cepa group (Smooth Earthball)
FRUITING_BODY 1.5-8 (10) em broad and/or high, more or less round to somewhat
flattened or lobed (often broader than it is high), the underside often-but not always-
with a rootlike or stalklike base made up of tough mycelial fibersandadhering debris;
eventually rupturing irregularly or splitting at the top into lobes which may peel back
slightly. PERIDIUM (skin) hardandfairly tough (rind like) when fresh, 1-3 mm thick,
white in cross-section but often staining reddish-pink to vinaceous when cut (if fresh).
Surface whitish or pallid, soon becoming buff, yellowish, straw-colored, or brownish,
often staining reddish or vinaceous when rubbed (especially the underside), then dis-
coloring brownish; smooth when young, often becoming areolate (cracked to form scales)
in age or where exposed to light (especially on top). SPORE_MASS whiteandvery firm
when young, soon becoming black or purple-black (sometimes with paler veins) while
remaining firm, then eventually becoming powderyandsomewhat paler or browner.
Spores 7-12 microns. round, spiny but not at all reticulate.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious under trees (both hardwoodsandconifers),
in woods or cultivated areas, along roads, in gardens, lawns, etc.; widely distributed.
In our area this speciesandits numerous look-alikes (see comments) are common year-
round in a variety of habitats, but seem especially prevalent under pineand/or eucalyptus.
EDIBILITY Poisonous! Chanterelle pickerandRussula-kicker Bob Sellers of Santa
Cruz, California, ate a small piece of S. laeve (see comments) under the impression that all
"puffballs" were edible. Twenty minutes later he broke into a cold sweat, felt nauseous,
and started vomiting. After expelling the offender, he recovered quickly.
COMMENTS There are a number of microscopically distinct Sclerodermas that will
more or less fit the above description. Collectively they can be recognized by their pallid
to buff or yellow-brown peridium that is initially smooth but may crack into scales as it
is exposed (the scales are not inherent as in S. citrinum), by their tough rindlike skin, and
by their firm purple-black spore mass when young. Features such as the tendency ofthe
peridium to stain reddish when rubbedandthe presence or absence of a "stalk" composed
of mycelial fibers seem to vary according to environmental conditions. Other species:
S. jlavidum is considered by some Scleroderma-scholars to be a form of S. cepa. It is
microscopically identical, but does not usually bruise reddishandnormally splits open
into starlike lobes which bend back to expose the spore mass. S. laeve closely resembles
the "true" S. cepa, but has slightly larger spores (9-15 microns); it appears to be the most
common Scleroderma in our area. S. albidum is also similar, but has even larger spores
(12-17 microns). S. reae, which favors arid habitatsandruptures irregularly, can be dis-
tinguished microscopically by its partially reticulate spores(9-18 microns).S.jloridanum
also has partially reticulate spores, but is tropicalandsubtropicalandruptures stellately
(i.e., splits into starlike lobes). There are also four farflung Sclerodermas with completely
reticulate spores: S. bovista, which sometimes develops blackish spots or stains in old
ageandhas spores 9.5-16 microns broad;S.juscum, which favors conifersandhas spores
averaging 13.5-19.5 microns; S. hypogaeum (=S. arenicola), a common vinaceous-
staining conifer-lover that often grows undergroundandhas an unusually thick peridium
and spores 18-23 microns broad; andS. michiganense, which has spores likeS. hypogaeum
and often grows underground, but has a thinner peridiumandfavors hardwoods. All of
the above species are widespreadandvary considerably in size, form,andscali ness,andall
but the latter species may stain reddish or vinaceous when bruised. They should be con-
sidered poisonous until proven otherwise. Also see the species listed under S. citrinum.
Scleroderma geaster (Dead Man's Hand)
FRUITING_BODY 4-15 em broad or high when closed, 12-30 em broad when expanded
(after rupturing); at first round to oval (but often somewhat flattened or irregularly lobed),
eventually splitting into several (usually 4-8) coarse, irregular, thick rays which curl back
in starlike fashion to expose the spore mass. PERIDIUM (skin) very thick (3-10 mm) and
firmandtough when fresh; exterior whitish becoming yellowish, straw-colored, or
brownish, roughened or somewhat hairy, often with adhering debrisandoften fissured
or cracked into scales, especially in age; interior (upper side of rays) brownish becoming
blackenedandempty in old age; base often attached to the soil by a mycelial "roof' of
tough fibers. SPORE_MASS at first firmandpallid, soon dark gray to purple-black
or black (and still firm), eventually becoming brown to dark brown or purple-brown
and powdery. Spores (5) 6-11 (12) microns, round, with warts or spines that often form
incomplete lines or ridges (i.e., partially reticulate). Peridium containing few if any thick-
walled hyphae.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on hillsides, along roads, in ditches, poor
soil, sand, asphalt, gravel, etc.; often buried or partially buried before maturity. It is
widely distributedandquite common in our area, especially in sandy soil. It usually ap-
pears in the fall, but the thick tough skins take a long time to decompose.
EDIBILITY Poisonous? This is one fleshy fungus I've never been tempted to eat!
COMMENTS The large sizeandtough skinJhat splits into coarse, thick rays are the
telltale traits of this bizarre fungus. It is also known (more correctly) as S. polyrh;zon
or S. polyrh;zum. It rivals Piso/ithus tinclOrius ("Dead Man's Foot") for grotesque-
ness. The two thrive in similar milieu-asphalt, sand, poor soil, etc.-and make a well-
matched if not exactly charming couple. It might be mistaken for a large cup fungus (e.g.,
Sarcosphaera), but it usually has traces of the powdery spore mass to distinguish it. The
rays lack the intact inner spore case characteristic of the earthstars,andthere mayor
may not be a stemlike base of mycelial fibers. It can also be confused with Mycenastrum
corium. but that puffball has a thick white felty outer peridiumanda smooth, purple-
brown inner one which splits into lobes at maturity. Other species: S. texense (=S. Jur-
ellum) is a very similar, thick-skinned species with a scalier (often shingled) exterior
and thick-walled hyphae in the peridium; it has a more southerly(tropicaland subtropical)
distribution but also occurs on the west coast. S. flavidum( see comments under the S. cepa
group) also splits in starlike fashion, but is much smaller, witha thinner(about I mm thick)
peridium that is tawnyandmore or less smooth.
Pisolithus tinctorius
(Dead Man's Foot)
FRUITING_BODY 5-30 cm or more highand4-20 cm broad, at first round to pear-
shaped, then club-shaped (i.e., usually but not always with a narrowed, rooting base or
"stalk"), finally breaking up in age or taking on the appearance of a large dusty root or
stump; odor mild to aromatic or unpleasant, depending on the age. SPORE_CASE with
a thin, brittle peridium (skin) that is variously colored (but usually yellowish, purplish,
olive-black, or brown)andoften lustrousandsoon ruptures irregularly or flakes away.
Upper portion of fruiting body containing hundreds of seedlike peridioles which grad ually
dIsintegrate, turning into a crumbly or dusty mass of brown spores (the disintegration
process starts at the top of fruiting bodyandproceeds downward). Peridioles small (24
mm long), elongated to oval or circular, whitish to greenish-yellow, yellow, brownish, or
vinaceous, at first imbedded in a sticky dark or blackish substance which dries out and
becomes brittle or crumbly at maturity. Lower portion of fruiting body typically con-
sisting of a fibrous, stalklike, persistent, sterile, rooting base which may have coarse
greenish-yellow mycelial fibers attached. VOLVA absent. SPORE_MASS powdery when
mature, dark brown to cinnamon-brown. Spores 7-12 microns, round, warty or spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups on or along roads, in waste
places,andin hardpacked, poor, sandy, or gravelly soil; very widely distributed, but
especially common in Californiaandthe Pacific N orthwest( the largest fruitings I've seen
were in the Siskiyou Mountains of northern California). In our area it fruits chiefly in
the late summerandfall, but is slow to decayandcan be found most any time. It forms
mycorrhiza with a wide range of treesandshrubs (oak, pine, etc.)andis said to be of value
in reforestation projects.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. In Europe it is known as the "Bohemian Truffle" and
used as an aromatic seasoning when unripe,andin China it is employed medicinally. It
is scarcely appetizing, however,andshould be tried very cautiously, if at alL The name
tinctorius reflects its use as a dye-a variety of rich colors (mostly brownsandgolds, but
also blacksanddark blues) can be obtained, depending on the mordants usedandthe
type of soil in which it is found.
COMMENTS This dusty monstrosity is among the most distinctiveandmemorable of
all the fleshy fungi. Young specimens are somewhat puffball-like (i.e., pear-or club-
shaped), but are easily told by the hundreds of seedlike peridioles they contain (see Color
Plate 185). In this stage the peridium often has a beautiful metallic luster. Older spe-
cimens, on the other hand, can be recognized from a great distance by their dusty
brown stumplike stance. Fresh specimens will stain practically anything they come into
contact with,andthe dry spore dust coats everything in the vicinity. This species has a
penchant for adversity, inevitably fruiting in poor soil, ditches, chaparral, or road cuts
(often in the company of "Dead Man's Hand," Scleroderma geasler), or even bursting up
through asphalt. As might be expected, it is disdained by many mycologists (" I t is the most
objectionable of all fungi ..."; "This ugly, stinky fungus ..."), but to me it is one ofthe most
enthralling-if not beautiful-of all fungi (I call it "Dead Man's Foot" not to demean it,
but because it looks like one). Its wide distributionandvariable features have resulted
in a plethora of aliases, includingP. arenarius,P. arrhizus, andPolysaccumpisocarpium.
D;ctyocephalos attenuatus (Stalked Oddball)
FRUITING_BODY beginning underground as an "egg" completely encased in a mem-
brane, the stalk then elongating ra pidlyandthe ruptured outer membrane forming a volva
at its base. Mature fruiting body consisting of a spore case mounted on a tough stalk.
SPORE_CASE round to somewhat flattened or even depressed on top, or irregular(e.g.,
sometimes with several lobes), 2-6 cm highand5-13 cm broad, seated on a disclike enlarge-
ment of the stalk apex which is white to brownish in old specimens. Outer peridium(skin)
fleshy to slightly gelatinous when young, becoming tougheranddeveloping brown to
reddish scales or warts which vary from small, flat,andmore or less persistent to large,
pyramidalanddeciduous; lower margin sometimes with a hanging "veil" composed of
adhering tissue stripped from the stalk during expansion. Inner layer of peridium 1-2 mm
thick, usually paler( whitish to buff) than outer peridium, but sometimes darkeninginage.
Upper portion of spore case breaking up into irregular pieces which fall away; lower
portion tougherandpersisting as a more or less bowl-shaped structure. STALK (5)
10-40 (52) cm long, 2-5 cm thick at apex, equal or more often tapered downward (rarely
thicker below or bulbous), the base sometimes pointedandfree of the volva, sometimes
with 1-2 rootlike mycelial cords attached; solid (or with insect cavities), sometimes forked
(with one spore case on each branch), fleshy-tough becoming woody when dry; at first
white, but becoming brown in age; often grooved, ridged, and/or flattenedandsometimes
twisted; often cracking, peeling, or curling back to form scales or sometimes even an
irregular "ring" or "annulus:' VOLVA at base of stalk saclike, but occasionally poorly
developed or absent; white to tan when fresh, 3-11 cm high; tough, hard, or chalky in age.
SPORE_MASS divided up into numerous whitish-walled "cells" (peridioles), but all but
the lowermost "cell" walls disintegrating, so that the mature spore mass is brown and
powdery, usually with an unpleasant odor (like decaying fish); lowermost "cell" walls
often persisting after the spores have been dispersed as flattened, pointed "teeth" on the
inner surface of the spore case, giving it a pitted or reticulate appearance. Spores 5-7
microns, round or nearly round, warted or spiny.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups ( often in tufts of 2-5 individuals
and occasionally two emerging from a single volva) in barren sandy soil or clay, waste
places, etc. It is widespread in the aridandsemi-arid parts of the West, but is most com-
mon in the deserts of southern California, the Four Corners area,andthe Southwest-
often near or under saltbush (A trip/ex) or along washes. It fruits after seasonal rains, but
the fruiting bodies are practically impervious to bacterialandfungal decay, persisting
for as long as 30 years in their natural environment! Mature specimens can protrude
from the soil like dusty roots (in the grand tradition of Piso/ithus tinctorius), or remain
underground, depending on the hardness of the soilandweather conditions. W. H. Long,
who gathered a gaggle of them near Antelope Valley, California, reports that developing
specimens raised hard blocks of soil weighing 15 pounds each!
EDIBILITY Much too crusty, musty,anddusty to be worthwhile, but possibly useful
as a dye (see Piso/ithus tinctorius).
COMMENTS As can be surmised from the description, this "oddball," like Piso/ithus
tinctorius, exhibits a great deal of variation in size, shape, color,anddegree of scaliness
-in other words, it is not difficult to identify but is easy to misidentify. Its polymorphism
has resulted in the naming of dozens of "new" species, when in fact there is only one highly
variable one. It can be distinguished from the stalked puffballsandother desert fungi by
its chambered spore mass, the pitted-reticulate upper surface of old (empty) spore cases,
the longandtough or woody stalk, plus the frequent presence of a volvaandirregular
breaking up of the peridium (a distinct apical pore is not formed). Its closest relative,
Piso/ithus tinctorius, lacks the well-developed stalkandvolva,anddoes not usually
grow in such desolate places.
Battarrea phalloides (Scaly-Stalked Puffball) Color Plate 187
FRUITING_BODY initially undergroundandcompletely enclosed by a membrane
(outer peridium) which ruptures around its periphery, the stalk then bursting through and
rapidly elongating. Mature fruiting body composed of a spore case (the inner peridium)
mounted on a long stalk, with the ruptured outer peridium leaving a volva at base of stalk
and sometimes a volval patch on top of the spore case. SPORE_CASE 3-5 (6) cm broad
and 1-3.5 cm high, typically rounded (convex) on top. with a flat or even depressed (con-
cave) underside that somewhat resembles a "veil"; surface smooth. pallid or whitish,
soon splitting around its lower periphery so that the upper (rounded) portion falls off,
thereby exposing the spore mass; lower portion remaining intact as a disc beneath the
spore massandsometimes persisting (after spore mass has dispersed) as a disclike"cap"
or sliding down the stalk to form a "ring." STALK 10-40 cm long, 0.4-1.5 cm thick, not
percurrent. equal or tapered downward (but volva-encased base may be swollen); rigid
and tough or even woody, hollow, white to brownish or rusty-brown, longitudinally
striate or groovedandcovered with fibers that often peel or split to form fine to very coarse
needlelike, ribbonlike, or shaggy scales. VOLVA at base of stalk saclike, whitish or
dirt-incrusted. often loose, buried in groundandsoon rotting away. SPORE_MASS
rusty-brownandpowdery when mature. adhering to everything it comes in contact with;
odor sometimes unpleasant in old age. Spores (4) 5-8 (10) microns, round to broadly
elliptical, warted. Capillitium of two types: simple, short hyphae up to 10 microns long.
and elators (elongated cells with internal spirals) up to 100 microns long.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in groups in sand. poor soil,andwaste places
(but often under trees in deep shade); very widely distributed. but in the United States
apparently confined to the West. It is generally regarded as rare, but in the deserts and
sagebrush country of the Great BasinandSouthwest it is relatively common for a desert
fungus. It also occurs along the California coastandOrson Miller reports it from Alaska.
In our area it fruits during the rainy season but persists for months without decaying.
EDIBILITY Inedible.
COMMENTS The fibrous-scaly stalk, presence of a volva (which, however, often rots
away or can be left behind in the ground),andcurious manner in which the spore case
ruptures around its periphery are the telltale traits of this intriguing fungus. The flattened
or concave, veil-like underside of the spore case is also unique. The upper portion or" lid"
usually detaches completely; it can often be found on the ground nearby, but is some-
times blown away by the wind. The volval patch (when present) may tear away from the
"lid," leaving a gaping hole as shown in the photograph. The stature ofthe fruiting body
varies considerably according to soilandweather conditions. S orne specimens (especially
the coastal ones) have relatively thick, coarsely scaly stalks, whereas others (particularly
desert dwellers) have longer, thinner stalks. All sorts of intergradations can be found,
however. Some authorities claim that the" true" B. phalloides of Europe has a gelatinous-
layered volva in the egg stage. If this is really the case, then the American species, which
lacks the gelatinous layer, is more correctly called B. stevenii. (Since the"eggs" develop
deep in the ground, they are rarely encounteredandit is difficult to know whether or not
this distinction is a valid one.) Another questionably distinct species, B. laciniata, has a
more persistent, multi-layered volva with inner, concentrically-arranged "leaflets"
around the stalk base. It usually has a white to buff or reddish volval patch on top ofthe
spore caseandtends to be more robust (stalk 24 cm thick at apexandspore case 4-8 cm
broad, 24 cm high). It occurs in southern Californiaandthe Southwest, usually in "rich
loamy alkaline soil" in the open desert (not under trees). S till another species, B. digueti,
is definitely distinct, for it does not rupture by peripheral cleavage. Instead, its outer
peridium ruptures apically (thus never leaving a volval patch)andits spore case remains
intact, with several holes forming in the upper (convex) portion. It also has longer elators
than B. phalloides. but in other respects (shapeandoverall appearance) is quite similar.
It appears to be strictly a desert fungus. I have found it in Baja California,andit is also
known from southern California, mainland Mexico,andthe Southwest.
Calostoma cinnabarina (Red Slimy-Stalked Puffball) Color Plate 188
FRUITING_BODY consisting of a spore case mounted on a thick, short, fluted stalk (the
spore case often barely protruding above the ground). SPORE_CASE 0.5-2 cm broad,
more or less round to somewhat oval, at first covered by the outer peridium, which is
composed of a thick, gelatinous or slimy, translucent layeranda thin, bright red inner
layer; outer peridium breaking up into piecesandfalling away (the pieces of the inner
layer often imbedded in the gelatinous pulp of the outer layer so as to resemble small
tomato or pomegranate seeds). Inner peridium persistent, not gelatinous, at first red and
scurfy or powdery, but often fading to orange, yellow, or buff as the scurf wears away;
rupturing through a crosslike apical pore(mouth) formed by 4-5 dark red to scarlet ridges
or "teeth." STALK 1.54 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, typically thickandshort, more or less
equal, spongy, with an outer gelatinous layer when fresh; otherwise composed of firm,
branching strands that form a ridged, netted, and/or pitted pattern; ochraceous to red or
cinnabar-red to yellow-brown, often fading in age. VOLVA absent. SPORE_MASS white
at first, becoming powderyandbuff-colored at maturity. Spores 14-28 x 6-11 microns,
elliptical to oblong, pitted. Capilliiium present when young but soon disintegrating.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soilandhumus in woods, along roadcuts, under
trees, etc.; fairly common in the late summerandfall in the southernandeastern United
States, especially at higher elevations. It occurs as far west as Texas,andis to be looked
for in southern ArizonaandNew Mexico, where several "eastern" mushrooms occur.
EDIBILITY Unknown-but too smallandslimy to merit experimentation.
COMMENTS In a group (the puffballs) not noted for its bright colors, the genus Calo-
stoma stands out. The complex structure of the outerandinner peridiums (each has at
least two layers)andpeculiar microscopic features such as the absence of capillitium in
the mature spore mass have made it difficult for taxonomists to relate it to other puffball
genera. The thick gelatinous outer layer, which can be likened to a universal veil, dis-
tinguishes Calostoma from other stalked puffballs,andthe powdery spore mass separates
it from the stinkhorns, which may also be slimy. C. cinnabarina is the only red Calostoma.
Others-all southeastern in distribution-include: C. lutescens, with a longer stalk that
usually elevates the spore case above the ground,anda light to bright yellow spore case
(except for the red mouth or pore) that usually has a wide collar at its base formed by the
outer peridium; C. ravenelii, a smaller species with a gelatinous-fibered stalkandnon-
gelatinous spore case that is tan to yellowish (with a red mouth)andoften decorated with
warts left by the outer peridium;andC. microsporum, rather similar to C. ravenelii but
slightly larger, with smaller spores (up to II microns long).
Tulostoma brumale group (Common Stalked Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY consisting of a small spore case mounted on a stalk. SPORE_CASE
round (but often somewhat collapsed or flattened), 1-2 cm broad, the underside shrinking
as it driesandoften pulling away from the stalk to form a collar. Outer layer ofperidium
(skin) brownish, but covered with sandandother debris, peeling away to reveal the inner
layer, but often remaining intact around the base. Inner layer smooth or with minute
particles, tan to pinkish-buff to buff, gray, or whitish, developing an apical pore at ma-
turity; pore usually encircled by a raised collar or tube. STALK 1-6 cm long, 2-4 (6) mm
thick, usually slender, equal except for a small bulb at base; tough but usually pliant,
covered at first with coarse brown to rusty-brown fibers, but sometimes smoother and! or
paler in age; longitudinally striate, joined to spore case via a ball-and-socket arrangement.
VOLVA absent or inconspicuous. SPORE_MASS rusty-salmonandpowdery at maturity.
Spores 3-5 microns, more or less round, minutely warted. Capillitium well-developed.
HABITAT Scattered or in groups in sandandgravel, sandy soil,andother waste places
(even in the mortar of brick walls!); very widely distributed, but not particularly common.
In our area this speciesandits close relatives (see comments) fruit mainly in the fall and
winter, but the weathered fruiting bodies can be found most any time.
EDIBILITY Inedible when mature,andrarely found in the immature stage.
COMMENTS TuloslOma species are easily recognized by their slender stalk, small
spore case,andrusty-salmon spores. The fruiting body develops underground as in Bat-
tarrea,andthe stalks of mature specimens are often buried so that only the spore case
is visible. The absence of a volva in most species plus the small sizeandformation of an
apical pore distinguish TuloslOma from Battarrea,andthe stalk is not as consistently
thickened at the apex as it is in Chlamydopus. There are several closely related Tulostomas
that will more or less fit the above description, including T. berteroanum(see photo), the
most common in our area. They are partial to sandy soilandare best differentiated
microscopically (in other words, leave them to the TuloslOma taxonomists). Some ofthe
more widespread species are: T. striatum, which has ridged sporesandan outer peridium
that leaves an acornlike cup around the lower half of the spore case; T. simulans, in which
the spore case is persistently covered by adhering sand particlesandother debris; T.
campestre, also sand-incrusted, but lacking a well-defined tube around the apical pore; and
T. fibrillosum, a fairly common species which also lacks a tube but has practically smooth
sporesanda longer, coarsely hairy stalk.
There are also several species apparently endemic to the Southwest (or at least to arid
regions), including: T. involucratum, common, with a membranous (not granular) outer
peridium that often forms a frilled cup around the inner peridium plus a tubular apical
pore; T. opacum, a rare species with large spores (7-1 I microns); T. meristostoma, small,
with a slit or irregular tear instead of a raised apical pore or tube even whenfresh (in many
species the pore becomes slitlike or irregularly torn after weathering); T. cretaceum, a
commonandhighly distinctive sand-loving species with a chalk-white spore caseanda
stalk that tapers downward to a volva beneath which are one or more rootlike processes
(at least in most specimens);andT. excentricum, with an off-center tubular mouth and
inconspicuous volva plus a spore case which is not white unless weathered. All of these
species differ from Chlamydopus meyenianus in the ball-and-socket relationship between
the spore caseandstalk (though the two may be firmly attached),andall are rather small
and slender-stemmed. For larger species, see T. macrocephalum.
Tulostoma macrocephalum (Fat-Headed Tulostoma)
FRUITING_BODY consisting of a spore case mounted on a stalk. SPORE_CASE 1.2-3
cm broadand0.8-1.5 cm high, nearly round to somewhat flattened (usually broader than
it is high), firmly attached to the stalk. Outer layer of peridium (skin) grayish-white to buff
and soon falling a way to reveal the inner layer, but often remaining intact around the base.
Inner layer smooth, dingy whitish, tough, developing a short tubular apical pore (mouth)
at maturity. STALK 5-15 cm long, 0.5-1.5 cm thick, usually rather long, equal or tapered
slightly toward the base, which usually has a bulb; tough or woody, usually scaly and/or
transversely cracked. VOLVA absent or present only as a small fragile dirt-incrusted
sack or collar at base of stalk. SPORE_MASS rusty-salmon to cinnamon-brown and
powdery at maturity. Spores 4-5.5 microns, round, warted. Capillitium present.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in sand or sandy soil in arid regions, fruiting most any
time if rainfall is sufficient. It was originally found in the gypsum dunes of White Sands
National Monument in southern New Mexico (I have seen it there), but has also turned
up in southern Californiaandcan probably be found throughout the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Inedible because of its toughness.
COMMENTS The broad head, scaly stalk,andrelatively large size (for a Tulostoma)
are the hallmarks of this distinctive stalked puffball. The presence of an apical pore dis-
tinguishes it from Battarrea.andthe equal or only slightly tapered stalk separates it from
Chlamydopus. It is not likely to be found by the average mushroom hunter, but any mush-
room willing to grow in gypsum crystals warrants attention. Another robust southwestern
species, T. Iysocephalum, has a coarser, dirtier appearanceandits soil-incrusted "head"
topples off easilyandis often found beside the stalk. It grows under mesquiteandother
desert shrubs, but is not common.
C hlamydopus meyenianus (Desert Stalked Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as an underground "egg" encased in an outer peridium,
the stalk then elongating rapidly; outer peridium rupturing around its periphery, the
lower half forming a volva at base of stalk, the upper portion forming a patch of warty,
brittle tissue that breaks upanddisintegrates or occasionally clings to the top ofthe spore
case. Mature fruiting body consisting of a spore case(inner peridium) mounted on a stalk.
SPORE_CASE round to somewhat flattened, 1-3.5 cm broadand0.5-2 cm high, tough,
persistent, attached firmly to the stalk; surface smooth or slightly roughened, pallid to
buff, pinkish-buff, yellowish, or sometimes cinnamon, developing an apical pore at
maturity which may enlarge in age to form a "mouth." STALK4-15 (35) cm long, 0.2-1.5
(3.5) cm thick at apex, tapering downward, usually solidandtough or rather woody, often
curved and/or flattened; usually longitudinally striate or grooved, smooth to silky-
fibrillose or sometimes fibrillose-scaly; colored more or less like spore case or browner;
not percurrent. VOLVA at base of stalk saclike, two-layered, thick, often rotting away
or staying behind in the ground; white to brownish, usually incrusted with dirt or sand.
SPORE_MASS rusty to ochraceous to brownandpowdery at maturity. Spores 5.5-9
microns, round, spiny (or rarely smooth). Capillitium present.
HABITAT Solitary to scattered or in small groups in sandy, gravelly, or volcanic soil,
sand dunes, gypsum flats,andother barren places; sometimes also in adobe soil. It is
found throughout the aridandsemi-arid regions of the world (Australia, North Africa,
etc.)andwas originally described from Peru. It is widespread in western North America,
but is common only in the Southwest-and then only sporadically. I have seen it nearthe
Painted Hills in eastern Oregonandoutside San Bernardino in southern California. It
fruits after heavy rains but, like other stalked puffballs. persists for months afterward.
EDIBILITY Worthless-it is much too toughandfibrous, even as a substitute for beef
jerky.
COMMENTS Like other desert-dwelling stalked puffballs, this species is quite variable
in sizeandappearance but still easy to recognize. When still covered by the warty outer
peridium it is reminiscent of Phel/orina strobilina. but the presence of a volva (in most
specImens) distinguishes it. Once it has shed its outer coat (as shown in photo on previous
page), it resembles the cosmopolitan genus Tulostoma. but is slightly larger, lacks the
ball-and-socket connection of spore case to stalk typical of that genus,andis characteristi-
cally thickened at the apex of the stalkandtapered downward. The presence of a volva is
also noteworthy, but it decays more quickly than the rest of the fruiting bodyandis not
always evident in older specimens. The tendency of the spore case to rupture through a
single pore distinguishes it from Battarrea. which also has a volva. Two other distinctive
stalked puffballs should also be mentioned. Schizostoma laceratum is a desert dweller
whose spore case ruptures along sutures to form rays or lobes which subsequently spread
out somewhat (see photo). The spore case is attached firmly to the stalk via a ball-and-
socket arrangement (as in Tulostoma)andthere is no volva, though the base ofthe stalk
may split to form a free rim or collar. Queletia mirabilis resembles Schizostoma. but
has a spore case that ruptures irregularly. It is widely distributed but rare-there is one
report of it from Pennsylvania.
P hellorina strobilina
(Urnlike Stalked Puffball)
FRUITING_BODY consisting of a spore case which narrows downward into a distinct
stalk. SPORE_CASE round to oval or pear-shaped, 1.5-6 cm broad and/or high. Outer
layer of peridium (skin) scaly, the scales erect or pyramidalandoften quite large on top,
usually smallerandmore or less shingled below; white when fresh but soon becoming
brown to cinnamonandrupturing irregularlyandfalling away in pieces, exposing the
inner layer. Inner peridium a cup-like or urn-like expansion of the stalk apex (i.e., completely
continuous with the stalk), pinkish-buff to cinnamon, with a large (2-5 cm) irregular
mouth forming at the top in age. STALK 2-5 cm long, 0.8-2 cm thick at apex, dilated at
apexandtapered downward, but with a bulb at the base; firm, solid, woody, brown or
cinnamonandscaly like the outer peridium of the spore case (but scales may wear away
in age); not percurrent. VOLVA typically absent, but the basal bulb sometimes splitting
or peeling to form a vol va-like collar or rim. SPORE_MASS powdery when mature and
cinnamon to rusty-brown. Spores 5-7 x 4.5-6 microns, round or nearly round, warty
or spiny. Capillitium present but often scanty.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups (occasionally two or three growing from a com-
mon base) in desert soil, usually near shrubs; widely distributed in the warm, arid regions
of the world. It occurs throughout the Southwest after heavy rains but is not common and
only rarely fruits in large numbers. I have seen it outside Reno, Nevadaandnear Tucson,
Arizona as well as in India.
EDIBILITY Much too woody to be edible.
COMMENTS Also known as P. inquinans, this peculiar stalked puffball is reminiscent
of the common desert fungus Podaxis pistil/aris when young, but its stalk is not per-
current (i.e., it terminates at the base ofthe spore case). The scales flake offthe spore case
or "cap"andthe top eventually ruptures to form a large mouth so that old specimens
resemble wine goblets. These might be confused with Dictyocephalos atlenuatus, but
the spore mass lacks the chambers characteristic of that speciesandthere is normally no
volva at the base of the stalk.
Podaxis pistillaris (Desert Shaggy Mane)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 2-15 cm highand14 cm broad, oval to
cylindrical or sometimes somewhat twisted; surface dry, pure white to tan, yellow-brown,
or brown; typically breaking up to form shaggy fibrils or scales which may eventually peel
or wear away to reveal the smooth undersurface; eventually tearing radially or irregularly,
the margin usually remaining attached to the stalk for a long time. SPORE_MASS con-
sisting of contorted plates or rudimentary gills; at first white, soon darkening to yellowish,
then reddish,andfinally reddish-brown to dark brown to blackish; powdery at maturity
(but liquefying slightly under certain conditions). STALK4-l5 (26) cm long,0.2-l (l.5)cm
thick, equal above, the base usually swollen; extending into the spore massandoften
percurrent; usually longandslender, rather toughandfibrillose to raggedly scaly( but often
smoother in age); solid or hollow, often twisted-striate; white, or in age often discolored
like the cap. VEIL not clearly differentiated from capandstalk tissue. VOLVA absent.
SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores averaging (7) 10-16 (20) x (5) 9-15 microns, but
sometimes much larger (to 36 microns!); round to broadly elliptical, pear-shaped, or
irregular, smooth, thick-walled, with an apical germ pore. Capillitium present.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to gregarious or clustered on ground in deserts, washes,
lawns, gardens, irrigated fields, etc.; occurring throughout the warm, dry parts of the
world (known from every continent except Antarctica). It is the most prominent desert
fungus of the western United States, showing a preference for sandy soil but also coming
up in clay or adobe. In California it has been found from below sea level to over 5,000
feet (in the Panamint Mountains). It usually fruits between AprilandOctober, but the
fruiting bodies persist for monthsandconsequently can be found most any time. I have
seen it growing outside the T aj Mahal in India, accompanied by Agaricus bitorquis.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible when very young (white inside), but toughanddusty in age.
COMMENTS This distinctive denizen of the desert looks like a shaggy mane (Coprinus
comatus) but does not have gills, does not normally deliquesce,andhas a powdery spore
mass when mature. To the feverish, sun-fried, dust-incrusted fungophile driving deli-
riously across the monotonous mushroom-meager desert while dreaming of cool coastal
pine forests bulging with boletesandflower-filled mountain meadows overflowing with
Agaricus, it is likely to be mistaken for a miraculous mirage or wistful hallucination.
To the methodical mushroom taxonomist, on the other hand, it is an evolutionary
anomaly: the stalk is percurrent as in other gastroid agarics, but the spore mass contains
capillitium as in the stalked puffballs. (Some taxonomists consider it to be a "gastroid"
relative of Coprinus, while others sequester it in an exclusive order of its own, the Podax-
ales.) The percurrent stalk distinguishes it from the similarly-shaped Phel/orina strobilina
(a stalked puffball),andthe shapeandhabitat separate it from other gastroid agarics and
stalked puffballs (but see Rhopalogaster transversarium in key on p. 724). It's interesting
to note that, like the shaggy mane, it sometimes grows with Agaricus bitorquis. Perhaps
since the latter fruits underground, it has a greater temperature range than either the
saggy mane (which likes it cool) or the desert shaggy mane (which likes it hot). Other
species: P. argent;nus, with an olive-brown to yellow-brown mature spore mass,andP.
m;crosporus, with a reddish-brown mature spore mass, are both very similar but have
much smaller spores (5-9 microns long). P. long;; also has smaller spores, but has a large
and robust fruiting body (1745 cm tall, stalk 1-2.5 cm thick at apex). Allofthese occur in
the Southwest, but are not nearly as common as P. pistil/aris.
Montagnea arenarius (Gastroid Coprinus)
FRUITING_BODY at first deeply buriedandenclosed in a tough membrane, then expan-
ding as the ruptured outer skin forms a volva at base of stalk. Mature fruiting body with
a stalkanddisclike cap (the cap first appearing oval, but all but the disc (center) soon
splitting into spore-bearing plates. CAP 1-3.5 cm broad, merely a thin disclike expansion
of the stalk; convex becoming plane or depressed, persistent; surface smooth, white to
grayish, buff, or occasionally straw-colored, often with a volval patch or remnants; mar-
gin often tattered or fringed in age. Flesh (in stalk) white when fresh. SPORE_MASS ex-
posed at maturity, composed of thin plates which hang from the margin of the disclike cap
and are entirely free from the stalk; plates often wavy or curled, up to 3.5 (6) cm long,
reddish-black to blackish at maturity, eventually falling off the cap or disintegrating,
but not deliquescing. STALK (5) 8-30 cm long, 0.2-1.5 (2.5) cm thick, percurrent, more
or less equal or often tapering downward, hollow, tough or almost woody when old and
dry (but very light); smooth or longitudinally fibrillose-striate, often splitting or cracking
into fibrillose or shaggy scales, white to buff or sometimes discoloring darker in old age.
VEIL absent or rudimentary. VOLVA at base of stalk saclike, usually buried in soil,
loose (often remaining in ground), two-layered, the outer layer whiteandample, the
inner layer composed of tough fibers. SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores (7.5) 12-20
(28) x (4.5) 6-11 (14) microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, with a germ pore. Capil-
litium absent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in sandy soil, old fields,andother waste
places; widely distributedandfairly common in the aridandsemi-arid parts of western
North America (from MexicoandTexas to Californiaandeastern Washington). It has
been found high up on the slopes of Mount Shasta,andby the hundreds in fields in eastern
Oregon. In California it is quite common inland. I have yet to find it in our area, but the
very similar Gyrophragmium californicum (see comments) does occur rarely in sandy soil.
EDIBILITY Like myself, too thinandtough to be of value.
COMMENTS This odd but interesting fungus can be told by its long stalkandthin
disclike cap from whose margin the spore-bearing plates are suspended. The presence
of a volva is also distinctive, but the volva is deeply buriedandeasily left behind in the
ground (or sometimes rots away). The sizeandstature vary considerably-those from
Oregonandnorth-central California being rather smallandslender (usually less than 20
cm tall),andthose from southern Californiaandthe Southwest being somewhat taller
(20-30 cm)andoften thicker. The blackish sporesandthin spore-bearing plates suggest
that Montagnea evolved from Coprinus. but the fruiting body does not deliquesce, nor
does it have true gills. A similar but much rarer fungus, Gyrophragmiumcalijornicum, has
dark brown to blackish spore-bearing plates that hang from the underside of the disclike
cap rather than from the margin. It also has a loose volva plus a double-layered partial
veil that either disappears or forms an annulus (ring) on the stalk. It is known only from
the San Francisco Bay region of California,andappears to be quite rare. In both ofthese
species the volvaandspore mass disintegrate or rot away, while the light woody stalk
and thin disclike cap remain intactandpersist for months without decaying. In this
condition they can be mistaken for old specimens of Battarrea phalloides (a stalked puff-
ball) whose spore mass has dispersed. In the latter species, however, the disc at the top of
the stalk represents the underside of the old spore case rather than the cap.
Longula texensis (Gastroid Agaricus)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 3-9 cm broad, oval to round or broadly
convex or somewhat flattened; surface dry, white to buff becoming tan to ochre or
brownish in old age, smooth or often breaking up to form white to brown fibrillose scales
or warts that may wear a way in age; becoming fragile as it dries out, often rupturing longi-
tudinally in age (especially near margin); margin at first joined to cap by a veil. Flesh firm,
white, but bruised areas often stained yellowish (or sometimes pinkish-stained in stalk).
SPORE_MASS composed of crowded, convoluted, folded or branched plates and/or
cavities; free from the stalk (at least in age); brownish becoming deep chocolate-brown
to blackish at maturityandusually exposed or partially exposed in age. STALK 2-10 cm
long, 1.5-3.5 (5) cm thick, equal or thicker at base, smooth or longitudinally striate, firm
and solid when fresh, becoming tougher or even woody as it dries out; white or colored like
cap; percurrent. VEIL two-layered, at first continuous with the cap marginandstalk, but in
age usually pulling away from the stalk or separating from the cap to forma superiorringon
stalk. VOLVA present or absent (usually intergrown with stalkandtherefore inconspi-
cuous). SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores 6-7.5 x 5-6.5 microns, nearly round,
smooth. Capillitium absent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in poor soil, waste places, irrigated fields,
lawns, disturbed areas, etc.; apparently widespread in the aridandsemi-arid areas of the
West (from Texas to Californiaandnorth at least to Oregon), fruiting after rains or
artificial watering. I t used to be common in the San Francisco Bay area, but has apparently
been pushed out by development. I t can still be found with regularity in the Sacramento and
San Joaquin Valleys,andhas also been found in Santa ClaraandSan Mateo counties.
EDIBILITY Unknown. I t has probably been eaten as an Agaricus button, but I can find no
specific information on it. According to Rick Kerrigan, it is easily cultivated.
COMMENTS Originally called Long;a (or Gyrophragm;um) texens;s, this mushroom
is closely allied to Agaricus,andis likely to be mistaken for that genus because of the veil
(which sometimes forms an annulus Or ring), cap, stalk,anddark spore mass. However, it
lacks true gillsandthe spores are not forcibly discharged. When the veil breaks or pulls
away from the stalk or the cap splits radially, the spore mass is exposed to the elements,
whereas in Endoplychum the spore mass usually remains enclosed. A giant version of this
species,L. texens;s var. major, occurs throughout the range ofthe typical variety. Its cap is
6-12 Or more cm broadandoften quite scaly,andthe stalk is 10-25 cm longand2.5 cm
or more thick (see photograph above).
Endoptychum depressum Color Plate 84
(Mountain Gastroid Agaricus)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 3-15 cm broad, rounded or convex or
flattened on top, often centrally depressed in age; surface smooth or occasionally scaly,
white to dingy whitish or buff, often staining yellow or amber when bruisedandin age
(and sometimes staining vinaceous-brown near bottom); margin depressed around the
stalkandjoined to it by a veil, sometimes pulling away from stalk in age or the cap rup-
turing irregularly. Flesh white, firm becoming tough in age, often bruising yellow; odor
usually sweet (like almond extract or anise) when young but often unpleasant or musty at
maturity. SPORE_MASS composed of branched or contorted, crowded plates (rudi-
mentary gills) or elongated chambers, pallid soon becoming chocolate-brown to blackish-
brown, usually powdery at maturityandnot normally exposed except in old age. STALK
14 cm or more long, 0.8-3 cm thick, equal or tapered, usually short (but see comments),
firm, white or stained like the cap, smooth. percurrent. VEIL rather tough, covering the
juncture of cap marginandstalk, not normally rupturing but sometimes breaking away
from the stalk in age. VOLVA typically absent. SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores
variable in size but usually averaging 6-10 x 5.5-8 microns, round to broadly elliptical,
smooth, thick-walled. Capillitium absent.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (or some-
times aspen); common in the mountains of western North America, especially in the late
summerandfall. The short-stemmed form typical of the Sierra Nevada often develops
underground but usually pokes through the surface by maturity. A long-stemmed version
(see comments) is sometimes abundant under ponderosa pine in the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible (use only firm specimens); I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This mushroom is closely related to the section Arvenses of the genus
Agaricus by virtue of its sweet odor when young, tendency to stain or age yellow, and
dark spores. However, the veil doesn't normally break until after the spores are mature (if
it breaks at all)andthe gills are misshapen to practically absent. The stalk is usually quite
short (as shown in the black-and-white photo), but the long-stemmed variety (which may
or may not be distinct) shown in the color plate is the prevalent one in the Southwest.
Several other species may occur in the West, but have not been formally described. The
namesSecotiumandGyrophragmium are used by some authors instead of Endoptychum.
Endoptychum agar;co;des (Gastroid Lepiota)
FRUITING_BODY with a round to oval to pear-shaped, broadly conical, or heart-shaped
(narrowed at top) capanda short stalk. CAP (I) 2-7 (10) cm broad, 2.5-10 (12) cm high;
surface dry, white when youngandfresh, but discoloring buff to tan, ochre, or brownish
with age; fibrillose, but often breaking up to form scales which give it a shredded ap-
pearance; margin typically joined to the stalk. Flesh (in stalkandcap) white when fresh,
but in one form staining vinaceous-brown when exposed. SPORE_MASS composed of
distorted chambers and/or plates (rudimentary gills) crowded within the cap; at first
whiteandfleshy, then turning yellowishandfinally becoming brown to yellow-brown in
old age,andsometimes powdery. STALK percurrent, sometimes entirely internal (a
vertical column that extends to the top of ca p), but usually extending slightly below the cap
(up to 2 cm), usually thickest at base of cap; white when fresh, but often discoloring like
the cap in age; usually with a mycelial cord at base. VEIL not clearly differentiated from
cap (i.e., underside or ""margin" of cap joined to stalk). VOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT
not obtainable; spores 6-9 (11) x 5-7 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a thick inner wall
that has an apical pore. Capillitium absent.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in la wns, fields, flower beds, waste
places, etc.; widely distributed. It is fairly common in the SouthwestandRocky Mountain
region in the summerandearly fall, but I have not seen it in coastal California. It is one of
the few gastroid agarics to be found in eastern North America.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible when young; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Also known asSecol;um agar;co;des, this unsung, farflung fungus looks
like an unexpanded Agaricus or Lepiota, but has only rudimentary gillsandnever upens
out. The rather pale spore colorandthick inner spore wall with a pore suggests a closer
relationship to Lepiota or Chlorophyllum than to Agaricus. It does not appear to have
much in common with other Endoptychums( e.g., E. depressum), but is the "type" species
of the genus. Other species: E. ar;zon;cum of the Southwest is very similar, but has much
larger spores; Neosecol;um macrosporum of the Midwest, Southwest,andsouthern
California also has larger spores, but they are ornamented rather than smoothandthe
fruiting body is usually slightly smaller (1-4 cm high).
Brauniellula nancyae (Gastroid Pine Spike)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandshort stalk. CAP (0.5) l cm broad, rounded to
convex or lobed, or sometimes flattened on top; surface dry to very slightly viscid, fibril-
lose, ochre to pale or dull orange beneath a layer of flattened grayish to brownish-gray
fibrils, often becoming vinaceous in age; margin often lobed, at first attached to the stalk by
the veil, separating from the veil in age but remaining incurved. Flesh thick, firm, pale
orange to ochraceous when fresh. SPORE_MASS composed of crowded, convoluted
plates and/or cavities; ochraceous to pale orange, becoming darker (grayish to nearly
black) as spores mature; usually remaining covered by the veil, but sometimes partially
exposed. STALK 0.3-2 cm long, 0.5-1 cm thick, equal or narrowed below, often so short
that it scarcely protrudes below the cap; solid, firm, ochraceous to dull orange, usually
fibrillose, often becoming vinaceous or reddish-stained in age and/or at base. VEIL
fibrillose, ochraceous or becoming vinaceous. VOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT not
obtainable; spores 16-20 x 6.5-9 microns, narrowly elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in duff under conifers
(especially firandpine) in the summerandearly fall; known only from western North
America. It is common in the Sierra NevadaandCascades as well as in Idaho; it is also
said to occur in northern Arizona.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but probably edible.
COMMENTS This curious mountain fungus is an almost exact replica of a Chroo-
gomphus, except that it has only rudimentary gills (if any)anddoes not open out,andis
often buried or half-buried in the humus layer. Note that it is the same color as Chroo-
gomphus( dull or pale orange to ochraceous, becoming vinaceous in age)andhas the same
spore color (gray to black)andhabitat. The grayish fibrils on the cap are suggestive of C.
leplOcyslis (see comments under C. IOmentosus). According to Eric Gerry, B. albipes
is an earlier (more correct) name for B. nancyae. Other gastroid members of the Chroo-
gomphus-family (Gomphidiaceae) include: an undescribed species (or perhaps just a
"freak") found under a pine in southern California (larger than B. nancyae,andlacking
the grayish fibrils on the cap);andGomphogaster leucosarx, described from Idaho, which
has white flesh in the upper stalkanda bright yellow stem base (like the agaric genus
Gomphidius), but which has a minutely chambered spore mass instead of gills.
Thaxterogaster pingue (Gastroid Cortinarius)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandshort stalk. CAP 1-5 cm broad, rounded Or obtuse to
convex or lobed, the top often flattened somewhat in age; surface slightly viscid to slimy
when moist, smooth, buff to olive-yellow to dingy yellow-brown or dark brown. Flesh
firm, white or tinged cap color. SPORE_MASS composed of crowded, contorted plates
and/or small cavities; yellowish becoming dull brown to pale or dark cinnamon-brown.
STALK 0.5-4.5 cm long, 0.8-2.5 cm thick, very short or rudimentary in some forms, well-
developed in others; equal or swollen at base; percurrent (the portion in the spore mass
usually quite narrowandunbranched); smooth, often viscid near base when moist, dull
yellowish to buff or colored like the cap, often purple or lilac where exposed to light. VEIL
fibrillose or cobwebby, persisting or disappearing. VOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT
not obtainable; spores (12) 14-16.5 x 8-9.5 microns, elliptical to somewhat oblong, warty
and/or wrinkled.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in duff under conifers in western North America; fairly
common in the summerandfall, especially at higher elevations. It is one ofthe most fre-
quently encountered gastroid agarics of the Rockies (usually under spruce). In the Sierra
NevadaandCascades it favors fir. In our area it is rare-one specimen of local origin
was brought to me, but its collector did not note the habitat.
EDIBILITY Unknown-but hardly tempting.
COMMENTS This species is best recognized by its viscid cap, dingy yellowish-brown
to brown overall color,andfrequently violet-tinged stalk. It is a variable species insofar
as shape is concerned-specimens growing in regions of high rainfall are apt to fruit above
the groundandhave a well-developed stalk, while those growing in drier habitats are more
likely to remain buried in the duffandhave a short stalk that barely protrudes from the cap
(i.e., the fruiting body can be roundishandRhizopogon-like). Thaxterogaster is thought
to be closely related to the agaric genus Cortinarius. Several other species of Thaxtero-
gaster occur in the United States, some ofthem undescribed.
Weraroa cucullata (Gastroid Liberty Cap)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 1-4 cm high, 0.4-1.5 cm broad, narrowly
conical with a pointed apex; surface dry to slightly viscid, smooth or fibrillose, often
wrinkled, yellow to yellowish-buff to tawny or yellow-brown; margin often splitting in
ageandretracting slightly from the stalk. SPORE_MASS composed of crisped or con-
torted gills that mayor may not branch to form cavities; brown to reddish-brown. STALK
longandthin (5-12 cm long, 1-4 mm thick), equal or with a small bulb at base, hollow or
stuffed, rather tough, smooth or fibrillose, colored like cap, dry. VEIL (partial) absent
or evanescent. VOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores 11-14 (16) x 6-8
(10) microns, elliptical, smooth, with a germ pore; tawny to brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground, usually among grasses in wet alpine
meadows; widely distributed in the mountains of western North America. It occurs in the
Sierra NevadaandI have found it in the southern Rockies in August.
EDIBILITY Utterlyandirrefutably inconsequential.
COMMENTS The narrowly conical, pointed cap perched on a long thin stalk plus the
rudimentary gills make this a most distinctive mushroom. It is reminiscent of a liberty cap
(Psilocybe semilanceata), but does not have true gills. Ga/erops;s cucu//ata is an older
name for it. Ga/erops;s po/ytr;cho;des, found in the same habitats, may be a smaller-
spored version of the same species. G. angust;ceps is an eastern species. Gastrocybe
/ater;t;a is also similar but grows on lawns and, like Conocybe. collapses or dissolves
very quickly (within a few hours). Also deserving mention is Setche//;ogaster tenu;pes,
a small species probably related to the Bolbitiaceae. It has a convex to round or cylindrical,
yellow-brown to brown or reddish-brown, non-viscid cap with a chambered or gill-like,
exposed spore massanda short or long but slender stalk. It is associated with eucalyptus
and is either especially fond of erudite settings or is only sought for by "academia nuts."
(It has been found on the StanfordandUniversity of California campuses.) ==
N ;vatogastr;um nub;genum (Gastroid Pholiota)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP (I) 2-8 cm broad, nearly round to convex,
sometimes expanding in age, the center often flattened or slightly depressed; surface
smooth or slightly fibrillose, ochraceous or tawny to dingy yellowish, buff, or white
(usually fading to whitish in age), slightly viscid when wet, sometimes pitted; margin at
first incurvedandoften lobed, remaining attached to the stalk or sometimes pulling away
in old age. Flesh white in the capandcolumella (that portion ofthe stalk surrounded by the
spore mass), usually brown in the stalk; rather soft but tough (especially in the stalk);
odor mild or fragrant (like bubble gum). SPORE_MASS brown to cinnamon-brown when
mature, composed of irregularly contorted gills that often form chambers; exposed only
in old age if at all. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or thicker at either end,
percurrent, usually shortandstout, quite tough (difficult to section); white or stained
brownish to rusty-btown, not viscid. VEIL present as whitish fibrillose tissue that extends
from the cap margin to the stalk; often disappearing in age, not forming an annulus (ring).
VOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT not obtainable; spores (3)7-9 (12x (3) 5.5.5 microns,
elliptical, smooth, brown in mass, honey-colored under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or in small clusters on rotting conifers, often near
melting snow or shortly after the snow disappears; fairly common in the mountains of
the West in the springandearly summer, especially on firandlodgepole pine. I have seen
large fruitings in the Sierra NevadaandCascades, but have yet to find it on the coast.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS This distinctive member of the "snowbank" mushroom flora is easily
identified by its pale color, growth on wood,andirregularly contorted or chambered
brown "gills" which remain enclosed by the cap or are exposed only in old age. Like other
gastroid or "reduced" agarics, it is apt to be mistaken for an unopened gilled mushroom.
Its occurrence on woodandbrown "gills" plus the colorandshape ofthe spores relate it
to the agaric genus Pholiota. Another Pholiota-relative, N. wrightii, has been found in
the mountains of southern California.
Macowanites american us (Gastroid Russula)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 1-5 cm broad, convex or irregularly lobed,
but often expanding in age to plane or even centrally depressed; surface viscid when wet,
smooth or often breaking up into scalese especially at center); color variable: lilac, purplish,
vinaceous, olive, blue, yellow, or even whitish, or often mixtures thereof; margin not
typically joined to the stalk but often touching it when young. Flesh brittle, crisp, white;
odorandtaste mild. SPORE_MASS consisting of irregular or distorted, often veined or
even chambered gills that are whitish at first but soon become ochre to dull yellow-orange;
usually attached to stalk. STALK 1-3 cm long, 0.3-1.5 cm thick, more orlessequal, firm,
brittle, smooth, white, percurrent. VEILandVOLVA absent. SPORE_PRINT not
obtainable; spores 8.5-13.5 x 8-12 microns, broadly elliptical to round, with amyloid warts
and ridges, modified for forcible discharge but not actually discharged.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff under conifers (sometimes buried);
fairly commonandwidespread in western North America, especially under spruce, fir,
Douglas-fir,andpine. It fruits mainly in the summerandfallandis said to be the most
common member of the genus. I have seen it in northern California.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible-but be sure of your identification.
COMMENTS This conifer-lover looks like a deformed or aborted Russula, which is
essentially what it is! The spores are not forcibly dischargedandhence a spore print is
unobtainable. There are more than 20 other members of the genus in North America,
including: M. ;od;olens, very similar but with a distinct iodoform (antiseptic) odor, found
under conifers; M. subol;vaceus, a mild-tasting species wtih a white or olive-tinged cap
and smaller spores, found in the Sierra Nevada under conifers;M. chlor;nosmus, with a
whitish to yellow cap, deep ochre spore mass, chlorine odor,andunpleasant taste, found
under conifers; M. luteolus, ad ull or pale yellowish, acrid-tasting species found in coastal
Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest under conifers;M. subrosaceus, a pinkish-capped,
ochraceous-staining species; M. (=Elasmomyces) rose;pes, with a pinkish to salmon or
vinaceous cap whose margin never touches the stalk, favoring spruceandfir;M. alp;nus,
a white to creamy-buff montane species;andM. magnus, a large species (cap 3-14 cm
broad, stalk 3-7 cm longandup to 3 cm thick) with a viscid tan to dark reddish-brown cap
and an unpleasant odor, originally collected in Santa Clara County, California. The
closely related genus Elasmomyces has spores which are not modified for forcible dis-
chargeandseems to be more common under oak than conifers, at least in California. Its
members include: E. russulo;des, with a red to reddish-brown cap (at least in age), widely
distributed; E. pilosus, which tends to grow underground in association with oak; and
E. odoratus of Washington, with a strong fragrant odor. None of these are worth eating.
A rcangeliella crassa (Gastroid Milk Cap)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 2-8 cm broad, convex when young, be-
coming plane to shallowly depressed or irregular in age; surface pale buff to pinkish-buff,
sometimes darkening slightly (to cinnamon-buff) in old age, dry or slightly viscid, smooth;
margin typically remaining attached to the stalk, but often not quite reaching it in some
places,andin age sometimes separating slightly from it. Flesh thick, crisp, brittle, white to
pinkish-buff; odor often unpleasant in age; taste very acrid (peppery). Latex present
but often scanty (especially in dry weather), white, unchanging. SPORE_MASS com-
prised of contorted plates or rudimentary, often chambered gills; pale pinkish-buff to
ochre-buff, usually completely enclosed by the cap but occasionally exposed when old,
especially near the stalk. STALK 0.5-2.5 cm long, 0.5-1.5 (2) cm thick, usually stubby and
poorly-developed, often off-center; solid or hollow, crisp, brittle, dry, smooth, percurrent;
whitish or colored likethecap. VEILand VOLVAabsent. SPORE_PRINT not obtainable;
spores 7.5-11 x 5.5-8 microns, elliptical, with strongly amyloid ridges (reticulate).
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in duff under conifersandin mixed woods; known only
from the mountains of western North America. It is sometimes common (along with A.
tenax-see comments) in the Sierra Nevada in the spring, summer,andfall. Like many
gastroid agarics, it does not seem to occur on the coast.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but the acrid taste is a deterrent.
COMMENTS The genus Arcangeliella is closely related to Lactarius.andthis species
looks like an aborted milk cap. The overall buff to pinkish-buff colorandwhite acrid
latex are important field characters. A. tenaxandA. lactar;o;des (the latter with a
gelatinous cap cuticle) have also been described from the mountains of OregonandCali-
fornia; they are very similar if not the same. Other species: A. var;egata is a coastal species
with a grayish-buff to olive-buff cap that is often yellowish-spotted in age plus a copious
white to almost clear, acrid latexandwell-developed white stalk. It occurs in our area but
is more common northward. Still another species, A. (=Elasmomyces) camphorata of
Washington, is remarkable for its strong fragrant odor like that of candy caps (Lactarius
fragilisandrelatives), especially when dry. As in candy caps, its latex is often absent, but
the odorandoverall tan to rusty-brown color distinguish it. See also Zelleromyces(under
Martellia & Allies).
M artellia brunnescens
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 cm broad, round to oval or irregularly knobby (potato-like).
Outer surface white when young, developing ochre-to rusty-brown or brown stains in age
or after handling,andusually entirely brownish in old age; smooth or pitted. SPORE
MASS (interior) composed of small chambers, crispandwhite when young, but dis-
coloring brown to rusty-brown when cut (often slowly)andbecoming ochre-brown to
brown at maturity; odor often sweet (somewhat reminiscent of vanilla), at least in age.
STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 8-11 x 8-9 microns, broadly elliptical to round,
with strongly amyloid wartsandspines; hyaline ( colorless) under the microscope. Cystidia
absent. Walls of tissue between the chambers lacking sphaerocysts in their central layers.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in soil or humus (buried) in woods; known
only from western North America. It favors conifersandis one of the most common
Martellias of OregonandCalifornia. I have found it in mixed woodsandunder Douglas-
fir in April, July,andOctober.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS There are many Martellias that will more or less fit the macroscopic
features of the above description. The sweet odor which develops in age might seem to be
a distinctive feature, but is found in a number of other species (e.g., M.fragrans of Idaho,
which has a strong vanilla-like odor). Another common western species,M.jallax, smells
like Russulafragrantissima (at least to me). It is quite common in our area under hard-
woods,anddiffers microscopically from M. brunnescens in having cystidia which are
golden in potassium hydroxide (KOH). Also worth mentioning areM.joetens, an Idaho
species that smells like M.fa//ax;M. cremea, which hasa percurrentcolumella; andM. cal-
iforn;ca, M. boozer;, M. parks;;, M. ell;psospora, et aI, which differ microscopically.
Gymnomyces socialis
FRUITING_BODY 1-2 cm broad (but several sometimes tightly clustered to form larger
masses), roundish to somewhat irregular. Outer surface pallid to creamy or pinkish,
usually staining ochraceous to rusty-brown when handled or dried; more or less smooth.
SPORE_MASS (interior) composed of minute chambers, rosy-pinkish to pinkish-buff at
maturity. STALK present as a short sterile base (at least in larger specimens) which is
tucked into the depression formed by the lower portion ofthe peridium(skin), giving rise
to a columella which penetrates the spore massandis usually percurrent; whitish to
pinkish-buff. SPORES 9-14 x 8-11 microns, round or nearly round, ornamented with
amyloid warts or spines, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope. Walls of tissue between
the chambers containing sphaerocysts in their central layers.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered in soil or humus under oak; known only
from California. According to Herb Saylor, it is fairly common in our area in the late fall,
winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species can be told by its small size, pinkish-tinged peridium (skin)
and spore mass,andthe presence of a columella which usually extends below the spore
mass as a short stalk. The latter feature is unusual for a Gymnomyces.andserves to dis-
tinguish it from G. roseomaculatus, which also develops pinkish or reddish spots or
tingesandgrows under oak. Specimens with a well-developed stalk might be mistaken
for a Macowanites or Elasmomyces. but do not have the rudimentary gillsandexposed
spore mass of those genera. Other species: G. cinnamomeusandG.ferruginascens both
lack a columellaandhave a brownish to rusty-ochre or cinnamon exterior, at least in age.
The first occurs in California under oak; the latter is recorded from Idaho under conifers.
Hydnangium carneum (Rosy Eucalyptus False Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-4 cm broad, round to irregularly lobed and/or flattened. Outer
surface often pitted or wrinkled, dry, fibrillose or minutely velvety, pale rose to pinkish,
pinkish-cinnamon, pinkish-buff, or flesh-colored (but often whitish when young and/or
retaining white areas in age), sometimes also with darker spots. SPORE_MASS (interior)
composed of small, often elongated or mazelike chambers that give it a spongy or marbled
appearance; pinkish or rosy (like exterior or darker); odor usually mild. STALK absent
or often present as a fragile whitish to pinkish sterile base which may extend into the spore
mass as a thin columella. SPORES 10-18 microns, round or nearly so, with large non-
amyloid warts or spines; hyaline (colorless) or tinged yellow under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus under eucalyptusandpossibly other
exotic treesandshrubs (e.g., Leptospermum); widely distributed wherever eucalyptus
is planted or naturalized. In California it fruits from late fall through the spring, but is par-
ticularly common from January through April. I often find it with Hymenogaster a/bus
and Hysterangiumfuscum. HarryThiers reports finding a large-spored variant under pine.
EDIBILITY Edible according to one source; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS The pinkish color (at least of the s pore mass)andround spiny spores of this
false truffle are strongly suggestive of the agaric genus Laccaria,andit is very likely that
the two are closely related. It is interesting to note that pinkish Laccarias are sometimes
common in our area under acacia, eucalyptus,andother Australian imports. Thecommon
Hydnangium of California has long gone under the names H. roseumandH. soeder-
stroemii, but they are probably synonyms for the wide-rangingandvariable H. carneum.
One source of confusion is the presence or absence of a sterile base or "stalk." Though
often present, it is very easily brokenandconsequently apt to be overlooked.
Octavianina asterosperma group
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 cm broad, round or more often knobbyandpitted (potato-like),
firm, often with white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs) at the base. Outer surface whitish
at first from a thin layer of cottony tissue which wears off in patches, revealing the dingy
brown to grayish to yellowish-olive undersurface; discoloring pale greenish to faintly
bluish or grayish-olive where bruised or rubbed. Peridium (skin) often wavy, whitish to
buff, discoloring like the surface when cut. SPORE_MASS (interior) composed of minute
chambers, very firm, dark brown to blackish when mature, with whitish plates of sterile
tissue sometimes visible; latex (fluid) present or absent (see comments). STALK absent,
but a slight sterile base often present as a thickening of the basal peridium,andin some
specimens this sterile base apparently giving rise to a thin columella. SPORES 13-18
microns, round, covered with large, blunt spines; yellowish to brown under the
microscope, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus under trees in woods (usually buried);
widely distributed but rare. Specimens tentatively identified as this species have been
found near Santa Cruz, California, under redwoodandDouglas-fir in JuneandJuly.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Most species of Octavianina are rare,andthis one is no exception. It was
originally collected in Europeanddescribed as exuding a latex when cut. Local material
seems nearly identical to the European version, but shows no sign of a latex. Var. potter;,
described from Michigan, also lacks a latex, but has a paler spore massandblackens when
bruised. The large, relatively few, non-amyloid warts or spines on the spores are the out-
standing feature of the species. Hymenogaster utricu/atus (see comments under H. sub-
lilacinus) looks quite similar in the field, but has ridged or honeycombed spores. There
are several Octavianinas with a paler (pallid to cinnamon-brown) spore mass, including:
O. papyracea, with an abundant cream-colored latexanda papery peridium when dry,
originally found in northern California under redwood; O. rogers;;, with smaller warts
on its sporesandno latex;andO. macrospora, with elliptical spores. All of these are rare.
Gautieria monticola
FRUITING_BODY (I) 2-9 cm broad, round to elongated or irregularly knobby (potato-
like), often with a mycelial cord (rhizomorph) at base. Outer surface pallid when very
young, soon becoming light brown to ochre to rusty-brown or dull brown. Peridium
(skin) very thin, soon wearing away to expose the spore-bearing cavities. SPORE_MASS
(interior) composed of numerous small (0.5-3 mm) round orelongated chambers, firm and
rubbery (not fragile)andcrisp when fresh, ochre-brown to rusty-brown to dull cinnamon
to dull brown at maturity; odor often strong in age (sometimes reminiscent of decaying
onions). STALK absent, but a distinct columella usually presentandoften penetrating
to the center of the spore mass; columella whitish or translucent, thin, often branched.
SPORES 10-15 x 6-9 microns, elliptical, longitudinally grooved, rusty-brown to ochre-
yellow under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in duff under conifers (some-
times partially exposed at maturity); common in western North America, particularly
under mountain conifers in the late spring, summer,andearly fall. I have seen large
numbers in the Sierra NevadaandCascades in June,anda similar species occurs in our
area under hardwoods. The strong odor that develops in age presumably aids animals
in locating them. The animals then help to disperse the spores.
EDIBILITY Edible, I am told, but rather rubbery.
COMMENTS The rubbery brown spore mass composed of numerous irregularly-
shaped cavities plus the absence or near-absence of an enveloping peridium (skin) are
characteristic of this speciesandits close relatives. Hysterangium species are somewhat
similar, but have a persistent skinandare differently colored. Similar species include: G.
graveo/ens, a larger-spored conifer-lover; G. pterosperma, fairly common in Oregon and
California, with ..winged" sporesandyellow-brown to ochre cavities;andG. candida, with
melon-like spores. Other species: G. morchelliformis is a widespread hardwood-loving
species with very large (up to 10 mm broad) spore-bearing cavities, no peridium, and
little or no columella. I have sniffed it out under oak because, like G. montico/a, itdevelops
a strong odor in age. Two small Gautierias with a persistent peridium should also be
mentioned: G. parksiana, whose peridium is yellowish-orange to ochre at first;andG.
gaut;er;o;des, whose peridium is whitish, at least initially. Both of these species occur on
the west coastandare likely to be mistaken for a Hymenogaster or Martellia until their
spores are examined.
Hymenogaster sublilacinus
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 (5.5) cm broad, round to irregularly lobed (potato-like). Outer
surface often fibrillose, variable in color but typically whitish to lilac or dull bluish when
young, becoming yellowishandthen orangishandfinally brown in age; often staining din-
gy ochraceous when handled (if older) or bluish (if young). Peridium (skin) often sepa-
rating rather easily from spore mass. SPORE_MASS (interior) composed of small or
minute chambers that give it a sponge-like appearance; pallid when very young but brown
to cinnamon-brown at maturity; odor variable (mild, sweetish, farinaceous, etc.). STALK
absent, but sterile tissue usually present as an expansion or thickening of the basal peri-
dium, which mayor may not give rise to a thin, short, branching columella. SPORES
8-13 (15)x 5-8 (9.5) microns, elliptical, warted-wrinkled, brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff under mountain conifers, especially fir,
spruce,andlodgepole or ponderosa pine; fairly common in the Sierra Nevadaandother
mountain ranges of the West in the spring, summer,andearly fall.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species appears to be the most common conifer-loving Hymeno-
gaster. at least in California. The confusing color changes it undergoes as it agesanddries
out has led to the naming of several "new" species (e.g., H. brunneseens, H. d;abolus,
H. suboehraeeus) where only one exists. The brown color of the mature spore mass plus
the warted brown spores separate it from other genera of false truffles. Other species:
H. parks;; is very common in our area under oakandother trees. It is small (5-15 mm
broad)andwhitish when freshandhas a grayish to ochre-brown or cinnamon-brown
spore massandprominently beaked spores (see photo at bottom of p. 750). H. g;lkeyae
closely resembles H. parksii but differs microcopically. H. memurphy; also grows under
oak, but ,yellows in age or when bruised. H. albus (=H. albellus, H. luteus) is a white
or yellow-staining species that grows under eucalyptus (often with Hydnangium
carneum). H. utr;eulatus (see photo below) is a conifer-lover with distinctive pitted-
reticulate spores at maturity. Macroscopically it rather resembles the description of
Octavianina asterosperma (dark spore mass, etc.). I have found it in large numbers under
Douglas-firandredwood in JuneandJuly, but it probably fruits throughout the mush-
room season. Because of its distinctive spores it may deserve a genus of its own. Many
other H ymenogasters occur, but most can only be identified with the aid of a microscope.
Destuntzia rubra
FRUITING_BODY 1-4 cm broad, roundish to oblong or lobed (potato-like). Outer
surface white when young, but staining pink, reddish, or vinaceous (or even bluish) in age
or after handling. Peridium (skin) fairly thick, white when sectioned. SPORE_MASS
(interior) olive-brown to grayish-brown becoming darker (sometimes nearly black) in age;
often speckled with white sterile tissue that separates clusters of minute chambers (use
hand lens!); firm or gelatinous (chambers mayor may not be gel-filled). STALK and
columella absent, but vinaceous mycelium sometimes attached to base or visible in
humus. SPORES 8-12 x 6.5-9 microns, elliptical, with striate conical warts, brownish
under the microscope. Basidia borne in chambers but not typically forming a hymenium.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff (usually buried) in mixed woods and
under conifers; fairly common in our area in the late winter, spring,andearly summer(but
probably more widely distributed). It seems to favor Douglas-fir. A similar species,
D. saylor ii, is fairly common in the Sierra Nevada.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Hymenogaster ruber, this speciesandits relatives
can be recognized by their dark, often somewhat gelatinous spore massandpink-or
reddish-staining exterior. The specimen shown in the photograph was pure white when
collectedandentirely vinaceous when I brought it home. Several Rhizopogons stain
reddish, but usually have a more fibrillose exterior, paler interior, and/or smooth spores.
The spore mass of Destuntz;a may gelatinize somewhat, leading to confusion with M e/ano-
gaster, but the chambers are much smaller than in that genus. Other Destuntzias include:
D. saylorii(with I-spored basidia like D. rubra)andD.juscaofCalifornia;D.subborealis
of Idaho;andD. solstitialis, an eastern species (see footnote on p. 748).
Chamonixia ambigua
FRUITING_BODY (0.5) 1-5 cm broad, more or less pear-shaped to cushion-shaped (i.e.,
round or oval with a narrowed base) to somewhat lobed (especially if growing in clusters).
Outer surface white when fresh, but discoloring vinaceous to dark vinaceous-brown to
blackish-brown after handling or standing,andeither staining yellow-green to bluish-
green when bruised or showing such stains, especially near the base; smooth but rather
soft or cottony. Peridium(skin) very thin. SPORE_MASS dark brown to vinaceous-brown
to deep grayish-brown when fresh, minutely chambered, the chambers empty so that they
resemble small tubes. STALK absent or present as a white or greenish-stained sterile base
which usually gives rise to a columella; columella branched or unbranched. usually
percurrent. SPORES (9) 11-15 (18) x 8-12 microns, elliptical with a prominent "beak"
at one end, longitudinally ridgedandslightly warted, the inner wall with an apical pore;
brown to dark brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small clusters in humusandsoil (buried)
under live oak; known only from California. Like many subterranean fungi, it is described
as being "rare," but may very well be common once you know whenandwhere to look for
it. I have found it in JuneandJuly in Santa Cruz County.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The genus Chamonixia intergrades with Hymenogaster, but most of its
species can be told in the field by their tendency to stain bluish or to exhibit natural bluish-
green stains. The distinctly tubulose (spongelike) spore mass is reminiscent of a bolete,
and it has been suggested that Chamonixia is related to the boletes (along with Trunco-
columella). C. ambigua mayor may not stain bluish when bruised, but typically stains
vinaceous to black when rubbed (within a few minutes)andusually has a percurrent colu-
mella. C. caespitosa is a widespread species whose skin is white when freshandrapidly
stains indigo-blue when bruised; it also has larger spores. C. brevicolumna has an olive-
ochre peridium that blues when bruised, plus a short broad rounded columella; it has been
found under conifers in Idaho. Hymenogaster pyriformis is a small blue-staining species
originally collected under oak in California. C. caudata has a yellowish-brown to brown
or maroon peridiumanda short whitish stalk, but does not stain blue; it occurs under
oakandother hardwoods in CaliforniaandOregon.
Truncocolul7leHacurina
FRUITING_BODY 2-5 (7) cm broad, 1.5-5 cm high, irregularly rounded to oval, bulblike,
lobed, or kidney-shaped, often with a stubby stalk. Outer surface sometimes whitish when
very young but soon becoming yellow to ochre, greenish-yellow, or grayish-olive, smooth
or sometimes cracking to form a few scales or patches. Flesh( in peridiumandstalk) yellow
to buff, firm. SPORE_MASS (interior) yellow-brown to olive-gray, becoming darker
(sometimes blackish) in age; composed of small empty tubular chambers, completely
enclosed by the peridium; firm when young but often quite gelatinous in old age. STALK
often (but not always) present as a short, thick, narrowed base; columella present also,
either stumplike (i.e., a broad basal region of sterile tissue) or branchedandextending
into the spore mass for a considerable distance; yellow to buff. SPORES 6-10 x 3.5-5
microns, elliptical, smooth, yellowish to light brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under Douglas-fir (and possibly other western coni-
fers); common, especially in the summerandfall, but fruiting practically year-round in
our area. Like most false truffles it develops underground, but often surfaces at maturity
or is dug up by rodents.
EDIBILITY I can find no published information on it, but ethnomycologistJimJacobs
had a bizarre experience after putting some in an omelet: although they had little or no
flavor at the time of eating, a strong licorice-like flavor began to permeate his mouth an
hour or two later,andlingered for several hours!
COMMENTS The yellow to buff, stumplike or branched columella plus the yellowish
to olive exterior make this a relatively easy species to identify. Other species: T. rubra has
a reddish or reddish-staining exterior, a dingy yellowish spore mass that stains blue when
cut,andlarger spores. It was originally described from Washington but has been found in
the San Bernardino Mountains of southern California. For other blue-staining false
truffles, see comments under Chamonixia ambigua.
Rhizopogon rubescens (Blushing False Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 1-6 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat irregular (potato-like).
Outer surface somewhat cottony or fibrillose, often sparsely overlaid with mycelial strands
(rhizomorphs); white when young but staining pinkish to red or vinaceous when bruised
or cut,andbecoming yellow to greenish-yellow or reddish-stained in age. SPORE_MASS
(interior) minutely chambered, firm or rubbery to spongy or slightly gelatinous in age;
white when young, but staining pinkish when cutandbecoming tawny-olive to olive-buff
to dark olive-brown or brown in age. STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 5-10x 3-4.5
microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth, usually tinged yellow under the microscope.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (usually
buried or half-buried), especially pine; widespreadandcommon. In our area this species
and/or its numerous look-alikes (see comments) can be found whenever it is damp.
EDIBILITY Delectable-if you're a squirrel!
COMMENTS The reddish-staining peridium (skin) is the outstanding feature of this
Rh , izopogon but there are many other "blushing" species that can only be separated
with certainty by using a microscope. Their ranks include: R. smith;;, an aromatic species
that grows with Boletus edu/is in pine forestsandis eaten by Italian-Americans as a white
truffle substitute (it is whitish when young, reddens when bruised,anddarkens consi-
derably with age); R. v;n;c%r, a common associate of Douglas-fir that is white when
youngandbecomes vinaceous-red in age; R. roseo/us, which becomes pinkish in age; R.
subaustra/;s, which develops black stains in age; R. succosus, with a strong rotten egg
odor in age; R. occidenta/;s, a common white to yellow, edible western species said to have
a sweetish tasteandskin that stains orange to reddish-brown when rubbedandreddish
when sectioned; R. couch;;, widespread, with few or no rhizomorphsanda pink-staining
spore mass when fresh; R. evadens, similar to R. smithii but with a disagreeable "metallic"
(Smith) odor in age, very common with ponderosa pine;R. atrov;o/aceus, with strongly
amyloid sporesanda white fruiting body that stains pinkish, then develops grayish-purple
to dark brownish tones in age; andR. subsa/mon;us, a diffcult-to-identify species "com-
plex" that is white to salmon-pink with salmon-or vinaceous-tinged rhizomorphs on its
exterior, especially common under mountain conifers (e.g., firandspruce).
Rhizopogon ochraceorubens
FRUITING_BODY 2-8 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat flattened or irregular
(potato-like). Outer surface yellow to tawny or ochraceous when young, but usually over-
laid with conspicuous brown to reddish-brown rhizomorphs (mycelial strands), often
mottled with red or reddish-brown areas (especially in age), sometimes reddening some-
what when bruised or discoloring brown to rusty-brown. SPORE_MASS (interior) pallid
to grayish becoming olive or olive-brown in age, firm or spongy becoming toughas it dries;
minutely chambered. STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 6-8x 2-3 microns, oblong,
smooth, hyaline or tinged yellow or greenish under the microscope.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered (usually buried, sometimes erumpent)
under pine; widely distributed in western North Americaandvery common. It is often
abundant in the Sierra Nevada as well as along the coast whenever it is damp enough.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The conspicuous brown to reddish-brown rhizomorphs that cover the
exterior of the fruiting body are a distinctive though by no means unique feature of this
species. It doesn't redden as much as R. rubescens,andis not white when young; there are
several similar species which can only be differentiated microscopically. Other species:
R. maculatus is a small (1-2 cm) vinaceous-tinged species with small rhizomorphs on its
outer surfaceanda grayish mature spore mass that becomes quite hard as it dries; it occurs
under coastal pines. R. coker; (=R. truncatus) is an infrequent but widely distributed
species with a small (0.5-1.5 cm), bright yellow fruiting body that does not stain; it grows
under conifers also, particularly white pines. R. p;nyonens;s has a peridium that stains
yellowish when broken; it is one of several Rhizopogons associated with pinyon pine.
R hizopogon ellenae
FRUITING_BODY 1-9 cm broad or long, oval to elongated to roundish, often somewhat
flattened. Outer surface white when young but developing dingy pinkish-gray to purplish-
lilac to fuscous (dark purple-gray or smoky) tones in age or after handling; smooth to
fibrillose or with a few rhizomorphs (mycelial strands). SPORE_MASS (interior)
minutely chambered, firmandwhite when young, becoming gray to olive-gray in age.
STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 7-9x 3-4 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth,
hyaline (colorless) or tinged yellow under the microscope, weakly amyloid at maturity.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered in duff or soil under conifers (particu-
larly pine), often erumpent (breaking through the ground); common in western North
America. I have seen large fruitings under pine in the Sierra Nevadaandalong the coast.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several medium-sized to rather large Rhizopogons that
stain dingy purplish-or pinkish-gray (not reddish as in R. rubescens!) to fuscous when
handled and/or in age. Other species: R. idahoensis also has amyloid spores (a rather
unusual feature for a Rhizopogon); it stains brownish to grayish-lilac when bruised and
is especially common in the northern Rockies under Douglas-fir. R. amyloideus has
strongly amyloid spores,. but is more prevalent in the coastal forests of northern Cali-
fornia. R. colossus is a large species that is whitish when fresh but stains brown to blackish
when handled or dried; it has non-amyloid spores and, like the others, occurs under
western conifers. R. parksii is a very common coastal species, particularly under Sitka
spruceandDouglas-fir. It is pallid to brown or pinkish, but stains dingy purple to bluish-
black on its surface when bruised or with age. R. subcaerulescens tends to develop
bluish or greenish stains when handled or in ageandis widely distributed. It is white at
first, dark vinaceous-brown in age. Also see the species listed under R. rubescens.
Alpova diplophloeus (Alder False Truffle; Red Gravel)
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-3 (5) cm broad, oblong or oval to nearly round, or less commonly
irregularly lobed. Outer surface pallid to pinkish-yellowish-buff when young, soon be-
coming yellow-brown to cinnamon, reddish-brown, or brown, usually staining dark
reddish-orange to reddish-brown where bruised; smooth or with only a very few rhizo-
morphs (mycelial threads); odor usually fruity at maturity. SPORE_MASS (interior)
composed of small chambers separated by pale yellow or whitish veins; chambers 0.5-3
mm broad, filled with a gelatinous substance, pallid to pale yellowish or olive when young,
becoming orange-brown to reddish-brown to dark vinaceous-brown at maturity. STALK
and columella absent. SPORES 4-6 x 1.5-3 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth, hyaline
(colorless) under the microscope.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in humus or soil (usually buried) under or near
alder; widely distributed, but particularly common in western North America. I have
found it in the fallandwinter in coastal Californiaandin the late summer, fall,andspring
in the Sierra NevadaandCascades.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS Also known as A. cinnamomeusandR hizopogon diplophloeus, this false
truffle can be distinguished by its cinnamon-colored exterior (when mature), fondness
for alder (a tree not noted for its diversity of false truffles),andits spore mass composed
of small, gel-filled chambersandpallid veins. At maturity the interior (spore mass) is
reddish-brownandsomewhat reminiscent of "red gra vel."ltcaneven turn dark vinaceous-
brown, but never becomes black as in Melanogaster. Other species: A. trappei(=A.luteus)
is a brilliant yellow species that becomes dull yellow to orange-or reddish-brown (or
mottled with these colors) in age. It has a brownish-yellow to brownish-black spore mass
and a garlicky to slightly fruity odor when mature. It grows with fir, Douglas-fir, and
other western conifers; I ha ve found it locally in the winterandspring. A. olivaceotinctus
is a yellowish-brown or olive-tinged western species that is apparently rare. A. alexsmithii
is yellowish-brown to dark brownandgrows with mountain conifers (especially hem-
lock). Melanogaster parksii of California is said to have a brown interior. Alpovas in
eastern North America include: A. olivaceoniger, a brownish-olive conifer-lover that
darkens when handledandhas a fruity odor at maturity; A. nauseosus, brown to reddish-
brown, with a yellow-brown to blackish-brown interiorandstrong aroma of rotten fruit
at maturity, favoring hard woods;andA. superdubius, whose stalklike rooting base causes
false truffle expert James Trappe to be "superdubious" as to whether it isreallyanAlpova.
Melanogaster euryspermus (Black Veined False Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 1.5-4 (6) cm broad, round to elongated or lobed (potato-like), often
with rhizomorphs (mycelial threads) at base. Outer surface slightly fibrillose to downy
or felty, rusty-brown to reddish-brown, warm brown, or dark brown (but often yellower
when young), often blackening where bruised. SPORE_MASS (interior) composed of
large (up to 5 mm broad) blackish gel-filled chambers separated by whitish to yellow
meandering veins; odor usually strong in age (sometimes like sewer gas, at other times with
a pleasant citrus component). STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 9-18 x 7-11
microns, lemon-shaped (but with two small prongs at one end), thick-walled, smooth;
dark brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or in small groups in duff or soil under both hard-
woodsandconifers; widely distributedandfairly common (for a false truffle), but rarely
fruiting in large numbers. In California this speciesandM. variegatus occur throughout
the mushroom season. I have found them under oak, tanoak,andmadrone,andin the
Sierra Nevada, under conifers.
EDIBILITY According to European sources, M. variegatus (see comments) is edible
when young. I can find no information on American material.
COMMENTS This speciesandits close relatives are easily distinguished from other
false truffles by their blackish gelatinous spore mass composed of large chambers separ-
ated by pallid to yellow veins. They might be mistaken for true truffles because of the veins,
but they bear their spores on basidiaandare much softerandstickier inside. The name
M. variegatus has traditionally been used for our common species. However, the
genus is being critically studiedandspecies concepts may be revised. I t is very similar to
M. euryspermus, but has elliptical spores that are usually less than 11 microns long. M.
intermedius is also similar, but has spores intermediate in size between those of M. eury-
spermusandM. variegatus. M. ambiguus has large, elongated sporesanda spongy, more
olive-colored exterior plus a somewhat metallic odor in age; I usually find it under Doug-
las-fir. M. macrocarpus is a large ( up to 12 cm!) conifer-loving species with large spores.
M. parksii of California is said to have paler brown sporesanda brown rather than black
spore mass. See also Alpova trappeiandA. nauseosus (under A. diplophloeus).
Leucophleps spinospora (White Jellied False Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 cm broad, round to oval or irregularly lobed (potato-like). Outer
surface white or whitish, often becoming grayish in age, usually wrinkledandtypically
covered with rhizomorphs(mycelial threads), but young specimens usually showing rhizo-
morphs only at base. SPORE_MASS (interior) white, often exuding a white latex when
cut, composed of many tiny (less than I mm broad), clear, gel-filled chambers (unless old
or late to develop); sterile veins absent. STALKandcolumella absent. SPORES 10-13 x
10-11 microns, round or nearly so, with small spines inside a clear gelatinous outer wall.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff (usually buried) under western conifers.
In the Sierra Nevada it is fairly common from spring through fall. The duff of our coastal
forests is more apt to cough up species of Leucogaster(see below) when ruffled for truffles.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but the texture is hardly appealing.
COMMENTS This common whitish false truffle might be mistaken for a Rhizopogon
because of its rhizomorphs, but the white gel-filled chambers and/or presence of a latex
distinguish it. Specimens which mature slowly, however, may lack a gelandlatex or be
hardandTuber-like. Other species of Leucophlepsare best differentiated microscopically.
One, L. magnata, can usually be told by its whitish to pale yellowish or ochraceous ex-
terior with less conspicuous rhizomorphs, plus its larger spores with larger warts or spines.
Leucogaster is also fairly common. Its ranks .include: Leucogaster rubescens, with large
gel-filled chambersandan exterior that becomes pinkish to brick-red to brownish as it
ages; L. odoratus, less common, with a yellowish-orange exterior, large chambers, and
a pungent odor in age; andL. caro/inianus, one of several species in eastern North America.
R adiigera atrogleba
FRUITING_BODY 2.5-5 cm broad, round to slightly flattened or depressed, often im-
bedded in white mycelial threads (rhizomorphs). Peridium (skin) three-layered. Outer
surface toughandfelty or fibrous-cottony, rough, white to grayish, often developing buff,
pinkish, vinaceous, or brownish tints in age; usually separating readily from the two inner
layers. Inner layers closely adhering to each other, whitish to rosy or pinkish when fresh
(but may turn olive or buff when bruised), 3-5 mm thick, white when sectioned ( or with a
greenish tinge). SPORE_MASS (interior) composed of plate-like bundles ofhyphae which
radiate from the columella to the peridium; white, fleshy,andrather soft at first, becoming
gooey or inkyandblackish,andeventually powdery (and blackish); odor often rather
unpleasant in the inky stage. STALK absent, but the basal portion of peridium usually
thickened slightlyandgiving rise to a prominent columella which is nearly round, cushion-
shaped, or narrowed at the baseandenlarged (rounded) at the apex; columella usually
0.8 cm thick or more at the widest portion, usually penetrating the spore mass at least half
way (never percurrent); white or tinged gray, sometimes disintegrating in old age.
SPORES 5.5-6.5 microns, round, minutely warted, deep brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in groups or large, mycelium-incrusted clusters in soil
or duff in woodsandalong old roads through the woods, usually buried or only partially
exposed; not uncommon in the Pacific NorthwestandCalifornia, but probably more
widespread. Radiigeras occur mainly with conifers in the summerandfall, butI have found
R. tay/orii (see comments) locally under oakandpine in the winter.
EDIBILITY Unknown; the gooey black spore "mess" of older specimens isn't appetizing!
COMMENTS The thick, often rounded or cushion-shaped columella plus the thick skin
and blackish spore mass at maturity make this a most distinctive fungus. Scleroderma
species also have a thick skinanddark spore mass, but lack a columella. The spore mass
passes through a gooey stage before becoming powdery. In this stage (see photo) it looks
like the "ink" from a shaggy maneandstains everything it comes into contact with. Other
species: R .fuscog/eba is quite similar, but has an olive-brown to brown mature spore mass
and spiny spores (see photo above). R. tay/orii, on the other hand, is smaller, with a
smoother brownish to drab exterior, paler brown spore mass,andwarted spores. Both of
these species occur in Californiaandthe Pacific Northwest but may be more widespread.
Hysterangium separabile
FRUITING_BODY round to somewhat flattened or lobed, 0.5-3 cm broad, sometimes
with mycelial fibers at the base. Outer surface white to pinkish or sometimes buff, often
becoming pinkish where bruised or handled. Peridium (skin) easily cracking or peeling
away from the spore mass, at least at maturity. SPORE_MASS (interior) olive-brown to
greenish, composed of small chambers; at first firmandtough (cartilaginous), but be-
coming slimyandstinky (putrid) at maturity or in old age. STALK absent, but a columella
present; columella thin, translucent or whitish, arising from a rudimentary sterile base,
often branchedandtypically extending about half way into the spore mass. SPORES
12-19 x 6-8 microns, more or less spindle-shaped, smooth within a wrinkled utricle (sac),
hyaline (colorless) to pale greenish-brown under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in humus orsoil(usually buried) under both hardwoods
and conifers; very widely distributed, but especially common in western North America.
In our area it is abundant under oakandother trees practically year-round. In the Sierra
NevadaandCascades it's common in the late spring, summer,andfall.
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice-if you're a squirrel or chipmunk.
COMMENTS Once called H. c/athroidesandalso known as H. coriaceum, this subter-
ranean fungus look like a stinkhorn "egg:' but never hatches. The greenish spore mass and
translucent, branched columella distinguish it from most other false truffles,andthe ten-
dency of the peridium to crackandpeel easily from the spore mass is also distinctive.
There are a number of similar species that differ microscopically. A few can be recog-
nized in the field, including: H. selche//iiandH. crassirhachis, with thick whitish septa
(partitions) emanating from a scarcely branched columella (the latter especially common);
H. aureum, with a golden-brown exterior; H. crassum, whose fruiting bodies are en-
meshed in a copious mass of white mycelial threads, fairly common under western hard-
woodsandconifers, particularly in rocky or gravelly soil; H. darkeri, a slightly larger (1-5
cm) species that has a percurrent columellaandoften grows above the ground;H.juscum
(=H. jischeri), associated with eucalyptus;andH. stoloniJerum, fruiting body anchored
by a thick mycelial cord or "stolon"andspore mass sometimes bluish-tinged.
Another stinkhorn relative, Phallogaster saccatus, is quite differen 1. It usually grows on
decayed woodandhas a more or less pear-shaped fruiting body with a tapered, stalklike
sterile base. The peridium is white to pinkish or lilac,andtypically develops lobes and
shallow depressions at the top which rupture irregularly at maturity in order to expose
the spores. The spore mass is mucilaginous, olive-colored,andfetid at maturity, and
separated into several large chambers within the fruiting body. It is fairly common in
eastern North America but absent in our area. Also see Rhopalogaster( in key on p. 724).
Phallus impudicus (Stinkhorn) Color Plates 193, 194
FRUITING_BODY beginning as an ""egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white to
yellowish-white in one variety, lurid pinkish to purple in another (see comments), with a
gelatinous layer beneath; rupturing to form a volva as the stalk elongatesandthrusts the
slimy, swollen ""head" upward. CAP (""head") 1.5-4 cm broad, coated with the putrid,
copious spore slime which eventually drips off or is carried or washed away, revealing
the whitish reticulate (pittedandridged) surface beneath; top with a hole which is some-
times covered by a clinging piece of the peridium (volva) and/or by numerous flies.
STALK 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered at both ends, entirely white or sometimes pinkish
below; minutely honeycombed (spongelike), hollow, fragile. INDUSIUM (""veil") absent
or rudimentary. VOLVA present at base of stalk as a white to pinkish or purple, loose,
lobed sack formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with a thick, similarly-colored
mycelial cord(s). SPORE_MASS slimy or mucilaginous, olive-green to olive-brown,
with an obnoxious odor at maturity (see p. 765). Spores 3-5 x 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical
or oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters in lawns, gardens, sandy or cultivated soil,
under trees or shrubs, in rich humus, etc.; widely distributedandespecially common in
the West, fruiting whenever conditions are favorable. McIlvaine states that, ""its favorite
abode is in kitchen yardsandunder wooden steps where, when mature, it will compel the
household to seek it out in self-defense,"andhis contemporary Nina Marshall says, "the
distracted housewife searches in vain for a solution to the difficultyandthe odor disappears
as mysteriously as it came. If she is one of the initiated, however, she will search until she
finds the haunt of the offender andthen destroy it on the spot to avoid further repitition of
the nuisance." The largest fruitings I have seen were on the lawn of a school in Los Angeles,
and in front of an old cathedrl in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Stinkhorn specialist William
Burk recalls seeing massive clusters that apparently sprung from the foundation of
a house in Salt Lake City, Utah. If the "eggs" are carried homeandtransplanted in
cool, damp earth, more often than not they will continue to develop so that the fasci-
nating elongation process can be observed firsthand.
EDIBILITY Not poisonous (see comments on p. 765), but as Alexander Smith says,
"who would want to eat even the eggs?" Captain Charles McIlvaine (the plenipotentiary
extraordinaire of turn-of-the-century toadstool testers), for one. He says, "(the eggs) are
semigelatinous, tenacious,andelastic, like bubbles of some thick substance. In this
condition, they demand to be eaten. . . cut in slicesandfried or stewed, they make a most
tender, agreeable food."
COMMENTS This is one "wild" m ushroo m that is truly unmistaka ble. In sha pe it resem-
bles nothing so much as a slimy cigar, leaky pipe, malodorous thumb, putrid horn, hollow
baton, spongy candle, or putrescent pencil. But the most distinctive thing about the stink-
horn is its utter spontaneity. In the words of one founding member of the New York
Mycological Society, "you never know when one is going to pop up right in front of you,
so fast you can actually see it growing. And there is no way to predict or control them. It's
the one thing in the world you can't push or hurry." The stinkhorn also hasa highly refined
sense of poetic justice. One "going strong" is said to have appeared in the concrete floor
of the newly built house greeting a newly married couple. To accomplish this instructive
feat, the mycelial cords had to force their way into the foundation from an old stump in the
garden!
The stinkhorn is sometimes mistaken inexplicably for an old morel, perhaps because
of the pitted headandsomewhat similar shape. However, the "indiscreet" odorandslimy
spore mass (both of which may be gone in old age)andpresence of a volva(andfrequently,
a squadron of flies) leaves no doubt as to its identity. The common variety in California
has a pinkish to purple peridium(see Color Plate 194)andis considered a distinct species,
P. hadTiani (=P. impeTia/is, P. iosmus) but some authorities on the subject. Other species:
P. Tavene/iiis very similar, but has a smooth to granular rather than reticulate "head." It is
quite common in eastern North America, especially in lignin-rich humusandon old
sawdust piles. The tropical "Devil's Stinkhorn," P. Tubicundus, is a rather long, slim, red
to scarlet species. It might be mistaken at first glance for a dog stinkhorn (Mutinus), but
has a clearly differentiated, detachable, more or less conical or bell-shaped "head." It
occurs in southernandeastern North America (at least as far west as New Mexico), but
is not common. See also Dictyophora duplicata (under D. indusiata).
Dictyophora indusiata (Basket Stinkhorn) Color Plate 191
FRUITING_BODY beginning as an "egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white or
sometimes tinged buff, gray, or reddish-brown, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing
to form a volva as the stalk elongates. Mature fruiting body 7-25 cm tall, unbranched,
consisting of a more or less conical to bell-shaped cap on a stalk, with a large lacelike veil
or "skirt" flaring out from beneath the cap. CAP ("head") 1.5-4 cm broad, coated at first
with the putrid olive-green to brown spore slime, which eventually drips off or is carried
away by insects, revealing a white or yellowish, ridgedandpitted (reticulate) surface
beneath; top with a hole in it. STALK 1.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered at either end, white,
hollw, fragile, sometimes curved, minutely chamberedandporous (spongelike). INDU-
SIUM ("veil") white, initially tucked under the cap margin but soon unfurling; skirtlike
or basketlike when fully expandedandtouching or nearly touching the ground (6 cm or
more high); attached to the top of the stalk or just under the margin of the cap; composed
of white strands that form an intricate chainlike or lacelike net whose "holes" are large
and polygonal. VOLVA present at base of stalk as a white or pallid, loose, often lobed
sack formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with a thick mycelial cord(s) attached.
SPORE_MASS slimy or mucilaginous, olive-green to olive-brown or brown, with a fetid
odor at maturity that attracts flies, beetles,andother insects (but odor not always strong,
and in one form somewhat sweetish). Spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2 microns, elliptical to oblong,
smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in humus or on rotten wood in tropical forestsandat
their edges; fruiting in wet weather, widely distributed. It is quite common in Central
AmericaandSouth America, as well as in Australia, the South Pacific, Africa, India,
and Japan.
EDIBILITY Edible in the egg stage, but probably not choice (see comments on edibility
of Clathrus archeTl)-in other words, it is better eyed than fried. In many parts of the
world (e.g., New Guinea) it is worshipped for its beauty and/or used as an aphrodisiac.
COMMENTS What's an indisputably tropical fungus doing in a reputedly topical field
guide like this? Well, I could justify its presence on the f1imy pretext that it just might
show up in somebody's hot house, sauna, or backyard bamboo forest. Or I could cite the
popular but shamefully arrogant political notion that Central America is our "backyard,"
and that any stinkhorn found in one's backyard merits mention. However, the truth is
that I've included it because I couldn't resist including it. In my opinion, such a piece
de resistance of nature deserves a full-fledged description no matter where it grows (and I
offer the color plate as prooO. The lacy or netlike "veil" which is responsible for the name
"basket stinkhorn" is initially hidden (greatly compressed), but swells out soon after the
DICTYOPHORA
touches-the ground,andmay be globelike or broadly skirtlike. Later, however, itshrinks
or collpases somewhatandbegins to droop. Aside from its spectacular skirt, D. indusiata
resembles our common stinkhorn (Phallus impudicus) in shape, size, color,andtexture
(including the pitted head),andsome phallologists consider it "a good Phallus." Other
species: D. dupl;cata (the "Veiled Stinkhorn") is a robust temperate zone version that is
fairly common in the hardwood forests of eastern North America. It resembles D. in-
dusiata, but is not so spectacular, the skirt being smaller-meshedandonly 3-6 cm long
(it looks somewhat like the second photo on p. 767). D. mult;color is a colorful (yellow
to orange-red) tropical species. D. rubrovolvata of China has a reddish volva.
Mutinus caninus (Dog Stinkhorn)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as an "egg" up to 2.5 (4) cm high. PERIDIUM (skin) white
or occasionally with a faint pinkish or yellowish tinge, with an inner gelatinous layer;
rupturing to form a volva at base of stalk. Mature fruiting body 5-10 cm highand0.5-1.2
cm thick, unbranched, slender, erect or curved slightly, roughly cylindrical (equal) or
thicker near top; lacking a differentiated cap, but with a blunt, rounded or abruptly nar-
rowed, often perforated tip. FERTILE_PORTION covering the upper 2-3 cm of fruiting
body (except the very tip), bright orange-red to red to pink, but covered at first with olive
to olive-brown spore slime. STALK more or less equal, colored like cap (orange-red to
orange or pink) or often paler or even white toward the base; hollow, fragile, spongy
(minutely chambered). INDUSIUM ("veil") absent. VOLVA present at base of stalk
as a white, lobed sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium; base usually with one
or more white mycelial cords attached. SPORE_MASS mucilaginous, olive to deep olive-
brown, coating the upper portion of stalk; odor fetid at maturity (but not as malodorous
as some stinkhorns). Spores 3-7x 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on groundandrotten wood in gardens,
roadsides, woods, etc.; widely distributedandfairly common in eastern North America
in the late summerandfall (along with M. elegans-see comments). It is apparently absent
in the West, but a white variety (see comments) has been found in Oregon,andit seems
only a matter oftime before the typical formandits longer look-alike, M. elegans, show up
on the west coast, as several other erotic exotics have.
EDIBILITY Nonpoisonous. Mature specimens, of course, are hardly tempting, but Bill
Roody of Elkins, West Virginia, says the "eggs" are excellent "peeledandrolled in flour
seasoned with garlic saltandpepper, dipped into beaten eggandthen once again in the
flour mix before frying in butter or oil. They're great as is or served with crackers and
cream cheese:'
COMMENTS The slim, cylindrical, pink to orange-red fruiting body capped with olive-
brown spore slime is a uniqueandmemorable-if suggestive-sight,andit is easy to see
how this "phalloid" got its common name (see color plates of M. elegans). The odor of
mature specimens can be rather feeble compared to that of Phallus impudicus or Clathrus
ruber, but is obnoxious nevertheless. The stalk varies from orange or pink to white, and
a variety that is entirely white (except for the spore slime) has been found in Oregon and
Michigan. (It has been called M. can;nus var. albus, but may very well be a distinct species.)
Another dog stinkhorn, M. elegans (=M. bov;nus, M. curtis;;) (COLOR PLATES 195,
196) is sometimes called "Devil's Dipstick." It is also common in eastern North America,
and is frequently mistaken for M. caninus. It can be distinguished, however, by its longer
(9-18 cm) fruiting body that is usually thickest in the middleandtapered gradually toward
the tip. Also, a larger area of the fruiting body( up to 6 cm) is smeared with spore slime. In
my experience it favors the same habitats as M. caninus, but is more common.
Clathrus ruber (Latticed Stinkhorn)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a round to somewhat flattened or knobby "egg" up t06
cm broad. PERIDIUM (skin) whiteandmembranous, smooth becoming wrinkled and
grooved as it gets larger, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing to form a volva. Mature
fruiting body 5-14 cm high, consisting of a round to oval latticed ball or netlike framework
with large polygonal or elongated "windows." BRANCHES of the framework bright pink
to red to orange or pale orange,andoften paler toward the base; flattened, hollow, very
fragile, minutely chambered (like a sponge)andtransversely ribbed or wrinkled on the
outer surfaces; inner surfaces covered with the sticky, putrid spore slime. STALK absent
or rudimentary. VOLVA present at base of fruiting body as a thick, loose, white sack or
pouch, usually with thick mycelial cord(s) attached. SPORE_MASS coating the inside
surfaces of the latticework; mucilaginous, olive to olive-brown or drying blackish, with an
extremely obnoxious stench at maturity. Spores 5-6 x 1.5-2.5 microns, oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to densely gregarious or clustered in soil, wood chips, rich humus,
etc.; widely but erratically distributed, apparently fruiting most any time (providing con-
ditions are favorable). It is said to be a native of southern Europe (its likeness appears on
more than one postage stamp from that region), but has turned up in many localities in
North America (Florida, Virginia, North Carolina, etc.), usually in landscaped areas or
other places where exotic plants have been introduced. It is a common sight in the parks of
San Francisco (especially in the late fall),andI have also seen it in Santa Clara County.
EDIBILITY Nonpoisonous according to some sources, harmful (at least ra w) according
to others (see the quote on stinkhorn poisoning on p. 765).
COMMENTS Also known as C. cancellatus, this "wild" mushroom looks like a red or
orange "whiffle ball" (see photograph). The white volva from which it emergesandthe
intolerable stench that develops at maturity are also distinctive. The color of the branches
varies considerably-from bright red to very pale orange-apparently depending on the
temperatureandhumidity. The putrid perfume attracts flies in large numbersandis,
in my humble fungal opinion, the vilest of any stinkhorn.1t must be smelled to be believed!
(According to Ramsbottom, the smell is "so fetid that more than one artist has related
that it was impossible to paint it without discomfort. . . when the color photograph was
taken it would have been pleasing to have shown one or"two flies at work, but they settled
in such swarms that they had to be driven off. "). The "eggs," on the other hand, are quite
odorlessandvery knobby or furrowed just prior to bursting. In this stage they are easily
"hatched" at home. C. cr;spus is a similar but even more spectacular neotropical species
hose "windows" are circumscribed by "coronas"; it has been found in Florida. A species
of the Old World tropics, C. cr;spatus, is also quite similar, but the upper part of its lattice-
work regularly breaks up into fragments in age. C. columnatus (=Laternea columnata)
has 2-5 thick, orange to red columns which arise independently but are fused at the top and
may branch horizontally (but not enough to form a latticework). It is widely distributed
and has been found in many localities in eastern North America (particularly the South),
plus Hawaii. C. preuss;;andIleod;ctyon cibar;um (=c. c;bar;us) are but two of many
southern and/or tropical stinkhorns with a delicate while latticeworkandlarge "win-
dows:' The first is a native of Africa; the latter is common in the southern hemisphere.
Clathrus archer; (Octopus Stinkhorn) Color Plates 197, 198
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a round to somewhat flattened "egg" up to 6 cm in dia-
meter. PERIDIUM (skin) membranous, white to dingy buff, pinkish, or tinged purple,
smooth or scurfy, with a gelatinous inner layer; rupturing to form a volva at base of stalk.
Mature fruiting body 5-12 cm high, consisting of (4) 5-7 (8) arms or "tentacles" arising
from a common stalk or "tube," or sometimes with up to 12 arms arising from two fused
stalks. ARMS longandslender, 3-9 (12) cm long, tapered toward their tips, at first upright
and roughly parallelandjoined at their tips (often in pairs), soon opening outward like
the petals of a flowerandeventually curling backandunder so that the tips often touch
the ground (but sometimes one or more arms branched,andat other times the tips
remaining joined to others). Inner (or upper) surfaces of arms bright red to pinkish-red,
usually paler toward base, ribbed or reticulateandcoated with spore slime. Outer sur-
faces (undersides) pale pink, longitudinally grooved. STALK 1-3 (5) cm long, typically
shortandsometimes hidden by the volva (but a long-stalked form is also known); hollow
and tubular (open at the top), detaching easily from the volva, white or pallid below,
pinkish above. VOLVA present at base of stalk as a loose sack formed by the ruptured
peridium; base usually with one or more mycelial cords (rhizomorphs). SPORE_MASS
coating the inner (upper) surfaces of the "tentacles," mucilaginous, olive to dark olive-
brown when fresh, but usually blackening as it dries; odor obnoxious at maturity (some-
what reminiscent of rotting crab). Spores 4-5.5 (7) x 2-2.5 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground (especially sandy soil) or rotten
wood in various habitats; widely distributed (Tasmania, Russia, etc.), but rare in North
America. It is fairly common in the riparian woodlands along the San Lorenzo River in
Santa Cruz County, California (especially in the spring, but fruiting most any time). I
have also found it under a rose bush growing on a mixture of compostandrice hulls.
EDIBILITY Nonpoisonous,andlike most stinkhorns, edible in the egg stage. One spring
evening a former friendandI decided to sample two "eggs," following a recipe for French-
fried stinkhorn eggs (see comments on edibility of Mutinus caninus). The flavor wasn't
bad, but we neglected to strip away the gelatinous outer layer. It proved to be so slippery
that the "eggs" slid down our throats before we could savor them, leaving behind only the
sticky spore mucilage (see Color Plate 198), which clung to our throatsandtongues so
tenaciously that we were still trying to wash it away several hours later!
COMMENTS The octopus stinkhorn-or "stinkopus," as I am fond of calling it-is
one of my five favorite fleshy fungal fructifications. It is a most attractive fungus when
fresh, easily told by its long red "tentacles" which are initially joined at their tips but then
unfold to form a slender-armed "star." It definitely looks more like a sea creature than a
mushroom, but its obnoxious aroma-which attracts fliesandjaded fungophiles from
afar-identifies it as a member of the stinkhorn tribe. The arms are longer than those in
Lysurus.andthe stalk is proportionately shorter (or at times practically absent). It was
formerly placed in the genus Anthurus (as A. archer; or A. aseroeform;s), but since the
"tentacles" are sometimes branched to form a rudimentary latticework (when young), it
is now classified as a Clathrus. A common tropical stink horn, Aseroe rubra (see photo
below) is sometimes confused with C. archeri, but looks more like a starfish or sea anenome
than an octopus. It has five to ten or more "tentacles" which are deeply divided lengthwise
(so that they may seem to occur in pairs)andarise from a flattened, disclike expansion of
the stalk apex. The spore slime rests in the center of the disc or coats only the very bases
of the "tentacles." Although strictly tropical, it may turn up, like so many other exotic
fungi, in a greenhouse or similarly sultry e.nvironment. Also similar to C. archer; is the
"s tinky Squid," Pseudocolus fusiformis(=P. schellenbergiae, P. javanicus). It is common
in scattered localities in eastern North America (especially Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
the home of stinkhorn specialist William Burk), as well as in Europe, Australia, Asia, and
Tierra del Fuego. It has a white to brown volvaandonly three to four "tentacles" which
are red-orange to orange or pinkish, arise from a common stalk,andare usually fused at
their tips (see photo on p. 777) but sometimes break free in age.
Lysurus periphragmoides (Stalked Lattice Stinkhorn)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a round to oval "egg" up to 5 cm broad. PERIDIUM
(skin) white to buff, with a gelatinous inner layer, rupturing to form a volvaat base of stalk.
Mature fruiting body 6-16 cm high, composed of a small rounded latticed "head" ona long
stalk. CAP or "head" 1.5-3.5 cm broad, round to somewhat flattened, comprised of a
latticework of red to orange (or sometimes yellowish or white) branches which form rather
small meshes or..windows"; outer edges of branches keeled. STALK 5-13 cm long, 0.8-3
cm thick, hollow, fragile, rather spongy, equal or tapered, usually red aboveandpaler
below, but yellow or white in some forms. VOLVA present at base of stalk as a loose, lobed
sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium, 'usually with whitish mycelial cords at-
tached to base. SPORE_MASS coating the inside surfaces of the latticed.. head"andsome-
times spilling out, mucilaginous, dark olive to olive-brown or drying blackish; fetid at
maturity. Spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2.5 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious ( occasionally two arising from the same volva) in rich
soil, lawns, gardens, open woods, on rotten wood, etc.; widely distributed. It is not uncom-
mon in mild wet weather in the southern United StatesandMidwest (North Carolina,
Texas, Nebraska, New Mexico, even New York). but has yet to be found in California.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible in the egg stage, but who wants to eat it?
COMMENTS Also known as Simblum sphaerocephalumandS. texense, this
southern stinkhorn looks like a miniature Clarhrus ruber mounted on a long stalk. In
some specimens the transverse (horizontal) branches of the network are reduced or even
absent, making its relationship to other species of Lysurus more obvious. White and
yellow variants are known, but the red one is the most common in North America.
Lysurus mokusin (Lantern Stinkhorn) Color Plate 192
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a round to oval..egg" up t06cm high. PERIDIUM(skin)
whiteandmembranous, with an inner gelatinous layer; rupturing to form a volvaat base
of stalk and sometimes also leaving a piece of tissue stuck to the top of fruiting body.
Mature fruiting body (3) 5-12 (16) cm high, consisting of a stalk that is branched above
into 4-6 (usually 5, rarely 7) arms which normally remain joined at their tips to form a
..spire," but which sometimes break free from each other. ARMS 0.8-3 (4) cm long, short
and thick, usually bright red, erectandonly sightly separated, or bowed to form a lantern-
like structure; 3-sided; outer surfaces roughened, with a central longitudinal ridge; sides
at first coated with spore slime; ..spire" long or short (1-20 mm long), erect or bent down-
ward. STALK 6-13 cm long. 0.5-2 cm thick, equal or more often tapered downward, flesh-
pink to pik or reddish-pink above, paler belowandusually white at base; hollow, tubular,
fragile, minutely chamberedandmarked by longitudinal rows of V-shaped depressions;
cross-section usually showing 4-6 (7) angles (same number as arms). VOLVA present
at base of stalk as a loose, lobed, white sack or pouch formed by the ruptured peridium,
usually with one or more white mycelial cords attached to base. SPORE_MASS borne in
the vertical slits between the armsandcoating their sides, mucilaginous, light brown to
olive-brown becoming darker (blackish) as it dries, with an unpleasant odor at maturity.
Spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2 microns, oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary to densely gregarious or clustered in lawns, gardens, hard-packed
soil, etc.; common in southern Californiaandfruiting there year-round, but partial to
warm weather. It is probably native to Asia, but is well established in California at least as
far north as Fresno. It has also been found in TexasandWashington, D.C.
EDIBILITY Edible in the egg stage, but in my opinion, no better than Clalhrus archer;
(I have fried it). However, it is considered a great delicacy in China.
COMMENTS This gaudy stinkhorn is easily recognized by its red to pink color and
distinctive shape. In the words of Paul Rea (who wrote an extensive analysis of the deve-
lopmental stages of this species), "the form of the expanded plant may be likened to a
moat (the volval cup) surrounding the base of a tower (the polygonal stipe) bearing a
belfry or lantern (the arms) surmounted by a spire"-a very apt description, except that
the "belfry" is usually besieged by flies (see color plate)! Specimens growing in hard
ground are apt to be larger than those growing in rich or loose soil, perhaps because they
take longer to develop. The arms sometimes break free from each other, but the several-
sided stalkandoften brighter color distinguish it from L. crucialus.
Lysurus cruciatus (Lizard's Claw Stinkhorn)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a round to oval "egg" up to 6 cm high. PERIDIUM
(skin) whiteandmembranous, with a gelatinous inner layer; rupturing to form a volva at
base of stalk. Mature fruiting body 6-12 (16) cm high, composed of a stalk that is branched
at the top to form 4-7 (usually 5) stubby arms. ARMS initially incurvedandtouching(but
not permanently fused) at their tips, then separating at least slightlyandremaining more
or less erect (i.e., not unfolding); shortandthick (1-2.5 cm long), hollow, 3-sided; outer
surfaces pallid to brownish, flesh-colored, pinkish, orange, or red, with a longitudinal
groove. Inner surfaces wrinkledandirregularly roughened or knobby, at first covered
with spore slime. STALK 6-10 cm long, 1-2 cm thick, usually tapered downward, hollow,
fragile, minutely chamberedandfaintly striate longitudinally; entirely white or tinged
yellowish aboveandwhite below. VOLVA present at base of stalk as a thick, loose, lobed,
white sack formed by the ruptured peridium; uually with one or more mycelial cords
attached to base. SPORE_MASS supported within the armsandcoating their inner sur-
faces, mucilaginous, olive to olive-brown becoming blackish as it dries, with an unpleasant
(fetid) odor at maturity. Spores 3-4 x 1-2 microns, elliptical to oblong, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups or clusters in lawns, gardens, under trees, in rich soil,
on rotten wood, etc.; apparently native to AustraliaandNew Zealand, but now widely
distributedandwell established in various parts ofthe United States. It is not uncommon
in southern California, but is not nearly as numerous as L. mokusin. It favors warm
weather but can be found most anytime. I have not seen it north of Santa Barbara.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible, but see comments on the edibility of Clathrus archeri.
COMMENTS Better known asL. (=Anthurus) borealis, this stinkhorn is easily told byits
short, thick arms which separate slightly but do not unfold a la Clathrus archeri. It can be
dull or brightly colored,andthe tips of its arms are never fused intoaspireasin L. mokusin.
I t has often been confused withL. gardneri, a tropical species whose arms have sterile bases.
Crucibu/um /aeve (Common Bird's Nest Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY tiny, at first nearly round, becoming cylindricalandthen deeply
cup-shaped (i.e., with a wide flaring mouth); 5-12 mm highandbroad (at the top) when
mature, the rim more or less circularandcovered at first by a hairy lid. Peridium (wall
of nest) one-layered, tough, persistent. Exterior velvety or shaggy, yellowish or tawny to
cinnamon-brown, becoming nearly smooth in ageandoften darker or whiter. Interior of
nest smooth, somewhat shiny, white to silvery, gray, or pale cinnamon. PERIDIOLES
(eggs) 1-2 mm in diameter, several, whitish to buff or with a very slight brownish tinge,
circular but flattened (lens-or disclike), usually attached to nest by long thin cords. Spores
(4) 7-10 x 3-6 microns, elliptical, thick-walled, smooth, hyaline.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious on sticks, wood chips, nut shells, vegetable
debris, humus,andmanure; widely distributed. It is not as common locally as some of the
other bird's nest fungi, but occurs year-round, sometimes in the company of Cyathus.
EDIBILITY Much too miniscule to merit being munched on.
COMMENTS Also known as C. levisandC. vulgare, this fetchingandfarflung little
fungus is easily told by its whitish eggs that are initially attached to the nest by long, thin
cords. It lacks the sticky mucilage of Nidu/a,andthe eggs are never lead-colored or black
as in Cya th us. Other species: Crucibulum parvulum is a similar but even more minute
(24 mm high) species with a white to grayish or buff exterior. It grows on dead juniper
and other organic matter in arid habitats.
Cyathus stercoreus (Dung-Loving Bird's Nest Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY tiny, goblet-to vase-shaped orresemblinganinverted cone,5-1O(15)
mm highand4-10 mm broad at the top, the rim more or less circular when mature and
covered at first with a thin pallid or whitish lid that soon disappears, Peridium (wall of
nest) tough, persistent, 3-layered (but the layers not always distinguishable). Exterior
tan to golden-brown, brown, grayish-brown, or reddish-brownandshaggy (but often
smoothandblackish in old age); base often with a pad of brown to reddish-brown
mycelium. Interior of the nest smooth, pale gray becoming dark gray or lead-colored and
often blackish in age. PERIDIOLES (eggs) several, 1-2 mm in diameter, dark gray to
black, flattened or lentil-like, hard, smooth, often with a short cord or "stalk" attached
(especially the lower eggs in the nest). Spores large: 22-40 x 18-30 microns, variable in
sizeandshape but mostly round to oval, thick-walled, smooth, hyaline.
HABITAT Densely gregarious on dung, manure,andother organic debris; widely dis-
tributedandcommon, but seldom noticed. In our area it can be found most any time. The
largest fruiting I've seen was on a well-manured la wn in March.
EDIBILITY A meager morsel, much too puny to be of value.
COMMENTS The dark gray to black eggs, shaggy exterior (at least when young), and
smooth interior are the principal field marks of this cosmopolitan bird's nest fungus. The
cords by which the eggs are attached are not always evident, at least in my experience.
Other species: C. olla is a similar but slightly larger species. Its nest is gray to brown with
an often wavy (rather than circular) rimanda smooth to finely hairy (fibrillose) but not
shaggy exterior. Its eggs are also larger (2-3 mm)andgray to brown or blackish,andits
spores are much smaller (8-15 microns). It is widely distributedandcommon, but not as
numerous in our area as C. stereo reus. C. pygmaeus is a miniature version of C. olla
(fruiting body only 4-5 mm high) that commonly grows on sticks, dung, etc., in the drier
parts of the West. Two other species are worth mentioning because of their beautifully
pleated or grooved (radially striate) interiors: C. striatus, widely distributedandquite
common, with a shaggy cinnamon-brown to grayish-brown or dark brown exterior plus
slightly triangular eggs;andC. helenae, found mostly in arid or alpine habitats, with
a grayer, thicker-walled nest that has tufted hairs on its exterior. The latter two species
can grow in manure but are more common on sticksandother vegetable matter.
Nidula candida (Jellied Bird's Nest Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY tiny, cylindrical or cushion-shaped becoming mug-or flower-pot-
shaped at maturity (with vertical sidesanda flaring mouth); 5-15 (20) mm highand3-8
mm broad at the top when mature, the rim more or less circularandcovered at first by a
,;,..,
lid. Peridium (wall of the nest) tough, persistent. Exterior whitish beneath a gray to brown
or dull cinnamon scurfy or shaggy layer that covers at least the basal portionandthe lid.
Interior of the nest smooth, white to yellowish-brown or brown. PERIDIOLES (eggs)
several, 1-2 mm indiameter, pallid to gray or brown (but often darker on underside),
flattened, without cords, instead imbedded in a sticky mucilage or gel which eventually
dries out. Spores 6-10 x 4-8 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, hyaline.
HABITAT In groups on rotting wood, berry canes,andherbaceous debris in gardens,
woods, along streams, etc.; widely distributed. It is common in our area in the late fall
and winter or even spring, but the empty nests persist for months without decaying and
sometimes give rise to new ones.
EDIBILITY Academic; you'd ha ve to be slightly looney to bother with something so puny.
COMMENTS A common but frequently overlooked little fungus, easily told by the
brownish to cinnamon scurfy exteriorandthe sticky gel in which the eggs are imbedded,
plus the presence of a covering or lid when young. The species name, candida. which
means "shining white," is a misnomer since the fruiting body is neither shiny nor white.
However, a similar species with a shaggy white exterior(andnumerous small brown eggs),
N. niveotomentosa, is common in Californiaandthe Pacific North west, usually on sticks
or in moss. See also the genus Nidularia (in the key)andCyathus stercoreus.
Sphaerobolus stellatus (Cannon Fungus; Sphere Thrower)
FRUITING_BODY minute, 1-3 mm broad, at first more or less roundandwhite to dull
yellow-orange or ochraceous, the outer wall (peridium) then splitting into 4-9 bright
orange starlike rays or "teeth," exposing the single spore-containing peridiole ("egg"),
which is then shot out like a cannonball as the entire structure turns inside out (leaving
behind a translucent whitish ball perched on the rays). PERIDIOLE ("egg") chestnut-
brown to olive-black, sticky or slippery, smooth, more or less round. Spores 7-10 x 3.5-5
microns, oblong, smooth, hyaline.
HABITAT Gregarious on rotting wood, sawdust, plant debris,anddung or manure;
widely distributed, but easily overlooked. I have seen it several times in nursery flats; it
fruits whenever moisture is sufficient.
EDIBILITY Unknown. Several hundred would be needed for a mouthful!
COMMENTS This cousin of the bird's nest fungi is easily recognized by its diminutive
dimensions, bright orange star-shaped "catapult,"andsingle central"egg" or spore ball.
It makes a marvelous-albeit liliputian-laboratory pet: a small pop is said to accom-
pany the ejection of the spore ball, which sticks to whatever it lands on. Its flight path
has been measured at 14 ft. highand17 ft. long--or more than 1000 times the size of the
fruiting body! To equal such a prodigious feat, we puny humans would have to throw a
discus over one mile highandfar! It is also interesting to note that the "sphere thrower"
does not "do its thing" in complete darkness-light is apparently needed to trigger the
"cannon;' as well as a sufficient supply of moisture.
M orchella esculenta
(Morel; Yellow Morel)
CAP 3-11 cm high, 2-6 cm broad, round to oval to bluntly conical or irregular; margin
attached to the stalk (but often with a crease at point of attachment); overall color tan to
yellow-brown to warm buff or even buff. Pits roundish to irregular in shapeandnot nor-
mally arranged in well-defined rows; often quite small but sometimes large, yellowish
to brown or tan. Ridges typically meandering rather than in lines, usually quite narrow,
same color as pits or paler (or occasionally slightly darker). Interior hollow, whitish,
roughened. Flesh often rather thin. STALK 1-5 (10) cm long, 1-2.5 (3.5) cm thick, usually
minutely granular or scurfy, equal or enlarged at the base, usually relatively short and
narrower than cap, the base often somewhat wrinkled or pitted; white to buff, sometimes
with brownish or cinnamon stains; typically hollow in cross-section. SPORES 16-25
x 9-14 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered, gregarious, or clustered in a variety of habitats
(woods, streamsides, old orchards, cultivated or disturbed ground, burned areas, etc.);
very widely distributed, but especially common in eastern North Americaandthe Mid-
west. Like other morels, it fruits in the spring but will occasionally turn up at other times.
In eastern North America it i:. most often found under oak, maple, beech, hickory, elm,
ash, fruit trees.andother hardwoods, especially in May (or in the words of Ingrid Bartelli,
"when the oak leaves are as big as squirrel's ears"). Large crops can also be found around
the bases of dying (but not quite dead) elms attacked by Dutch elm disease. In the West I
look for it under deciduous oaksandin sandy soil or riverbottoms where there is willow,
cottonwood, or alder, from February to Mayor June depending on the elevation
and clima te. It also occurs in burned areas, but not as commonly as the black morels, and
it is not as frequent as the latter at higher elevations.
EDIBILITY Edibleandone of the most avidly hunted of all wild mushrooms (see
comments on pp. 785-786).
COMMENTS This, the common morel or "sponge mushroom," is one of the most readily
recognized of all edible fungi. It can be told from other morels by its modest size, warm
brown to tan or yellowish color,andirregularly-arranged pits (see color plate),andfrom
the poisonous false morels (Gyromitra species) by its pitted or honeycombed rather than
brainlike or lobed cap. It could also be confused with the stinkhorn (Phallus impudicus),
but does not have a volvaandlacks the foul-smelling spore slime of that species. It is typi-
cally a denizen of low hardwood forests, riparian woodlands,andfruit orchards, whereas
the black morels are more common in northern latitudes or at higher elevations under
conifers. The ranges of the two overlap, however,andthey can sometimes be found
growing in the same area. Like other morels, M. esculenta varies considerably in shape
and appearance. In most cases the pits are quite irregular-looking, but in some forms
the transverse ridges are not as well-developed as the vertical ones, giving the pits an
elongated, slotlike appearance. The ridges never blacken as in the M. elata group, but
conical forms intergrade with M. deliciosa (see comments under that species). Pale
forms can also be confused with M. deliciosa, but usually have smaller, paler pits that
are not as vertically elongated. A giant morel with irregularly arranged pits occurs in
the same habitats as M. esculenta, but usually a little later. This is M. crassipes (or
M. esculenta var. crassipes). It measures 6-20 or more cm highandusually has a massive
stalk with an enlarged, wrinkledandfolded or buttressed base (hence its nicknames,
"Thick-Footed Morel," "Big-Foot,"and"Tree Trunk Morel"). It also tends to have
grayer pits when young with paler or even whitish ridges, but like M. esculenta, becomes
tan in age. Many morel connoisseurs in eastern North America prize it above all others.
In the West, unfortunately, it is relatively rare. I have found it under cottonwood in
Oregon, among forget-me-nots in an old orchard in California (see photo above), and
in landscaped areas.
M orchella del;c;osa
(White Morel)
CAP 1.5 cm high, 1-3.5 cm broad, round to oval or conical, the margin attached to the
stalk but sometimes creased at its juncture Pits usually vertically elongatedandquite
large at maturity, but not necessarily arranged in rows; dark gray to dark brown to grayish-
tan, brown, or tan (usually darker when youngandpaler in age). Ridges usually widely
spacedandmostly vertical (the horizontal ones often few or not as prominent), white
to creamy (lighter than pits) when young, usually becoming tan or same color as pits
in age but not blackening unless shrivelled up. Interior hollow, the surface pallid or
whitish, roughened. Flesh rather thin. STALK 1.5 cm long, 0.5-2 (3.5) cm thick, equal or
thicker below, the base often somewhat wrinkled, pitted, or irregular; white to creamy or
buff, usually scurfy or minutely warted; typically hollow in cross-section. SPORES
18-25 x 10-15 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in gardensandother suburban habitats, under fruit
trees, in old orchards, in woodsandat their edges; etc.; widely distributed, fruiting mainly
in the spring. In eastern North America its appearance marks the beginning of the end of
the morel season. In coastal California it is not uncommon in the spring, especially in
sandy soil, but occurs practically year-round. One couple I know gets a small crop under
their plum tree every Christmas! Another "white morel" occurs in the Sierra Nevada and
Cascades (see comments).
EDIBILITY Delectably delicious, as the species epithet implies. Like all morels, it
should be cooked (see comments on pp. 785-786 for more details).
COMMENTS As already pointed out, morels are perplexingly polymorphicandresist
our obtrusive attempts to categorize them. The name M. deliciosa has been applieq to
more than one kind of morel,andthe above description has been broadened to include a
number of confusingandintergrading, small to medium-sized morels with white or pallid
ridges al/easl when youngandpits which are usually largeandoften vertically elongated.
In age the pitsandridges often become the same color(yellowish-tan to brown) as shown
in the color plate, but the shapeandsize of the pits helps distinguish it from M. escu/enla.
The name M. conica has also been used for this species, but is more properly applied to
morels with blackening ridges (see the M. e/ala group). Other species: Another "white
morel" occurs in the Sierra NevadaandCascades about the same time as the black morels.
It has a whitish to buff cap that does not darken appreciably in age. The pits are usually
elongated vertically but the ridges often form vertical lines as in the black morels. I do
not know the identity of this morel, but I do know that it is delicious!
M orchella elata group
(Black Morel)
CAP 2-6 (10) cm or more broadand2-10 (18) cm or more high; usually conical to oval or
somewhat irregular in shape; margin joined to the stalk but often with a crease at its point
of attachment; overall color usually quite dark, especially in age. Pits usually vertically
elongated and/or arranged in vertical rows, but in some forms meandering (see com-
ments); yellow-brown to brown, grayish, olive-brown, or even reddish-brown, sometimes
becoming blackish in age. Ridges vertically aligned in some forms, colored like the pits
at first, usually darker (olive-brown to smoky-brown to black) before or by maturity
(and sometimes dark from the beginning). Interior hollow, the surface pallid or
whitish or tinged cap color, roughened. Flesh fragile in some forms. STALK 1.5-10 (20)
cm or more long, (0.5) 1-4 cm or more thick, slender in some forms, as thick as the cap in
others (often proportionately longerandthicker in age); equal or enlarged at either end,
often grooved and/or wrinkled, especially toward base; sometimes nearly smooth, more
often entirely or partially scurfy from a coating of small granules or warts; white to creamy,
buff, pinkish-tan, or sometimes with a reddish tinge; typically hollow in cross-section.
SPORES (18)x 20-25 (30)x 11-15 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups, clusters, or troops on ground in woods and
at their edges (especially under conifersandaspen)andin burned areas, less commonly
in urbanandsuburban settings; very widely distributed (Japan to the Himalayas, Europe,
etc.), but especially common in northernandwestern North America. Like other morels,
its season is the spring( or early summer at higher altitudes), but" freak" fruitingscan occur
in the fall, particularly if a warm wet spell follows cold weather. In coastal California,
where the seasons are not strongly defined. black morels occur year-round. but seldom in
quantity. In colder regions they are often abundant, usually two to five weeks after the
snow melts. Look for them in the Sierra Nevada when the snow plants (bright red sapro-
phytic plants) have fully emerged,andin the Cascades when the calypso orchids are in
bloom (see Color Plate 199). Don't expect to find them everywhere, however. For one
thing, you face fierce competition from other collectors; for another, ttrey are devilishly
difficult to see, because they look just like fallen pine or fir cones (see Color Plate 202).
Also, they show a definite preference for semi-disturbed areas, e.g., campgrounds, along
roads,andin loggedandburned areas. Bushels can be harvested one to two years after a
forest fire, providing the spring weather is favorable.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelectable (see comments on pp. 785-786). However, some
people are apparently "allergic" to it. Like all morels, it should never be eaten raw.
COMMENTS The above description covers a number of black morels (the so-called
"M. elata-M. angusticeps-M. conica" complex). Many of the morels in this category
are black or at least dark in age, but some are brown, reddish, or pinkish-tinged and/or
have pits that are usually more or less radially arranged (that is, arranged in rows).
Others are quite darkandmay have pits that are not arranged in obvious rows. Excluded
are those morels with a "half-free" cap (see M. semilibera), brown or tan to yellowish-
capped morels with irregularly arranged pits (see M. eseulenta),andmorels with
dark pitsandpale ridges when young (see M. deliciosa). There are at least two common
kinds of black morels in North America. The first variety, sometimes called the "Fat-
Headed Black Morel," is probably the "true" M. elata. though it has gone under the name
M. angustieepsandhas also been called M. eoniea. It has a roundish to oval or conical
"head" that is relatively large in comparison to the stalk, pits which are often elongated
but not necessarily radially arranged,andridges that are gray to black before maturity
(and are often dark while very young). This variety is shown aboveandin the color plates.
The second variety, sometimes called the "Narrow-Headed Black Morel," is shown in
the photo on p. 790. Its cap is often more conical or elongatedandoften spongier or
more fragile than the first variety. Its pits are usually arranged in rowsand its ridges usually
blacken, but not as quickly or as consistently as the fat-headed variety. Its stalk is often
longandrelatively thick (often as thick as the base of the cap),andis typically more
furrowed or wrinkled toward the base than the fat-headed variety,andalso wartier or
scurfier. According to "morelizers," this second variety, if distinct from the first, is
probably the "true" M. angustieeps, but it has also been called M. eoniea. A giant form of
this variety is shown on the back cover of the book.
These two black morels grow in the same regions, but the fat-headed one seems to be
the commoner of the two. Sometimes they seem distinct, at other times they intergrade or
"hybridize." A third variety, often called the "Red Morel," is shown on p. 31.lt resembles
the previous two (especially the narrow-headed one), but a distinct reddish or pinkish
tinge pervades its stalk and/or cap. This variety, which may simply be a growth form,
has a particularly fine flavor. Still another variety has a whitish to buff cap. It may be an
albino form, or a separate species entirely (see comments under M. deliciosa). Whew!
M orchella semilibera
(Half-Free Morel)
CAP 1.5-5 cm highandbroad, bluntly conical to round or oval when young, usually conical
in age; margin (lower edge) free from stalk for about one half( 1/3-2/3) the distance to the
apex of the cap, often flared outward away from the stalk in age. Pits largeandelongated,
yellowish-brown to brown or grayish-brown. Ridges vertically oriented (with few if
any transverse ribs), yellowish-brown to brown or olive-brown (usually slightly darker
than the pits), often becoming blackish in old age or as they dry out. Underside (interior)
whitish or pallid, roughened. Flesh rather thinandfragile. STALK 3-10 cm long, 1-2.5
cm thick at apex, equal or thicker below in age, fragile, white to yellowish; surface usually
noticeably rough or with scurfy granules that may form ribs (as in Verpa); usually hollow
in cross-section. SPORES 22-34 x 15-21 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in woodsandunder trees (mainly hard-
woods); widely distributed, fruiting in the spring. In our area it occurs in sandy soil along
streams with cottonwoodandalder, but is not as common as Verpa bohemica, which
favors the same habitats. Farther north (e.g., in Idaho) it is more frequent.
EDIBILITY Edible, but more fragileandnot quite as flavorful as other Morchellas.
COMMENTS Also known as M. hybridaandMitrophora semi/ibera, this is a dis-
tinctive species because of its "half-free" cap that is intermediate between Verpa bohemica
(whose cap is attached to the stalk only at its apex)andother Morchellas (whose cap is
completely intergrown with the stalk). It is also intermediate in its fruiting behavior, for
it typically appears shortly after the Verpasandshortly before the other Morchellas.
The stalk may be quite short when youngandthe "head" relatively large, but in age the
"head" shrinksandthe stalk lengthens considerably, giving it the aspect of a Verpa.
Verpa bohemica Color Plate 205
(Early Morel; Wrinkled Thimble Morel)
CAP 1-5 cm broadand2-5 cm high (but sometimes much larger-see comments), bluntly
conical to somewhat bell-shaped. squarish, or irregular, attached to the stalk only at
the apex, the sides hanging down freely like a skirt; margin often touching(but not joined
to!) stalk when young, sometimes flaring or upturned in old age. Fertile surface pale
to dark yellow-brown or tan, often becoming darker brown in age; deeply wrinkled by
branching folds or ribs which are often vertically orientedandsometimes branch to form
pits. Underside whitish to brownish. Flesh rather thinandfragile. STALK 6-15 cm long,
0.8-3 thick (or sometimes much larger), equal or tapered slightly in either direction;
whitish to creamy or becoming tan or ochre in age, smooth or often roughened by small,
orangish to brownish granules which may form transverse belts or "ribs"; more or less
round in cross-section, usually stuffed loosely with a cottony white pith. SPORES huge:
54-80 x 15-18 microns, elliptical-elongated, smooth, without oil droplets. Asci 2-spored.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious in woods, thickets,andforest edges, etc.,
especially in sandy or well-drained soil in stream valleysandravines; usually fruiting in
the early spring, widely distributed. It typically appears one to three weeks before the true
morels (Morchella species), sometimes in the same places. It is abundant in parts ofthe
Pacific Northwest. In our area I have seen large fruitings under cottonwoodandalder.
EDIBILITY Edible with caution. Although eaten by many people, it can cause severe
stomach crampsandloss of muscular coordination, particularly when consumed in large
amounts or on several successive days. The flavor is strong but not on a par with the true
morels. A/ways cook it,andbeware: some of the "morels" sold in markets are Verpas!
COMMENTS Also known as Ptychoverpa bohemica because of its two-spored asci,
the early morel is easily told by its conspicuously wrinkled or pitted, thimble-like cap and
smooth to roughened but not fluted stem. The cap is not as lobed as that of Gyromilra and
He/vella.andthe sides ofthe cap are not intergrown with the stalk as in Morchella. Med-
ium-sized specimens are the norm, but as in some of true morels, a giant form also occurs.
Typical V. bohemica is most likely to be confused with Morchella semilibera. whose cap
is "half-free" (intergrown with the stalk over its upper portion),andwith V. conica. which
has a smoother or more irregularly wrinkled capand8-spored asci. When in doubt, you
can quickly resolve the issue by examining the spores. Those of V. bohemica are the
largest of any stalked Discomycete!
Verpa conica (Thimble Morel; Bell Morel)
CAP 1-4 cm broadandhigh, usually more or less thimble-shaped (broadly conical to bell-
shaped), but sometimes lobed (see comments)andsometimes developing a depression at
the top in age; attached to stalk only at its apex, the sides free like a skirt; margin inrolled
or incurved at firstandsometimes touching the stalk (but not joined to it!), often lobed,
often flaring out Or turning up in old age. Surface smooth to slightly wrinkled, or in one
form irregularly wrinkled (see comments), ochre-brown to brown or dark brown. Under-
side pallid. Flesh thinandrather brittle Or fragile. STALK (2.5) 4-12 cm long, (0.4) 0.5-1.5
cm thick, equal or tapered upward (or occasionally downward), white to yellowish, tan,
or tinged ochre-orange; smooth or with granular or minutely scaly transverse bands or
ribs (granules often browner or oranger than background); often rather spongy and
usually stuffed with a loose cottony pith (but often becoming hollow in age); more or less
round in cross-section. SPORES (20) 22-30 (34) x 12-17 (19) microns, elliptical, smooth,
without oil droplets. Asci 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary, widely scattered, or gregarious in soil or humus in forests, riparian
woodlands, under shrubberyandfruit trees, etc., usually in the spring; widely distributed
but not particularly common. In our area I have found it as early as Februaryandas late
as May, but it usually peaks a week or two after V. bohemica. I have seen fairly large
fruitings under redwood, oak,andcottonwood; in southern California it sometimes fruits
in great quantity under chaparral shrubs. I have also seen it in Yosemite.
EDIBILITY Edible when cooked, but rather fragileandnot often occurring in enough
quantity to warrant collecting.
COMMENTS The thimble-like cap with a free margin is the principal field mark of this
farflung fungus. A rather strongly wrinkled, irregularly lobed form sometimes occurs,
however (see photo below). The shape of the typical form is somewhat reminiscent of a
stinkhorn, but it lacks a volvaandits cap is never coated with putrid spore slime. Since
the cap is attached to the stalk only at the very top, it pops off easily,andthe entire mush-
room is rather fragile. The strongly wrinkled form does not have the vertical ridges
characteristic of V. bohemica,andis actually reminiscent of a small Gyromitra. The
spongy stalk with a cottony pith inside plus the free cap margin that is inrolled when young
are sufficient to distinguish it. Morchella semilibera is also somewhat similar, but has a
pitted cap that is artially intergrown with the stalk.
Disciotis venosa (Veined Brown Cup Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY (3) 5-20 cm broad, at first more or less cup-shaped, but usually
flattening out in age. Fertile (u pper or inner) surface reddish-brown to brown, dark brown,
or at times ochre-brown, sometimes smooth when young but usually becoming radially
wrinkled or veined to reticulate, corrugated, or pebbled by maturity {at least toward the
center); margin often wavy and/or splitting. Exterior scurfy, roughened, or minutely
warty, whitish to buff or tinged brown, often fluted or wrinkled at base (i.e., appearing
"gathered") to form a short stalk. Flesh fairly thickandbrittle. STALK when present
short, thick, usually buried. SPORES 19-25 (30)x 12-15 (17) microns, elliptical, smooth,
without large oil droplets; asci lining upper surface of fruiting body, not amyloid.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in damp soil or humus under or near
trees or occasionally in the open; widely distributed, fruiting mainly in the spring. I usually
find it on well-drained soil in riparian woodlands (cottonwood, willow, etc.), but in my
experience it is not very common.
EDIBILITY Edible, but not recommended. Although the flavor is said to be like that of
morels, people without a microscope can easily confuse it with other brown cup fungi
(Peziza. Discina. etc.) which mayor may not be edible. One source lists it as poisonous
unless cooked.
COMMENTS Until it is seen several times, this prominent brown cup fungus can be dif-
ficult to identify in the field. It is often quite largeandconspicuously veined or reticulate,
but several other brown cup fungi can mimic it. Microscopically it is quite distinct, how-
ever, for the smooth, elliptical spores lack oil dropletsandthe asci do not blue in iodine.
It used to be called Peziza venosa, but because of these microscopic differences it has
been rewarded with its own genusandplaced in the morel family.
Discina per/ala (Pig's Ears)
FRUITING_BODY (2)3-10 (20) cm broad, at first cup-shaped but soon becoming saucer-
like, then wavy or flattened (disclike) to very broadly convex (with the margin turned
down) or umbonate, or umbilicate (with a central depression); outline round to irregular
or somewhat angular in old age. Fertile (inner or upper) surface some shade of brown:
tan to yellow-brown to brown, cinnamon-brown, or dark brown( usually paler or yellower
when growing in or near snow); usually wrinkled, veined, or convoluted, especially toward
the center, but sometimes smooth. Exterior (underside) more or less smooth, paler or
whitish or somewhat translucent when moist. Flesh rather thick but brittle. STALK some-
times absent but more often present as a short ( up to I cm long), thick (I-3 cm), narrowed
base; white or tinged tan to brown, usually appearing "gathered" (i.e., with broad ribs
and/or pits). SPORES 25-35 x (8) 11-16 microns, spindle-shaped with an apiculus(knob
or short projection) at each end, smooth or becoming minutely roughened at maturity,
with one large central oil dropletandtwo or more smaller ones at the ends.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground or around old stumps or occa-
sionally on rotten wood in forests; widely distributedandcommon, fruiting mainly in the
spring or early summer under conifers. It is one oft he characteristic "snowbank" fungi of
western mountainsandoften occurs with Gyromitra gigas, G. esculenta,andmorels.
Sometimes it begins developing while still under the snow!
EDIBILITY Not recommended. Some people eat it, but care must be taken to cook it
thoroughlyandidentify it correctly.
COMMENTS This common springtime fungus is best told by its saucerlike to flattened,
umbilicate, or slightly downturned, yellowish to brown fruiting body that frequently has
a short, thick stalk. Like many of the larger Discomycetes, it develops quite slowly, and
since spores are not produced until the fruiting body is fully grown, "sterile" specimens are
often encountered. D. ancilis is apparently a synonym. There are several similar species of
Discina that are best differentiated microscopically. These include: D. apiculatula andD.
macrospora (the latter often with a reddish-brown fruiting body when mature); D.
olympiana, a smaller species found in the Pacific Northwest;andD. leucoxantha, a yel-
lowish, sometimes stalkless, truncate-spored species found under both hardwoods and
conifers, particularly in eastern North America. Also very similar is Gyromitra mela-
leucoides (=Peziza melaleucoides, Paxina recurvum), with a somewhat waxy-looking
underside when moist, a sometimes slightly longerandnarrower stalk,andmuch shorter
(10-14 microns), non-apiculate spores. See also Disciotis venosaandPeziza species.
Gyromitra gigas
(Snow Mushroom; Snowbank False Morel;.Bull Nose; Walnut)
CAP 3-10 (25) cm broad, 3-6 (15) cm high, brainlike or stronglyanddeeply convoluted
and wrinkled, but typically compact (i.e., without strongly projecting lobes); fertile
surface typically yellow-brown to butterscotch-brown or tan when fresh, but at times
darker brown or even reddish-brown (especially in age); attached to the stalk at or near
the margin. Interior chambered; underside (sterile surface) usually whitish. Flesh thin and
fairly brittle. STALK massive (usually as thick or almost as thick as the cap)andusually
short (sometimes completely hidden by the cap margin!), 2-10 cm longandthick, white or
whitish, often rather irregular in shape or thicker at base; ribbed or wrinkledandgrooved;
strongly channelled or folded in cross-section. SPORES 24-36 x 10-15 microns, elliptical,
the ends lacking projections or with only very short, blunt ones, smooth or finely rough-
ened, typically with one large central oil dropletandsmaller ones at the ends.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or rotten wood in coniferous
forests (occasionally under hardwoods); common throughout the mountainsandcolder
parts of western North America in the springandearly summer, typically near melting
snow or soon after the snow disappears. In our area, where the winters are mild, it seems
to be absent. However, I have seen enormous fruitings in the Sierra NevadaandCascades.
EDIBILITY Edibleandpopular. Apparently it can be eaten safely without parboiling
(e.g., sauteed like a morel), but should never be eaten raw. Some people prefer it to the
true morels-but be sure you identify it correctly!
COMMENTS The chunky or almost cubical stature (see photo). strongly wrinkled cap.
and internally folded stalk are the telltale traits of this common ..snowbank" fungus.
G. montanaandNeogyromitra gigas are synonyms. It sometimes grows with the dan-
gerous G. esculenta, but can be distinguished by its yellower cap color, chunkier stature,
and complex stalk. G. californica has a ribbed stalk, but usually has a strongly spreading
(umbrella-like) or puffed-up cap. G. gigas shows considerable variation in size. Specimens
weighing more than two pounds have been reported, but the normal size range is walnut-
or softball-sized. G. korfii (called G. fastigiata in some books) is a very similar vernal
species. It is more numerous in eastern North America than in the West (under both
hardwoodsandconifers)andhas spindle-shaped spores with prominent projections at
both ends. For other complex-stalked species, see G. caro/iniana (under G. esculent a)
and G. brunnea (under G. infula).
Gyrom;tra esculenta (False Morel; Brain Mushroom) Color Plate 206
CAP 3-12 cm highandbroad or occasionally larger, sometimes cup-shaped when very
young but soon becoming lobed or even saddle-shapedandat maturity intricately wrinkled
and folded (brainlike) but not pitted. Fertile surface nearly smooth when very young but
becoming more wrinkled as it matures, deep reddish-brown or purplish-brown to bay-
brown, dark brown, or brown, or in some forms yellowish-brown; typically attached to
the stalk at several points. Underside usually paler; interior hollow or chambered. Flesh
rather thinandbrittle. STALK 2-10 (15) cm long, 1-2.5 (4) cm thick, white to tan, flesh-
colored, reddish, or sometimes colored like the cap (but often paler); equal or sometimes
thicker at either end, smooth or grooved vertically but not ribbed; stuffed or hollow (or
with two narrow hollows) in cross-section. SPORES 17-28 x (7) 9-13 (16) microns, ellip-
tical, smooth, usually with two oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered. or in groups under both hardwoodsandconifers; fruiting
in the spring (or early summer in colder climates)andvery widely distributed, but espe-
cially common in northernandmontane coniferous forests. It is not very common in our
area (perhaps the winters aren't cold enough), but is often abundant in the Sierra
Nevada, Cascades,andother mountain ranges of the West. It is often encountered while
morel hunting. The fruiting bodies persist for several weeks before decaying.
EDIBILITY Dangerously poisonous, at least raw! Although eaten without ill effect by
many people, this species has caused numerous deaths in Europe (see p. 799 for more
details). Far fewer cases of poisoning have been reported from North America, suggesting
that the American version is safer than the European one, or that certain ecological
variants are less toxic. However, the paucity of poisonings may also indicate that fewer
Americans eat it, or that those who do treat it with more caution. I certainly don't think it's
worth the risk. In the words of mycophagist Charles McIlvaine, who was famous for his
willingness to eat almost anything: "It is not probable that in our great food-giving country
anyone will be narrowed to G. escu/enta for a meal. Until such emergency arrives, the
species would be better left alone."
COMMENTS The brown cerebral capandsmooth to slightly grooved stalk plus its
occurrence in the spring are the hallmarks of this infamous fungus. Despite the moniker
"false morel," it can scarcely be confused with the true morels, for the brainlike cap is
never deeply pitted or honeycombed. California specimens are more often reddish-brown
than yellowish-brown, but regional variation can be expected. The stalk is often slightly
grooved or compressed, but does not show the intricate folds in cross-section that are
typical of G. gigas. Other species: G. caro/;n;ana is a springtime species that favors low
hardwood forests in eastern North America, but has also been reported from scattered
localities in the West. It has a brainlike to irregularly wrinkled or even pitted, brown to
reddish-brown cap, but has a massive stalk (up to 20 cm thick!) that is deeply furrowed
and complex (folded) in cross-section. It can attain weights of several pounds each,andis
said to be edible if prepared properly (parboiled, etc.). Like G. escu/enta. however, it is
best avoided, particularly if there are morels outandabout!
Gyromitra infuta (Hooded False Morel)
CAP 3-12 (15) cm broadandhigh, sometimes cup-shaped when very young but soon
developing projecting lobes; at maturity with 2-3 (rarely 4) lobes, saddle-shaped to hood-
shaped to irregularly lobed but not intricately wrinkled or brainlike; fertile surface usually
reddish-brown to dark brown, but in some forms yellow-brown, smooth to uneven but not
intricately folded; cap typically attached to stalk at several points, the margin usually
incurved (toward stalk). Underside (sterile surface) paler, minutely velvety; interior
hollow or chambered. Flesh rather thinandbrittle. STALK 1-8 (12) cm long, 0.8-3 cm
thick, equal or tapering upward, smooth or minutely velvety, sometimes indistinctly
grooved but not ribbed; colored like the cap or paler (in some forms whitish); hollow (or
with two narrow hollows) in cross-section.SPORES(15) 17-23 (26) x (6) 7-10 (12) microns,
oblong-elliptical, smooth, typically with two large oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious under both hardwoodsandconifers, usually on rotten
wood but also on soil, humus, along roads, in burned areas, etc.; widely distributed. In
most regions it fruits in the late summerandfall-a feature that helps distinguish it from
G. escu/entaandother vernal species. In coastal California, however, it fruits in the winter
and early springandis the most common Gyromilra (especially under oakandpine).
EDIBILITY Poisonous! It contains MMHandshould never be eaten raw! For more
details, see comments on p. 799andp. 893.
COMMENTS The saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed cap which is usually reddish-brown
to dark brown plus the more or less smooth (non-fluted) stem are the distinguishing
features of this false morel, which is also known asH elvella infula. Its penchant for grow-
ing on rotten wood is also distinctive, but by no means consistent or definitive. Saddle-
shaped specimens are apt to be confused with H elve//a,andit is keyed out under that genus.
The color is quite distinctive, however,andthe stalk is thicker than that of most non-
fluted Helvellas. The surface of the cap can be smooth to uneven or slightly wrinkled,
but is not pitted as in the true morels nor intricately folded or brainlike as in G. escu/enta.
Smooth specimens of the latter species can usually be distinguished by their growth in the
spring soon after the snow melts. Other species: G. ambigua is a "dead ringer" for G.
in/u/a. Although it sometimes has a slight lilac or purplish tinge to the fruiting body, it
can only be differentiated with certainty by its spores, whicharelonger(22-33 microns) and
have blunt projections at both ends. It has a northern distribution, fruits at the same time,
and is also poisonous. G. brunnea(=G. underwoodiiand now called G.fastigiata, a name
which has also been applied to G. korfil) is a springtime species found principally under
hardwoods in eastern North America. It has a pale to dark reddish-brown cap that is
usually saddle-shaped or "winged" (divided into 2-3 lobes-hence its common name,
"Elephant Ears"). The cap surface is often wrinkled above the stalk but relatively smooth
near the margin,andthe undersides of the lobes are free from the stalk but often fused to
Gyromitra californica (Umbrella False Morel)
CAP 4-12 (25) cm broad, convex to umbrella-like or undulating or occasionally broadly
saddle-shaped (usually strongly spreadingandoften appearing "puffed-up"); fertile
surface uneven to somewhat convoluted but not brainlike, tan to brown, olive-brown, or
light to dark grayish-brown; margin typically free from the stalkandincurved toward it.
Underside ( sterile surface) whitish or creamy, ribbed, minutely hairy to smooth. Flesh very
thinandfragile, almost papery when dried. STALK 3-8 (12) cm long, 2-5 (6) cm thick,
equal or narrowed at base, often rather short, deeplyandirregularly fluted or with several
widely spaced ribs that extend onto the underside of the cap, where they fan outandcon-
tinue to or nearly to the margin; white or sometimes aging grayish, buff, or yellowish, the
base (or sometimes the entire stalk) usually with a pinkish, rosy, vinaceous, or purplish
tinge; typically not internally chambered in cross-section. SPORES 13-19 x 7-10 microns,
elliptical, smooth; ends often apiculate at maturity, with small oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woodsandat their edges, along streams,
or often in somewhat disturbed soil (e.g., along old skid roads); widespread in western
North America, fruiting mainly in the late springandsummer, but sometimes in the fall
or even winter. I have not found it in our area, but it occurs in the Sierra Nevada. As the
species epithet implies, it was originally collected in California, but seems to be more
common in the Pacific NorthwestandRocky Mountains. Alexander Smith says he could
have collected "several bushel baskets" of it on the Olympic Peninsula one year.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. It is edible according to some reports, poisonous according
to others. The presence of MMH (see p. 799) would account for this contradiction.
COMMENTS Also known as Helvella cali/ornica, this species can be told from other
Gyromitras by its thin, strongly spreading or umbrella-like capanddistinctly ribbed stalk,
and from Helvella maculata by its pinkish-or vinaceous-tinged stalk(a fairly reliable but
not foolproof feature). The cap color is rather variable, but is not typically as yellow as that
of G. gigas. nor as red as that of G. esculenta. Other species: G. sphaerospora is its eastern
North American counterpart. It is quite similar but has round spores,andoccurs at least
as far west as Montana.
Helvella acetabulum (Brown Ribbed Elfin Cup)
CAP 2-8 cm broadandup to 4 cm deep, cup-or bowl-shaped. Fertile surface (interior)
light to dark brown ( or in one form tinged violet), smooth; margin even or irregularly split
in age. Exterior (underside) brown above, paler (white or creamy) at base, conspicuously
ribbed, the ribs blunt or sharp-edged, branching, usually creamyandtypically extending
at least half way up the cupandoften nearly to the margin; smooth or minutely hairy.
Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK sometimes absent but usually present as a stout, deeply
ribbed base, 1-5 (9) cm longand0.5-3 cm thick; equal or thicker below, white or creamy
(or sometimes brown if very short); convoluted or chambered in cross-section. SPORES
16-20 x 11-14 microns, elliptical, smooth, with a central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in woodsandat their edges; widspread and
fairly common. It is usually listed as a springandearly summer species, but in our area it
fruits in the winterandearly spring. I find it once or twice a year, usually under oak.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Pax;na acetabulum, this species looks like a cross
between a cup fungusandan elfin saddle. (If the cup were inverted, you'd have an elfin
saddle!) The well-developed ribs that extend far up the underside of the cup help to
separate it from H. leucomelaenaandH. queletii. Other species with ribs extending up the
underside of the cup include: H. gr;seoalba, similar in size but with a gray cup;andH.
costifera, smallerandgrayish-brown.
Helvella leucomelaena (White-Footed Elfin Cup)
FRUITING_BODY cup-or bowl-shaped, with a short stalk or base, (1) 2-5 (7) cm broad
and high. Fertile surface (interior of cup or"cap") smooth, dark gray to dark brown, dark
grayish-brown, or blackish, the margin often finely scalloped, lobed, or split, especially
in age. Exterior colored like the interior above, shading into white or creamy below,
minutely roughened, not ribbed or only ribbed basally (i.e., appearing "gathered"). Flesh
thin, rather brittle. STALK shortandstout to practically absent, 0.5-2 (4) long,0.5-1.5 (3)
cm thick at apex, with distinct, broad, low, rounded, whitish ribs that terminate at the base
of the cup; usually white but at times dingy grayish; channelled in cross-section (especially
the upper portion). SPORES 20-23 (25)x 10-14 microns, elliptical to somewhat oblong,
smooth, with a single central oil droplet.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered ( occasionally solitary) on ground,
usually near or under pineandother conifers; widespread, but particularly common in
western North America. In our area it fruits in the winterandearly spring, but is infre-
quently encountered ( or easily overlooked because of its dark color). Farther northandat
higher elevations it is quite common in the springandearly summer. In all regions it
favors bare, grassy, or hard-packed soil along roadsandpaths. The fruiting bodies begin
their development underground,andtheir stalks are often buried until maturity.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS Formerly known asPaxina leucomelas, this species is likely to be mistaken
for a cup fungus. However, the dark "bowl"andwhitish, distinctly ribbed stalk plus the
fairly fragile flesh place it in He/vel/a. The stalk is sometimes so shortas to be non-existent,
in which case the base ofthe bowl appears "gathered" (folded or ribbed).H. crassitunicata
and H. solitaria are two very similar western species that differ microscopically. The
first, however, usually fruits in the late summerandfallandhas a northern distribution
(the Pacific NorthwestandAlaska), while the latter has a more distinct stalkandusually
develops above the ground. None of these species have ribs which extend up the exterior
of the cup as in H. acetabulumandrelatives, nor is their stalk as long as that of H. que/etii,
nor as slender as that of H. macropusandrelatives.
Helvella queletii (Ribbed Elfin Saucer)
CAP 2-8 (12) cm broad, usually concave with opposite margins rolled upandin (in-
curved) at first, becoming shallowly cup-or saucer-shaped to plane or even with a down-
curved margin in age. Fertile (upper) surface blackish to grayish-brown to brown (often
darker when young) or in one form pale brown to buffy-brown, smooth; margin often
splitting in age. Exterior (underside) same color or more often paler or grayer, minutely
roughened (granulose) to nearly smooth, without ribs. Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK
(I) 2.5-7 (12) cm long, 0.5-2 (5) cm thick, equal or thicker below, deeply ribbed longi-
tudinally, the ribs extending only to the base of the cup (cap); white (including the ribs)
or sometimes tinged buff, tan, or ochre. SPORES (17) 19-22 x 11-14 microns, elliptical
to oblong, smooth, with a large central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in forest humus or occasionally on
rotting wood, usually under hardwoods; widely distributed but not particularly common.
In most of North America it is a late springandsummer species, but in coastal Cali-
fornia it fruits, like most Helvellas, in the winterandearly spring.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS This is a most distinctive species, as the photograph shows. The concave
to plane, grayish-brown to nearly black fertile surface plus the prominently ribbed or
fluted stalk are the principal field marks. The stalk is much longer than that of H. /euco-
melaenaandH. solitaria,andthe ribs do not extend onto the underside ofthe cup ("cap")
as in H. acetabulum, H. griseoalba,andH. costifera. The peculiar way in which opposite
sides of the "cup" are often rolled up when young (see photo on previous page) is sug-
gestive of a young H. compressa, but that species does not have a ribbed stalk.
Helvella macropus
(Scurfy Elfin Cup)
CAP 0.8-3 (6) cm broad, sometimes closed up when young but soon opening to become
shallowly cup-shaped, rarely becoming plane in old age; margin at first incurved. Fertile
(upper or inside) surface usually gray to grayish-brown, varying to grayish-tan or grayish-
olive or grayish-buff, smooth. Exterior( sterile surface) colored like the interior or slightly
paler or grayer, hairy or minutely fibrillose-scaly or dandruffy. Flesh thin. STALK 1-5
(7) cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or often thickened at the base, not ribbed but sometimes
with wrinkles or pits at the base; colored like the exterior of cup aboveandhairy or scaly-
dandruffy, usually paler or whitish at the base; round or flattened but not chambered in
cross-section. SPORES (18) 20-25 x 10-12.5 microns, more or less spindle-shaped. finely
roughened or smooth, with one large oil dropletanda smaller one at each end.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on ground or rotten wood under both hard-
woodsandconifers; widely distributed. It is one of the commoner summertime Helvellas
of eastern North America, but in our area it fruits in the winterandspringandis not
very numerous (or at least not often collected because it is so inconspicuous).
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too small to be of value.
COMMENTS This cute little elfin cup is best told by its overall grayish colorandhairy
or scurfy-scaly sterile surfaceandstalk. The stalk is not ribbed as in H. leucomelaena or
H. acetabulum,andthe elongated spores are unusual for a Helvella. Both short-and
relatively long-stemmed varieties are known. H. vil/osa is a very similarandwidespread,
slightly darker species with a slightly less hairy stalkanda shallower cup that usually
becomes plane or even slightly convex in age (see photo below). I have found it several
times in our area, also in the winterandspring. H. cupuliJormis is quite similar in shape,
but has a paler (often whitish) exterior or underside. H. corium is similar in shape but is
entirely black,andthe lower portion of its stalk is often somewhat ribbed. It seems to have
a circumpolar( northern) distributionandoften occurs in sandy soil ordebris.H. pallidula
of eastern North America is a pale tan to pale grayish-brown, cup-shaped species. None
of these have the markedly ribbed stalks of H. queletiiand H. acetabulum,andall have the
elliptical spores typical of most Helvellas, rather than the elongated spores of H. macropus.
Helvella compressa (Compressed Elfin Saddle) Color Plate 204
CAP 1.5-5 cm highandbroad, saddle-shaped to somewhat irregularly lobed (with 2-3
lobes) when mature, typically with a well-developed sinus (cleft), but opposite margins
rolled upandover the fertile surface when young; margin unrollingandoften flaring in
age, free from the stalk. Fertile surface brown to dark brown or grayish-brown, smooth.
Underside (sterile surface) white or creamy to grayish-white, minutely hairy. Flesh thin,
rather brittle. STALK 3-10 cm long,0.3-1.2 (1.7)cmthick, equal or thicker below, smooth
or finely downy, not ribbed; white to pale cream-colored; round or somewhat flattened
in cross-section, but not chambered; base sometimes pitted. SPORES 19-22 (25) x 12-15
microns, broadly elliptical. smooth, with a large central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground in woodsandat their edges, under trees,
etc.; known only from western North America. In our area it usually fruits in the late
winterandspring under redwood, oak,andvarious other trees. It seems to be the most
common of our non-fluted Helvellas.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This attractive elfin saddle is best identified by its combination of brown
to grayish-brown cap with a finely hairy undersideandslender, white, non-ribbed stem.
The transformation in the shape of the cap as it matures is apt to cause some confusion
unless intervening stages are found. When young the margin is curled over the fertile
surface so that the whitish underside is most visibleandthe cap is almost cuplike( see photo
at top of p. 811). In age, however, the margin unfurlsandthe saddle shape is more apparent
(see other photos on p. 811).H. alhella is a very similarbutsmaller(cap 1-2.5cm broad and
high, stalk up to 5 cm longand2-6 mm thick) species with a grayish-brown to blackish cap.
Some authors describe its underside as hairless while others maintain it is minutely hairy
when young. If the latter is true then its small size is the principal point of departure from
H. compressa. A small form meeting this description is not uncommon in California in
the winterandspring, usually under oak. Another closely related species, H. stevens;;
(=H. conn;vens) is small to medium-sized but has a paler (tan to yellowish-or cinnamon-
buff) capandslightly smaller spores. It has a wide distributionandalso occurs in our area.
Both H. compressaandH. stevensii are distinguished from H. elastica by their upturned
cap margin when young, deeperandnarrower cleft (sinus),andminutely hairy sterile
surface (see color plate),andfrom H. atraandrelatives by their whitish stalk.
Helvella leucopus (Elfin Miter)
CAP 3-7 cm broadandhigh, often with three or more lobes but sometimes with only two;
shape variable: miter-shaped or appearing saddle-shaped from three different angles, but
sometimes irregularly contorted or occasionally suggestive of an elephant head (one
longer lobe with two "ears"); margin nearly straight when young (not conspicuously
inrolled), the lower edge of each lobe typically joined to the stalk at one point. Fertile
surface typically more or less smoothandvery dark (dark brown to dark grayish-brown to
blackish), occasionally mottled with lighter brown areas. Underside (sterile surface) white
or tinged faintly with the cap color, not minutely hairy. Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK
4-12 cm long, 0.7-2 cm thick, equal or thicker below, often flattened or compressed but
not ribbed or deeply fluted; smooth (not hairy), often with hollows or holes at the base;
white or sometimes developing slight smoky-brown stains in age, often curved (giving it
the appearance of a bleached rib); hollow in cross-section. SPORES 20-23 x 14-15
microns, elliptical or slightly oblong, smooth, with a large central oil droplet.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on ground under trees, usually in the spring; widely
distributed. In our area I have found it under cottonwood in the late winterandspring,
but it grows in other habitats as well.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. The European version is said to be edible, but I can
find no information on North American material.
COMMENTS The above description is based on several dozen specimens that grew in
sandy soil under a cottonwood near Santa Cruz, California. It agrees perfectly with
European descriptions of H. monachella, a name now considered synonymous with H.
leucopus; H. albipes is yet another synonym. No matter what you call it, the dark cap
contrasts nicely with the white, unribbed stalk, making it a most attractive elfin saddle.
It is most apt to be confused with H. compressaandH. albella, but is usually larger and
stouter, with a more irregular, multi-lobed cap whose underside is hairless.
Helvella elastica (Brown Elfin Saddle)
CAP 0.54 (6) cm broadandhigh, typically saddle-shaped or miter-shaped with a broad,
shallow sinus (cleft) between the lobes, but sometimes convex (with little or no sinus).
Fertile surface smooth, brown to tan or grayish-tan, the margin straight or somewhat
incurved toward the stalk; lobes free from the stalk or sometimes partially attached to it
or to each other. Underside (sterile surface) whitish to buff or pale tan, smooth, not hairy.
Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK (2) 4-8 (14) cm long, (0.2) 0.4-1.2 cm thick, equal or
tapered upward, sometimes curved, smooth or indistinctly grooved at the base but not
fluted or ribbed; white to buff or pale yellowish-buff; round to slightly flattened in cross-
section, not chambered. SPOR ES 18-22 (24) x 10-14 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth
or warted, with one central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary to widely scattered or gregarious in woods or at their edges, particu-
larly near streamsandpaths; widely distributed. It occurs in our area in the fall, winter, and
early spring, but is not as common as H. compressa.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS Many authors (myself included) have applied the name H. elastica indis-
criminately to a slew of smallish Helvellas with slender white, non-ribbed stems and
brownish, saddle-shaped caps. However, in the "true" H. elastica the cap is smooth(hair-
less) on its undersideandusually has a broad, shallow cleftanda straight to slightly down-
curved margin, whereas in species such as H. compressaandH. stevensii the cleft is nar-
rowerandthe lobes more upright, the underside is minutely hairy,andthe margin is often
curled upandin (thus hiding the fertile surface) when young.
Helvella atra (Dark Elfin Saddle)
CAP 0.7-2 cm highandbroad, distinctly saddle-shaped or occasionally 3-10bed when
mature, with a narrow sinus (cleft); margin free from the stalk or occasionally attached.
Fertile surface deep sooty-gray to black, smooth. Underside (sterile surface) pale gray to
blackish, hairless. Flesh thin, fairly brittle. STALK 1-3.5 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, equal or
slightly thicker below, not fluted but occasionally with shallow pits at the base; dark
sooty-gray to black (often palest at base), round or flattened in cross-section but not
chambered. SPORES 17.5-20 x 10.5-12.5 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, with a
large central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups on ground or rotten wood under both
hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributed but rare (at least in North America), fruiting
mainly in the summerandfall. I have found it only once-in New Mexico under pine. It is
also reported from Alaska, Montana,andWashington.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This diminutive elfin saddle is easily recognized by its black, distinctly
saddle-shaped capandnon-ribbed, blackish stalk. H.lacunosaissimilarincolorbutlarger
and much more commonandit has a flutedandpitted (lacunose) stalk; H. corium (see
comments under H. macropus) is black but has a cuplike cap. H. alra has several close
relatives with a dark saddle-shaped capanddark, non-ribbed stalk, including: H. sub-
glabra of eastern North America, which has a brownish to gray ( never black) cap,andtwo
widespread species with a minutely hairy or downy underside (sterile surface): H. eph;p-
p;um, which is the same size as H. alra, but grayish;andH. pez;zo;des, which is slightly
largeranddark brown to grayish-brown or blackish. N one of these are worth eating.
H elvella maculata (Fluted Brown Elfin Saddle)
CAP 1.2-6 cm broadandhigh, saddle-shaped or irregularly lobed at maturity, the margin
free from the stalkandat first rolled up (thus obscuring the fertile surface), but unfurling
or flaring out with ageandsometimes splitting. Fertile surface brown to grayish-brown
or buffy-brown, often mottled with darkerandlighter shades, smooth or slightly wrinkled.
Underside (fertile surface) creamy to yellowish, buff, or grayish, minutely hairy, some-
times with a few ribs extending a little way up from the stalk. Flesh thin, rather brittle.
STALK 2-10 cm long, 0.5-3 cm thick, equal or tapered above, deeply ribbedandsometimes
lacunose (pitted), white to pale buff, sometimes with grayish or brownish stains in age;
convoluted or chambered incross-section. SPORES(18)20-23 x 12-13.5 microns, bluntly
elliptical or oblong, smooth, with one central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in mixed woodsandunder conifers; widespread in
western North America. I've seen large fruitings locally in the winterandearly spring, but
it is not nearly as common as H. lacunosa. In many regions it fruits in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This showy elfin saddle can be identified by its grayish-brown to brown
mottled capanddeeply ribbed stalk. It is reminiscent of H. crispaandH. lacunosa, but is
darker than the formerandpaler than the latter. It might also be confused with Gyromilra
californica, but is less fragileandlacks the strongly spreading or umbrella-like cap ofthat
species. H. fusea is said to be quite similar, but has distinct ribs on the underside of the
capandlacks a flaring margin. I have not seen it.
H elvella lacunosa
(Fluted Black Elfin Saddle)
CAP 1-10 cm or more broadandhigh (but a veraging2-5 cm), saddle-shaped or more often
irregularly lobed or convoluted. Fertile surface smooth or wrinkled, black to grayish-
black or gray (or rarely whitish); margin typically attached to the stalk at several points
or intervals, often incurved (toward the stalk) when young. Underside (sterile surface)
grayish to grayish-brown or black (rarely white), smooth(not hairy), ribbed or unribbed.
Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK 3-15 cm long, (0.5) 1-3 cm thick, equal or tapering up-
ward, deeply ribbedandtypically lacunose( i.e., the ribs branching to form elongated holes
or pockets); ribs often sharpanddouble-edged; white to gray or sometimes black (often
white when younganddarker in age), the base often paler; convolutedandchambered in
cross-section. SPORES (12) 15-21 x (9) 11-14 microns, broadly elliptical to nearly round
to oblong, smooth or slightly roughened at maturity, with one central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups in woodsandunder trees; very widely dis-
tributed, but especially common in western North America. In our area it is usually abun-
dant in the winterandearly spring in pine forests or on lawns or roadsides where pines
have been planted. but it also occurs with oakandDouglas-fir. In other regions it usually
fruits in the late summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Edible when cookedandrated highly by some people. It can be sauteed, but
in my experience is rather chewyandbland. The tough stalks should be cooked separately
or discarded. It can also be driedandpowdered for use as a seasoning.
COMMENTS This species is by far the most common of our Helvellas, often appearing
in large groups or troops after winter rains. When fresh it is virtually unmistakable because
of its gray to black capanddeeply fluted stem, but it is frequently disfigured by a white,
moldy-looking parasite (Hypomyces cervinigenus). Such specimens should not be col-
lected for eating. The cap is not brown as in H. maculata,andpale individuals can be
told from H. crispa by the partially attached rather than free cap margin. H. mitra is
an obsolete synonym. There are several similar species, including: H. palustris(=H. phi-
lonotis) of eastern North America, a very similar but smaller species that favors damp or
swampy placesandhas a deeply ribbed but not lacunose stalk; H. sulcata, which has a
small, pale gray to black cap that is usually saddle-shaped with a deep, well-defined cleft
plus a ribbed but not lacunose stalk (it often grows on rotten wood);andH. phfebophora,
a small, slender, rare species with a more or less convex or umbrella-like cap. All three of
the latter species have been reported from the Midwest and/or eastern North America by
Nancy Weber,andmay occur in the West. I can find no information on their edibility.
H elvella crispa
(Fluted White Elfin Saddle)
CAP 1-5 cm broadandhigh, saddle-shaped to irregularly lobed at maturity; margin
typically at first rolled up, then unfurlingandflaring, typically free from the stalk. Fertile
surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, white to creamy, buff, pale pinkish-buff, or tinged
yellowish. Underside (sterile surface) colored like the cap or slightly darker or grayer,
scurfy or minutely hairy. Flesh thin, rather brittle. STALK 3-10 cm long, 0.8-3 cm thick,
equal or tapering upward, deeply ribbedandoften lacunose, white to pinkish-buff or
colored like the cap, sometimes darkening slightly in age; convoluted or chambered in
cross-section. SPORES (14) 17-21 (24) x 10-14 microns, elliptical or oblong, smooth,
with a large central oil droplet.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on ground or very rotten wood under both hardwoods
and conifers; widely distributedandfairly common (especially in eastern North America),
but almost totally supplanted in our area by H. lacunosa. I have found it only twice-in
OctoberandMarch under redwoodandtanoak. In other areas it fruits in summerandfall.
EDIBILITY To be avoided. Some sources report it as edible, but it should be tried
cautiously if at all-and only after cooking it thoroughly.
COMMENTS The white to buff capanddeeply ribbed or fluted stalk are characteristic
of this beautiful elfin saddle, which is the type species ofthe genus Helvella. The cap is not
brown as in H. maculata, nor gray or black as in H. lacunosa. Pallid specimens of the
latter occasionally occur, but can be distinguished by their partially attached rather than
free cap margin. Other species: H. factea has a white to creamy or buff capanda fluted
stalk, but the underside of its cap is hairless.
P licaria endocarpoides
FRUITING_BODY 1-7 cm broad, at first cup-shaped but soon becoming flattened or
undulating. Fertile ( upper) surface dark brown to black, smooth or roughened, sometimes
also wrinkled. Exterior( underside) same color or paler, smooth or roughened. Flesh rather
brittle, usually paler or browner than fertile surface. STALK absent or rudimentary.
SPORES 8-10 microns, round, smooth, typically with several small oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on burnt ground, old campfire sites, etc.; usually but
not always fruiting in the spring; widely distributed.
EDIBILITY Who knows?
COMMENTS Also known as P. leiocaTpa, this charcoal-lover is easily told by its dark
brown to black fruiting body that is usually stalklessandflattened at maturity (see photo).
P. tTachycaTpa is a very similar but smaller ( up to 2.5 cm broad) warted species with larger,
roughened spores. P. caTbonaTia should also be mentioned. All three of these grow in
ashes, have round spores,andare placed in Peziza by some taxonomists.
Peziza brunneoatra
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-2.5 cm broad, cup-shaped becoming flattened (disclike) in age.
Fertile (upper or inner) surface brown to brownish-black, sometimes with an olive tinge,
smooth. Exterior (underside) same color or slightly paler or redder (red-brown). Flesh
thin, brownish, brittle. STALK absent or present only as a very short, narrowed base.
SPORES 16-22 x 8-12 microns, elliptical, smooth becoming roughened (warty) or par-
tially reticulate at maturity, with one or two oil droplets.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered on damp soil along roadsandpaths
through the woods, near streams, under trees, etc.; widely distributed but not particularly
common. I have found it several times in our area in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Unquestionably inconsequential.
COMMENTS The small size, dark color,andtendency to become disclike in old age
help to identify this species. It is a "cup fungus" in name only, for mature specimens are
usually disclike or even slightly convex. Pleclania species are also quite dark, but are
tougherandmore deeply cup-shaped, while Pachyella species usually grow on wood and
Plicaria species favor ashes.
Peziza sylvestris (Boring Brown Cup Fungus; Fairy Tub)
FRUITING_BODY 2.5-8 cm broad, deeply cup-shaped when young, becoming shallowly
cup-shaped or sometimes flattened in age. Fertile ( upper or inner) surface brown, smooth
or often somewhat wrinkled; margin sometimes wavy or scalloped. Exterior finely warted
or roughened to nearly smooth, whitish to pale tan when fresh. Flesh rather fragile.
STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 15-20 x 9-10 microns, elliptical, smooth or
becoming finely roughened at maturity, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or small clusters on ground, usually in woods;
widely distributed. It is common in our area, especially in the winterandspring, under
both hardwoodsandconifers.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of many terrestrial brown Pezizas that are best differentiated
microscopically. As a group they can be recognized by their brown color, more or less cup-
shaped fruiting body, fragile texture,andgrowth (usually) on the ground in the woods.
P. sylvestris seems to be the most common of the lot in coastal California, but may not be
so abundant in other regions. Other boring brown cup fungi include: P. echinospora
(=P. pustulata?), with a pale brown fertile surfaceandcoarsely roughened or pimpled
whitish exterior; P. succosa, light brown with a whitish exteriorandturning yellow (or
exuding a yellow juice) when broken;P. cerea, a yellowish-buff species;andthree species
that often have a reddish tinge when fresh(i.e., they rangefrom brown to reddish-brown to
brownish-orange): P. badia andP. badioconJusa, both medium-sized to fairly large with a
brown to reddish-brown exterior (the former with partially reticulate spores, the latter
with warty spores);andP. petersii, a smaller species (up to 4 cm broad) with a smooth
exteriorandsmaller spores (10-12 microns long). All of these Pezizas are cuplike at first
and are sometimes called "fairy tubs" because they look like miniature bathtubs when
filled with rainwater. In age, however, they can be quite flat or irregular in shape, or in the
words of Gary Lincoff, "may resemble discarded torn pieces of rubber" (see photo on p.
820). None are worth eating.
Peziza repanda (Spreading Brown Cup Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY 4-13 cm broad or occasionally larger, cup-shaped when young but
expanding to nearly flat or often wavy (undulating), the margin often splitting. Fertile
(upper or inner) surface pale brown to medium brown, tan, or in age somewhat darker,
smooth to somewhat wrinkled or convoluted at the center. Exterior (underside) pallid.
Flesh fairly brittle. STALK absent or present only as a short, narrowed base. SPORES
14-18 x 8-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, gregarious, Or in clusters on logsandbranches (especially of hard-
woods), lignin-rich humus, etc. (often in nurseries where wood chip mulch is used); widely
distributed. It is common in our area in the winter but fruits practically year-round.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but easily confused with look-alikes of unknown edibility.
COMMENTS The salient features of this brown cup fungus are its medium to large size,
growth on wood or wood chips, light brown color,andsmooth spores. There are several
similar species, including: P. varia, with minutely roughened sporesanda slightly grayer
fertile surface, widespread on rotting wood or occasionally in basements;P. emileia, with
minutely roughened sporesandan ochre-brown fertile surface; andP. badioconjusa(see
comments under P. sylvestris), often found on or near rotting conifers. See also P. domi-
dliana. which prefers to grow in domestic situations,andP. sylvestris. which usually grows
on the ground. Other species: Pachyella (formerly Peziza) grows on soggy logs or stumps,
but has a somewhat gelatinous-rubbery fruiting body that is broadly attached to the
substrate (rather than just at the center)andis usually flattened (disclike) or shallowly
cuplike. The most common species, Pachyella c1ypeata, grows 2-8 cm broadandhas a
brown to chestnut-brown fertile surface. pachyella babingtonii is minute (1-5 mm) and
cushion-shaped, reddish-brown to purplish-brown,andoften somewhat translucent.
Peziza domiciliana (Domicile Cup Fungus) Color Plate 207
FRUITING_BODY 2-10 cm broad or occasionally larger; cup-shaped when young and
often with a short stalk, becoming flattened or wavy in age but often retaining a central
depression (i.e., umbilicate); outline frequently irregular or somewhat angular in old age.
Fertile (upper) surface at first white or buff, but often darkening in age to tan or brown;
smooth to slightly wrinkled. Exterior( underside) same color or paler. Flesh rather fragile,
at times slightly waxy, sometimes turning yellow when broken. STALK often prominent
when youngandinconspicuous or absent in age, short( when present)andstout, up to 1 cm
long, usually whitish. SPORES 11-15 x 6-10 microns, elliptical, smooth to very slightly
roughened, at times with two small oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on a wide range of domestic materials:
plaster, cement, sand, gravel, coal dust, carpets, fireplace ashes, etc. (It is said to favor
strongly alkaline substrates.) Hugo Sloane, Santa Cruz County's incorrigible enfante
terrible-in-residence, has had specimens grow out of the wall above his bathtub-in two
different houses! It also grows in cellars, greenhouses, shower stalls, damp closets, under
porches. on wet rugs, behind refrigerators, around leaky water beds-and in my car!
EDIBILITY If it were poisonous we would probably know by now, but I can find no
specific information on it.
COMMENTS This white to tan or brown fungus is best identified by its propensity for
appearing in unexpected places. Several other cup fungi will occasionally grow indoors
(e.g., P. varia. P. petersii), but this one makes a habit of it. The color plate shows specimens
photographed in situ-in the carpeted "romper room" of a nursery school! It has been
shown that the fruiting bodies develop quite slowly, taking 3-5 weeks to mature. During
this time their shape, size,andcolor can change considerably.
Peziza vesicu/osa (Common Dung Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 2-8 cm broad, at first more or less round (spherical), then opening to
become cup-shaped with an inrolled (but often crimped or convoluted) margin. Fertile
(inner or upper) surface yellowish to yellow-brown to pale brown or buff, smooth or
wrinkled toward the center, sometimes darker brown in age. Exterior( underside) whitish
to buff or pale tan, minutely roughened or scurfy. Flesh rather fragileandsoft. STALK
absent or present only as a narrowed basal point of attachment. SPORES 18-24 x 10-14
microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary or more often gregarious (sometimes in large clusters) on manure,
dung, rotting straw, in corrals, around stables, gardens,andother fertilized areas, etc.;
widely distributedandcommon. In our area it fruits practically year-round, whenever it is
damp enough. I have seen massive clusters growing with Bolbitius vite//inus in a corral.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. One source says it is poisonous unless well-cooked.
COMMENTS This is one of our characteristic dung-inhabiting fungi. The habitat is its
most distinctive feature,andwhen it grows in fertilized soil it may be necessary toexamine
it microscopically in order to distinguish it from P. repandaandother species.P.fimeti
also grows in dung, but is smaller (up to 2 cm)anddull brown, seldom grows in clusters,
and has smaller spores. For even more miniscule"d ung cups," see Cheilymenia coprinaria.
Peziza violacea (Violet Cup Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 (4) cm broad, at first nearly round but soon becoming cup-shaped,
then expanding to shallowly cup-shaped or disclike; often somewhat irregular in old age
with the margin splitting. Fertile (upper) surface smooth or slightly wrinkledandoften
depressed at the center, violet to reddish-violet, often darker in age. Exterior (underside)
pallid to grayish or tinged violet, delicately powdered at least near margin. Flesh brittle,
thin, tinged violet. STALK absent or present as a short, narrowed base (especially when
young). SPORES 16-17 x 8-10 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious on burnt ground (forest fireandcampfire sites, etc.);
widely distributed, but not very common. In our area this speciesandP. praetervisa(see
comments) fruit in the winterandspring; elsewhere I've seen them in springandsummer.
EDIBILITY Unknown, or at least I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS This is one of several cup fungi that grow almost exclusively on burnt
ground. The violet color is distinctive, although another charcoal-lover, P. praeterv;sa,
is also violet (but usually darker: deep purple to purple-brown), with smaller, roughened
spores. P. proteana also likes ashes, but is paler (white to pinkish). For smaller charcoal-
lovers, see comments under Cheilymenia coprinariaandGeopyxis vu/cana/is.
Peziza proteana (False Sparassis)
FRUITING_BODY 1-6 cm broadandcup-shaped to disclike in the typical form, but
forming large cabbage-like clumps 10-30 or more cm in diameter inform sparasso;des, the
"cups" in these fruiting bodies much distorted by mutual pressureandusually lopsided,
spoon-shaped, or completely misshapen (especially at center of clump). Fertile surface(s)
smooth or wrinkled, whitish to tan, often witha pinkish orlilactinge; margin(s) often wavy.
Exterior same color or slightly paler or darker, or often lilac-tinged at or toward the base;
often slightly scurfy. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 10-13
x 4.5-7 microns, elliptical, minutely roughened, usually with two small oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on ground in woods, usually in burned
areas; widely distributed but not particularly common (form sparassoides is rare). I have
found it only twice in our area, in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Edible if cooked thoroughly. One book lists form sparassoides as "choice."
COMMENTS The typical form ofthis cup fungus can be recognized by its pale color and
preference for burnt ground (it is not normally as dark or as purple as P. vio/aceaandP.
praetervisa). The cabbage-like form was originally placed in a different genus, but is now
thought to be a growth form of P. proteana in which the "cups" are "bent out of shape" by
overcrowding ( wouldn't you be?). This form superficially resembles the cauliflower mush-
room (Sparassis), but is differently colored, more brittle in texture,andbears its spores
in asci rather than on basidia. It has been suggested that "sparassioid" Pezizas such as
P. proteana link the hordes of regular cup-shaped species to the rare, convoluted, truffle-
like forms (e.g., P. ellipsospora).
Peziza sp. (unidentified) (Truffle-Like Peziza)
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-5 or more cm broad, usually buried in ground, but sometimes
partly exposed; ranging from simpleandcuplike with a strongly inrolled margin to com-
plexandlobed (a loosely joined mass offolded chambers). Exteriorsmooth or finely hairy,
white to creamy when fresh, yellowing when handledanddeveloping ochre to orangish to
rusty-yellow stains in age (and old or dried areas often becoming brown or reddish-
brown). Interior (fertile surface) sometimes intricately folded, with one to several large
chambers which open to the exterior; colored like exterior. Flesh fragile; odor usually
sweet in age. STALK absent. SPORES 10-17 x 9-14 microns, broadly elliptical, minutely
roughened at maturity. Asci 8-spored, forming a palisade that lines the interior.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups under oakandother trees, usually growing
on the surface of the soil beneath the humus layer, but sometimes partially exposed; fairly
common in our area in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but too fragile to bother with.
COMMENTS This is one of several truffle-like Pezizas. The internalizing of the fertile
surface is an obvious adaptation to growing underground (see chapter on truffles). The
above description is based on material collected near Santa Cruz, California, where it is
a common species (see photo on p. 822). It is apparently unnamed, although it approaches
P. (formerly Hydnotrya) ellipsospora, a sometimes large Californian species described as
being "purplish to brown" with slightly larger spores. Other truffle-like Pezizas include:
P. stuntzii, discovered under conifers in Washington, an aromatic species whose solid
interior is marbled with brown veins; andP. gautierioides, also found in the PacificN orth-
west, but growing quite deep in the soil (up to 6 inches down!), usually in the spring. All
of these can be confused with other underground Ascomycetes( e.g., Hydnotrya), but their
amyloid or amyloid-tipped asci place them in Peziza.
Sarcosphaera crassa (Crown Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a hollow, round to flattened or lobed ball3-lOcm broad,
usually with a "soft spot" or slight depression at the top; wall usually splitting at maturity
from this spot downward to form several (usually 6-10) pointed segments or rays which
open up part way to form a deep crownlike cup; 5-20 cm broad when expanded. Fertile
(inner) surface smooth or breaking into fine scales, usually whitish to grayish at first, but
becoming grayish-pink to pinkish, lilac, purple, or purple-brown in age (especially after
splitting open). Exterior whitish to creamy, scurfy or roughened, usually dirt-incrusted.
Flesh rather thick but brittle, whitish. STALK usually (but not always) present as a short,
thick, narrowed base up to 3 cm long. SPORES 14-22 x 7-9 microns, elliptical with blunt
or truncate ends, smooth or very slightly roughened, with 1-3 (usually 2) oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or in clusters of 2-5 individuals, developing at or below
ground level but usually exposed or partly exposed at maturity; widespread, but especially
common under western conifers. It is often found in the spring (while morel hunting), but
also fruits in the summerandfall. It is common under pineandother conifers in the Sierra
Nevada, Cascades,andRocky Mountains, but I have yet to find it in our area.
EDIBILITY Not recommended. It!S rated highly by some but is difficult to cleananda
few people are adversely affected by it. Cook it thoroughly if you decide to try it. O.K.
Miller describes the texture as U a little like a rubber eraser that's been softened by time."
COMMENTS Also known as S. ex;m;aandS. coronar;a, this is a curiousandhighly
distincti ve fungus. Specimens which haven't split open are likely to be mistaken for truffles
(especially if they're growing underground), but are easily distinguished by their com-
pletely hollow interior. Older individuals, on the other hand, might be confused with
Scleroderma geaster, but can be told by their pinkish to purplish color. Other species:
Pez;za ammophila is somewhat similar in shape when mature, but has a brown to dark
brown interiorandis cu p-shaped when young. It grows in sand dunes or sandy soil around
the world, but is not common. Geopora species can also be similar, but have fuzzy brown
hairs on the exteriorandare not pinkish-or purple-tinged. Neournula pouchet;; has a
pinkish fertile surface, but is smallerandalways cuplike (see key to Sarcosoma & Allies).
Sarcosoma mexicana (Starving Man's Licorice; Giant Gel Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 5-10 (20) cm broadand3-10 (15) cm high, rubbery, sometimes cup-
shaped but more often more or less top-shaped (i.e., with a narrowed baseandbroader,
flattened to slightly concave "cap"); margin often lobed. Fertile (upper) surface black or
sometimes dark brown. Exterior dark gray to black, finely velvety (especially above),
usually narrowed below to form a thick "stalk" which is often deeply wrinkled or ribbed or
has large pockets. Flesh (interior of fruiting body) a thick, watery-gelatinous mass, clear
gray to black or brownish. STALK usually present as a narrowed base (see above).
SPORES 23-34 x 10-14 microns, elliptical to somewhat sausage-shaped, smooth, with
one to three oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on rotting wood or duff under conifers;
fruiting in the late winter, spring, summer,andearly fall. It is known only from western
North AmericaandMexico,andhas been characterized as ""rare." However, it is some-
times very common (along with S./atahensis-see comments) in the mountains of Oregon
and northern California during the morel season (Ma yandJune) or shortly after the snow
melts. I have not seen it in our area, but S. /atahensis occurs occasionally.
EDIBILITY Unknown. As its common name implies, you would really have to be hungry
to be tempted by it.
COMMENTS Originally known as Bulgaria mexicana, this is one of my fifty ""five
favorite fleshy fungal fructifications." Its black color, thickly gelatinous flesh (best seen
by slicing it open lengthwise as shown in above photo),andgrowth with conifers make it
virtually unmistakable. It is muchlargerthan""Poor Man's Licorice" (Bu/garia inquinans),
and is associated with conifers rather than hardwoods (at least in my experience). S./ata-
hensis is a similar but slightly smaller (2-7.5 cm broad), purple-brown to black species
that is common under western conifers, particularly at higher elevations. Its flesh is
gelatinous when young but often becomes tougherandless gelatinous in age, plus its
spores lack oil droplets at maturity. Another species,S. globosum, may occur in the West
but is much more common in eastern North America. It is massive, black,andgelatinous
like S. mexicana, but its water-and-gel-filled base is very broad (not tapered)andmay
"leak" when collected!
Urnula crater;um (Crater Cup; Devil's Urn)
FRUITING_BODY 4-12 cm highand3-6 (10) cm broad, usually urn-shaped (i.e., with a
narrowed base or stalk); upper portion at first closed, then opening to form a deep cup or
"urn"; margin remaining incurved for some time, usually scalloped, sometimes torn at
maturity. Fertile (inner) surface smooth or scurfy, dark brown to black. Exterior variable
in color: dull pinkish-gray to dark brownandscurfy at first, often smootherandblacker
in age. Flesh toughandfibrous or leathery, black or very dark. STALK 2-4 cm long,
5-10 mm thick, continuous withandcolored like exterior of cup, or darker; usually with
a patch of dark brown to black mycelial hairs emanating from the base. SPORES
24-36 x 10-15 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in groups orclusters on or near rotting hardwood sticks
and logs (the wood often buried); common in eastern North America in the spring.
EDIBILITY Too tough to be worth eating.
COMMENTS This dark brown to black urn-shaped fungus is one of the first fungi to
appear each spring in the hardwood forests of eastern North America. It differs from
Plectania melastoma by its deeper cupandbetter developed stalk, but the two species
might just as well be merged into one genus. I can find no record of it from the west coast,
but a similar species, U. h;emal;s, has been found in AlbertaandAlaska. It might con-
ceivably be mistaken for a Cratere//us, but the growth in the spring plus the fertile upper
or inner (rather than lower or outer) surfaceandslightly different shape distinguish it.
Plectan;a melastoma (Black Cup Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY 1-2.5 cm broadand1-3 (4) cm high; at first nearly round (or with a
stemlike base), then opening slowly at the topandeventually becoming more or less cup-
shaped; margin usually remaining incurved for a long time but sometimes splitting in
places. Fertile (upper or inner) surface smooth or sometimes with veinlike markings when
dry, often glistening when wet, black or deep brownish-black. Exterior tough (but with
a semi-gelatinous inner layer when wet), minutely hairy, strongly wrinkled or veined,
black, but often with a rusty-orange tinge near the margin from the presence of minute
orange granules. Flesh tough or cartilaginous, not brittle. STALK absent or present as
a short, stout, narrowed base; continuous withandcolored like exterior of cup, the base
often with wiry black mycelial threads that extend into the substrate. SPORES 20-28
x 8-12 microns, elliptical or spindle-shaped, smooth, with oil droplets when immature.
HABITAT Solitary or more often in small groups or clusters on decaying sticks and
other debris of both hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributedandnot uncommon, but
easily overlooked, fruiting mainly in the spring. In our area this species or something very
similar (see comments) occurs under oak in the late winterandearly spring. I usually find
it when I'm foraging for Craterellus cornucopioides, perhaps because both are black.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The black color, wrinkled exterior (or underside), small size,andtough
texture are the principal field marks of this attractive cup fungus. The typical form with
rusty-orange granules usually grows under conifers. Our local oak-loving version usually
lacks visible granules, but orange granules can be seen under the microscope. Bulgar;a
melastoma is an older name for it. Two very similar black cup fungi with little or no stalk
and no orange granules are also worth mentioning: P. miller; has a stellate margin (i.e.,
with starlike points)andelliptical spores, whileP. (=Pseudoplectan;a) n;grella has round
spores. Both usually occur under conifers. See also Urnu/a craterium, which has a larger,
deeper (urnlike) fruiting body.
Plectan;a nannfeldt;; (Black Snowbank Cup Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY consisting of a shallow cup mounted on a well-developed, slender
stalk. Cup 0.5-2 (3) cm broad, the margin at first incurved. Fertile (inner or upper) surface
smooth, black. Exterior also blackish but delicately hairy. Flesh black, rather tough or
cartilaginous. STALK always presentandtypically rather longandslender, 2-6 cm long,
2-4 mm thick, more or less equal, not ribbed, black, often with black mycelium at base.
SPORES 21-30 (35) x 10-14 microns, elliptical, smooth or slightly roughened, without
oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in duffanddebris or on buried or rotten wood under
conifers (particularly firandspruce); fruiting in the spring shortly after the snow melts
or even developing under the snow. It is known only from western North Americaandis
fairly common at higher elevations (but easily overlooked). I have not seen it in our area.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This attractive black cup fungus can be distinguished in the field by its
color, small size, well-developed stalk,andgrowth in the spring under conifers. He/vella
corium (see comments under H. macropus) is somewhat similar but larger, not as tough,
and often shows ribs on the stalk. P. (=Pseudoplectania) melaena also grows in the spring
under conifers, but is slightly largerandhas a yellow-brown to olive-brown cap or cup
when young (but blackens in age)anda short or long stalk. For species with little or no
stalk, see Plectania melastoma.
Otidea alutacea (Brown Clustered Ear Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 2-6 cm highand2-4 cm broad, shape variable: usually cup-shaped but
lop-sided (the shorter side split lengthwise or open)andsemi-erect, but often irregularly
wavy or contorted when growing in clusters; apex often truncate when growing erect.
Fertile surface (interior) smooth, tan or light brown to grayish-brown or brown. Exterior
often slightly scurfy, pale to dull brown (or yellowish in one variety). Flesh brittle. STALK
absent or present as a narrowed, whitish, downy base. SPORES 14-16 x 7-9 microns (or
smaller in one variety), elliptical, smooth, typically with two oil droplets.
HABITAT Scattered to densely clustered in forest humus, usually under conifers; fairly
common in western North America. In our area this speciesandits look-alikes (see
comments) is frequent in the fallandwinter, particularly under Douglas-firandoak.
EDIBILITY U nknown-better chucked than plucked.
COMMENTS The brownish color, lopsided fruiting bodies that are often contorted,
broadened at the apex,andsplit down one side, plus the tendency to grow in dense clusters
are the distinguishing features of this undistinguished fungus. There are a number of
similar brownish Otideas, including: O. buJonia, dark brown, usually growing in clusters;
O. rainierensis, found in the Pacific Northwestandnormally not clustered; O. abietina,
medium to dar k brownandoften cup-shaped, but with much larger spores (18-22 microns
long);andO. grandis, brown but frequently with reddish-orange patches on the fertile
surfaceanda thicker, more prominent stalk. There are also several brown Otideas with
an elongated, erect, spoon-shaped to earlike (not truncate or cup-shaped) fruiting body
like that of O. onotica. These include: O. smithii, deep reddish-brown to vinaceous-brown
and fairly large (up to 8 cm high), with a thick stalklike base, fairly common under conifers
in the Pacific Northwestandnorthern California;andWynne/fa si/vico/a (=0. auricula),
a northern species that is colored like O. smithii but has larger spores (22-25 microns long).
Otidea onotica (Donkey Ears)
FRUITING_BODY (3) 5-10 cm highand(2) 4-6 cm broad (more if completely expanded);
shape variable but usually spoon-shaped or like an elongated ear (standing erect on one
end with one side open or slit); margin at first inrolled, but expanding somewhat in age.
Fertile surface (interior) smooth, ochraceous to dull orange to orange-buff or yellowish,
often with a pinkish or rosy tint when fresh. Exterior similarly colored but without a
pinkish tinge, often slightly scurfy. Flesh thin, pallid, brittle. STALK present as a whitish,
narrowed, hairy or downy base that arises from a litter-binding mycelium. SPORES
12-14 x 6-8 microns, elliptical, smooth, with two oil droplets. Paraphyses (sterile cells)
strongly hooked.
HABITAT Scattered or more often in groups or clusters under both hardwoods and
conifers; widely distributed. In our area it fruits in the winterandspring, but is not as
numerous as O. alU/acea.
EDIBILITY Edible according to some, but one study revealed the presence of the toxin
MMH. In other words, it is better chucked than plucked.
COMMENTS The erect growth habitandearlike fruiting body plus the ochraceous or
orangish to pinkish-tinged fertile surface separate this species from most other cup fungi.
The apex of the fruiting body is not broadlyfla ttened or truncate as is typical of O. alU/acea.
Other species: O. leporina ("Rabbit Ears") has a yellowish-brown interiorandbrownish
exterior, but is otherwise quite similar. O. concinnaandO. cantharella are both pale
to bright yellow, but often have a broadened or truncate apex. All of these species are
widely distributed. For duller or browner Otideas, see comments under O. alU/acea.
Sarcoscypha coccinea (Scarlet Cup Fungus) Color Plate 210
FRUITING_BODY 2-5 (6) cm broad when mature, more or less cup-shaped, the margin
usually incurved, often tattered in old age. Fertile (inner or upper) surface bright red to
scarlet, sometimes fading to reddish-orange in age, smooth. Exterior whitish, covered
with minute hairs. Flesh thin but not particularly brittle. STALK absent or more often
present, up to 4 cm long, 3-7 mm thick; minutely hairyandwhite, tapered downward.
SPORES 24-40 x 10-14 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary ,or in groups on buried or fallen hardwood sticks or branches; widely
distributedandfairly common in the winterandearly spring (or late fall in some regions).
In our area I have found it in abundance in a riparian woodland composed of willow,
alder, buckeye,andcottonwood.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Plectania coccinea, this beautiful cold weather cup
fungus is easily told by its bright red fertile surface. The marginofthe cup is not fringed with
dark hairs as in Scutellinia scutellata,andthe exterior or underside is whitish. The length
of the stem seems to depend partly on how deep its food source (stick) is buried. Other
species: S. occidentalis is a similar but smaller (up to 1.5 cm broad) eastern species with
a well-developed (1-4 cm long) stalkandsmaller spores. Microstoma (=Anthopeziza,
Sarcoscypha) floccosa is a minute (up to 1.5 cm highandI cm broad) bright red species
whose exterior is clothed with long white hairs. It is fairly common on downed sticks in
eastern North America, but I have not seen it in the West. Microstomaprotacta (=Plectania
hiemalis) is somewhat similar to M. floccosa, but its stalk arises from a hard, elongated
rootlike structureandis often branched above, giving rise to up to a dozen bright red
cups. It is widely distributed but rather rare. Several closely related genera of bright red
to orange or pink cup fungi occur in the tropics, including CookeinaandPhillipsia,
with striate or banded spores. Finally, there are several small stalkless, disclike species
that grow on the recently fallen branches or foliage of conifers. These species include:
Pithya vulgaris, yellow to orange or reddish-orange, semi-gelatinous,andup to I cm
broad, usually found in the spring on branches of firandother conifers; P. cupressina,
similar but not gelatinous, found on cedar or cypress;andPseudopithyella miniscula,
a miniscule (1-2 mm) scarlet species.
Aleuria rhenana (Stalked Orange Peel Fungus) Color Plate 209
FRUITING_BODY 1-2cm broad, cup-shaped with a stalk. Fertile (inner or upper) surface
bright orange to yellow-orange, smooth. Exterior white or whitishandminutely hairy or
downy. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK present, 1-3 cm long, 2-5 mm thick, slender, equal or
ta pered downward, colored like the exterior; base often arising from a dense mass of white
mycelium that may bind several stalks together. SPORES 20-23 x 11-13 microns, ellip-
tical, coarsely reticulate at maturity.
HABITAT Gregarious, often in small clusters, on ground or moss in woods (usually
under conifers); widely distributed but infrequent. I have found it only twice-in Mt.
Rainier National Park in Washington, in September,andnear San Francisco in January.
EDIBILITY Presumably consumable, but much too smallandrare to be of value.
COMMENTS This petite cup fungus is the same color as its cosmopolitan cousin, A.
aurantia, but is much rarerandusually smaller, possesses a stalk,andlikes to grow in
dainty clusters (see color plate). Leucoscypha (=Neottie//a, A/euria) ruti/ans is a similar
moss-inhabiting species with slightly larger sporesandlonger hairs on its underside.
Aleur;a aurant;a (Orange Peel Fungus) Color Plate 208
FRUITING_BODY 1-10 cm broad, sometimes nearly round at first but soon becoming
cup-shaped to saucer-shaped to flattened or wavy, or sometimes irregularly contorted
(especially if clustered). Fertile (upper or inner) surface bright orange to golden-orange,
fading somewhat in age, more or less smooth; margin often wavy or lobed. Exterior
(underside) pallid or at least paler, smooth or minutely downy. Flesh thin, brittle orfragile.
STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 18-24 x 9-11 microns, elliptical, coarsely
reticulate or ridged at maturity, typically with two oil droplets.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground, fruiting mainly in the
fallandwinter in our area; widely distributedandvery common. It seems to prefer bare
soil or sand along roads, paths, landslides, etc., but also grows in grass or moss.
EDIBILITY Edibleandhighly rated by one authority, but bland according to others.
One of my colleagues uses it ra w in salads, but it is so thin-fleshedandfragile that it hardly
seems worth the trouble to collect it.
COMMENTS The orange peel fungus is most likely to be mistaken for one of the old
orange peels that frequently litter our woodsandroadsides. It is much more fragile, how-
ever,andless common. Its sizeandshape vary considerably depending on environmental
conditions, but the "aleuring" bright orange colorandabsence of a stalk are constant.
Some species of Otidea are orangish, but have a more erect rather than prostrate growth
habit, while A. rhenana is smallerandhas a stcdk. A variety of A. aurantia with smaller
spores (13-15 microns long) occurs in our area. See also Melastiza chateri (under Scutel-
linia scutellata), a somewhat similar but smaller species with brown hairs on its exterior.
Caloscyphafulgens Color Plate 211
(Snowbank Orange Peel Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY 1-4 (6) cm broad, sometimes nearly spherical when young but be-
coming cup-shaped or flatter in age, sometimes slit down one sideandappearing lop-
sided; margin inrolled when young. Fertile (upper or inner) surface smooth or slightly
wrinkled, bright yellow-orange to orange, sometimes with dark bluish to olive-green
stains. Exterior hairless, colored like interior but usually with more pronounced blue or
greenish stains, especially toward margin. Flesh thin, brittle. STALK absent or present
only as a short, narrowed whitish base. SPORES 6-8 microns, round, smooth.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or clustered in damp soil or duff under conifers,
fruiting in the springandearly summer shortly after the snow melts; widely distributed,
but especially common in the mountains of western North America. It is one of the charac-
teristic spring mushrooms of the Sierra Nevada, Cascades,andRocky Mountains.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS The yellow-orange coloranddark blue or greenish stains that make it
look like a moldy orange peel are the hallmarks of this springtime cup fungus. The my-
celium apparently parasitizes the seeds of conifers (mainly spruceandfir)andclusters
of fruiting bodies often arise where squirrels stash their seed-containing cones. An albino
form of this species with bluish stains has been found in Idaho.
Cheilymenia coprinaria (Eyelash Dung Cup)
FRUITING_BODY (1) 3-7 (10) mm broad, at first closed but soon opening to become
shallowly cup-shaped to disclike or somewhat cushion-shaped. Fertile (upper) surface
orange to pale orange becoming yellow or brownish in age, smooth; margin fringed with
minute dark brown hairs, often wavy. Exterior (underside) paler, also clothed with dark
hairs. Flesh thin. STALK absent. SPORES (14) 17-22 (25) x 8-12 microns, elliptical,
smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary to densely gregarious on dungandmanure or compost, etc.; fruiting
in wet weather, cosmopolitan (along with its numerous look-alikes) but seldom noticed
because of its small size.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares?
COMMENTS This species is one of several small, difficult-to-distinguish, dung-loving
cup fungi. Although the hairs on the exterior are quite conspicuous, in the words of one
specialist, "they may be overlooked in the field, where the nature of the substrate dis-
courages close scrutiny." Similar yellow to orange dung-lovers include: C. the/ebo;des,
with paler hairs (sometimes also growing on soil, humus, or "spent hops"); C. stercorea,
with branched dark brown hairs; Coprob;a granu/ata, minute (1-2 mm), orange,andhair-
less. Several similar disclike to cushionlike species occur in burned areas, often in vast
numbers, or in the heated (sterilized) soil in greenhouses. These include: Anthracob;a
macrocyst;s, with a reddish fertile surfaceandbrown hairs on its exterior; A. me/a/oma,
with a yellowish-brown to ochre-orange fertile surfaceandbrown hairs on its exterior;
Tr;chophaea abundans, minuteandwhitish with pale brown hairs, growing on plaster as
well as burnt ground; Pyronema ompha/odes, very common in confluent masses, with a
pale orange to reddish-orange, minute (1-3 mm), hairless fruiting bodyandelliptical
sores; Pu/v;nu/a carbonar;a, also minuteandpale to bright orangeandhairless, but with
round spores;andPu/v;nu/a archer;, similar to the previous species but with smaller
(7-9 microns), round spores. Also worth mentioning is Ascobolus, which usually has
a minute dark (greenish to dark brown or black), disclike fruiting body. Most of its
species grow on dung, but one, A. carbonar;us, grows in swarms on burnt ground. For
small cup fungi that do not grow in dung or burned areas, see Scutellinia scutellata, and
for largerandmore deeply cup-shaped, ash-loving or terrestrial species, see Geopyxis
vulcana/is. Better yet, go get some exercise!
Scutell;n;a scutellata (Eyelash Pixie Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 0.2-1.5 cm broad, at first nearly round (spherical), but soon opening
to form a shallow cupandeventually disclike (flattened). Fertile (upper) surface smooth,
bright red to scarlet to orange (or rarely paler with a pinkish cast); margin conspicuously
ciliate (fringed with dark brown or blackish hairs up to 1 mm long). Exterior(underside)
also clothed with dark hairs. Flesh very thin. STALK absent. SPORES (15) 17-19 (23)
x (9) 11-14 (17) microns. elliptical. minutely warted, with one or more oil droplets.
HABITAT Gregarious on rotten wood or damp soil (or occasionally on ashe wet lea ves,
or conks); widely distributedandcommon, but easily overlooked because of its small size.
In our area it fruits in the winterandspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too puny to be of importance.
COMMENTS This is another easily-recognized cup fungus. The bright red to orange
fertile surfaceandciliate (eyelash-like) margin are good field characters. S. umbrarum
is a very similar, widespread, terrestrial species with a slightly largerfruiting body (up to 2
cm broad), larger spores,andshorter, less conspicuous hairs. S. er;naceus is also similar,
but is orange to yellowandsmaller (2-5 mm broad), has smooth spores,andgrows on
wood. Che;lymen;a crucipila is a minute (I-4 mm) orange to orange-red, terrestrial species
with paler, shorter hairsandsmooth spores that lack oil droplets. Lamprospora species are
minuteandhairless. Finally there is M elasl;za chaler;, a bright orange terrestrial species
that is 0.5-2 cm broadandhas minute brown hairs on its exterior, especially near the mar-
gin. For similar dung-and ash-lovers, see comments under Cheilymenia coprinaria.
Humar;a hem;spher;ca (Hairy Fairy Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 1-3 cm broad, at first nearly round (spherical), gradually opening up
to become cup-shaped. Fertile surface (interior) white or whitish to grayish, smooth;
margin fringed with brown hairs. Exterior densely clothed with stiff brown hairs. Flesh
thin. STALK absent or present only as a "rather abruptly narrowed base. SPORES 20-24
x 10-12 microns, elliptical, smooth or minutely warted, with 2 or sometimes 3 oil droplets.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups on ground or occasionally rotten wood;
widely distributedandfairly common under both hardwoodsandconifers, usually
fruiting in the summerandfall. I have yet to find it in our area, but it may well occur.
EDIBILITY Who knows? Who cares? Do you?
COMMENTS The combination of pallid fertile surfaceandbrown hairy exterior make
this an easy cup fungus to recognize. Jafnea sem;tosta is a larger(2-5 cm broad) species with
a creamy-white to tan or brown interior, a brownexteriorclothed with scattered soft brown
hairs, plus a short ribbed stalk; it is fairly common in eastern North America. Other hairy
species: Tr;chophaea boud;er;andT. bullata have a pale gray to whitish interior and
brown hairy exterior, but are much smaller (1-6 mm broad)andgrow on wet soil under
conifers; T. abundans is a minute whitish species that grows in burned areas. For more
colorful hairy or ciliate species, see Scutellinia scutellataandCheilymenia coprinaria.
Geopyxis vulcanalis (Vulcan Pixie Cup)
FRUITING_BODY 0.3-1 (2) cm broad, nearly round (spherical) when young, becoming
deeply cup-shapedandthen often flattening out in age. Fertile (upper or inner) surface
smooth, pale orange to pale or dingy yellowish, the margin usually finely scalloped. Ex-
terior paler or whitish, usually powdery or downy when young but often entirely smooth
in age. Flesh thin, fragile. STALK usually present, up to 5 mm longand1-3 mm thick,
sometimes so short as to be practically absent, equal or tapered downward, colored like
exterior of cup. SPORES 14-21 x 8-11 microns, elliptical, smooth, without oil droplets.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in duff or moss under conifers, or in burned
areas; widely distributed. I have seen large fruitings locally in the fall, winter,andspring.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but much too puny to be of value.
COMMENTS This pixieish cup fungusandits close relatives are easily told by their small,
deeply cup-shaped (at least when young) fruiting body that often has a finely scalloped
margin. In G. vulcanalis a short stalk is usually present, but in some of the other species
(see below) it is lacking. G. carbonar;a is a similar species that grows only in burned areas.
It has a brick-red fertile surfaceandnormally remains cup-shaped rather than expanding.
Tarzetta species closely resemble Geopyxis in sizeandappearance, but as currently de-
fined, have spores with two prominent oil droplets. Their ranks include: Tarzetta cupu-
lar;s, widespread under conifers, in moss, on burnt ground, etc., which resembles a
miniature goblet with its dainty stalkandgrayish-tan to tan or brownish cup; T. rosea,
found in burned areas, with a pink to reddish cupandlittle or no stalk;andtwo somewhat
larger (1-3 cm broad), yellowish to brownish, woodland species: T. bronca of eastern
North America, with little or no stalk,andT. cat;nus, widespread (including California),
with a stalk. Most of these species have a scalloped margin or "lip" as in G. vulcanalis. and
were originally placed in Geopyxis. Pustu!aria. and/or Peziza.
Geopora cooper; (Fuzzy T ruffle)
FRUITING_BODY usually buried or partially buried, round or nearly round (but often
squirrel-eaten), 2-7 (10) em broad. Exterior fuzzy or velvety from a coating of light brown
to dark brown hairs, usually furrowed. INTERIOR white to creamy or yellowish-tan,
usually streaked with tan or brown, deeply convoluted, the folds often touching each
other but leaving at least some open spaces or"canals" between them. Odor usually mild,
but in one form resembling fermented cider. SPORES 18-27 (30) x (10) 13-21 microns,
broadly elliptical in one form, round or nearly round in another; hyaline ( colorless) under
the microscope, smooth, with one oil droplet. Asci usually 8-spored, forming a distinct
palisade (hymenium) that lines the open surfaces of the folds.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on or in the ground under both hardwoods
and conifers (but especially the latter); widely distributed in western North America and
locally common, especially under mountain conifers during the spring, summer,andfall.
It favors pine in coastal Californiaandpine, fir, or spruce in the Sierra Nevadaandelse-
where; in Alaska it has been found under willowandaspen. It develops underground
but may surface (or be dug up by squirrels) in age,andso is often seen by casual collectors.
EDIBILITY Edible. Rodents are very fond of itandso are some humans.
COMMENTS This is one of our largest trufflesandalso one of the more distinctive.
Its telltale traits are the fuzzy brown exteriorandconvoluted interior. The latter is simply
a mass of folded tissue (see photograph), with the spore-bearing asci lining the empty
spaces or "canals" between the folds. The spores are shot out of the asci as in the cup fungi.
It has numerous synonyms, including G. harkness;;andG. magnata.
Geopora aren;cola (Hole In The Ground)
FRUITING_BODY at first closedandburied in ground, then opening at the top and
becoming more or less cup-shaped at maturity, the margin remaining incurved or often
splitting stellately (in starlike lobes) in age; 14 cm broad. Exterior brownanddensely
clothed with flexible brown hairs that bind surrounding dirt or sand. INTERIOR (fertile
surface) pallid to creamy or grayish, often becoming yellowish, tan, or brownish in age;
smooth. Flesh brittle to rather tough. STALK absent or rudimentary. SPORES 23-30 x
12-17 microns, elliptical to spindle-shaped, smooth, usually with one( rarely two) large oil
droplets. Asci lining inner surface of cup, typically 8-spored, not amyloid.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered in sand or silt, disturbed ground,
etc., usually immersed in the soil with only the mouth showing; widespread but not
common, or at least not often noticed. 1 have found it once in our area, in the spring.
EDIBILITY Academic-it is practically impossible to get rid of the sand or dirt!
COMMENTS Better known asSepultar;aaren;cola, this species looks like a hole in the
ground or an insect burrow or worm tunnel(see photo on p. 935).ln old age it is clearly cup-
like, however,andoften splits into lobes (as shown in photo). The hairy brown exterior
distinguishes it from Sarcosphaera crassaandother cup fungi that develop in the ground,
and relates it to G. cooper;, which has a complexly folded rather than hollow interior. The
fuzzy brown hairs can be seen with a hand lens by gently brushing away some ofthe dirt.
Other species: G.long;; ofthe Southwest is similar but has nearly round spores; G. arenosa
is also similar but much smaller; G. aurant;a is similar but has a reddish to orange or
egg-yellow interiorandrigid hairs on its exterior; G. pellita has a yellowish to pale orange
interior, but its hairs are not rigid; G. c1ausa(=Hydnocystiscaliforn;ca) has a fuzzy brown
exteriorandits mouth is oriented randomly with respect to the fruiting body( i.e., at the top,
bottom, or side). It usually grows underground, but is rare in our area.
Hydnotrya variijormis
FRUITING_BODY 0.74 cm broad, round to somewhat flattened, depressed, or lobed.
Exterior minutely velvety, whitish to creamy to buff or yellowish to cinnamon-buff or
brownish, not warted. INTERIOR variable in configuration, but small specimens often
containing a simple cavity with a prominent opening,andlarger ones usually with several
chambers or narrow, branching canals formed by crowdingandinfolding of the outer
wall; canals usually empty but their sides often fused; white or pallid, but the hymenium
(fertile tissue) often brownish to pinkish-orange at maturity. SPORES 32-36 x 24-28
microns, elliptical, smooth becoming minutely pittedandwrinkled at maturity, yellowish-
brown under the microscope. Asci borne in a palisade (hymenium) that lines the canals or
cavity, typically 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary or in groups in soil or inside very rotten wood under conifers; oc-
casional (along with H. cerebriformis-see comments) in the Sierra Nevada, Cascades,
and other western mountains. It fruits in the spring, summer,andearly fall.
EDIBILITY Edible? I can find no specific information on it.
COMMENTS This speciesandH. cerebriformls (see below) can usually be told in the
field by their fondness for growing inside rotten wood plus their complexly folded interior
(at least in large specimens)andnon-amyloid asci. The exterior lacks the warts of Genabea
cerebriformisandthe brown hairs of Geopora coo peri. H. cerebriJormis is similar to
H. variiformisandgrows in similar habitats. It has a more consistently complex or con-
voluted interior (not unlike that of Geopora cooperi, shown on p. 847), is usually slightly
darker than H. variiformis (dull reddish-brown to dark purple-brown), typically has a
strong garlicky odor when mature,andhas round, minutely spiny spores. H. tu/asneiis a
widespread odoriferous species that is very similar to H. cerebriformis; it is also brown to
reddish-brown, but has coarsely warted spores. H. cubispora is a widely distributed,
brownish to pinkish-cinnamon, usually terrestrial species with a more or less hollow (but
lobed) interiorandspores which are often cubical. H. michae/is (=H. yukonensis) is a
rather rare northern species with elliptical warted sporesanda convoluted interior.
Genea harknessii (Dark Geode Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-2.5 cm broad, round to flattened to very knobby
and irregularly lobed, usually with an apical opening to the interioranda tuft of mycelium
at the base. Exterior dark reddish-brown to dark brown to dark gray or black (but often
with a thin whitish covering of hyphae when very young), divided into small, often pyra-
midal warts. INTERIOR basically hollow, but often interrupted by irregular projections
of strile tissue from the outer wall; inner surface of wall wartedanddark brown to blackish
or bluish-gray; sterile tissue white to grayish. SPORES averaging 24-28 x 22-27 microns,
elliptical to nearly round, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, smooth at first but
finely warted at maturity. Asci 8-spored, arranged in a palisade (hymenium).
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in humus or soil under oak, manzanita, coyote bush
(Baccharis)andother treesandshrubs; known only from the west coast. It is fairly com-
mon (for a truffle) in California in the winterandspring, especially in February-March.
I've found this species, G. gardneri.andG. compacta (see comments) under live oak. It
also occurs in the Sierra Nevada. Like other Geneas, it often growsjust below the ground
or on the soil surface beneath the humus,andis difficult to see because of its color.
EDIBILITY Prized by pigs, but I can find no mention of humans eating it.
COMMENTS The hollow interioranddark warted exterior separate this common
species from most other truffles. The shape ranges from nearly round to elaborately lobed
or cerebriform (brainlike). Round specimens are reminiscent of miniature geodes because
of their warted internal cavity, while the more knobby specimens look like bits of coral or
piles of intertwined worms (see above photo). Other species: G. gardneri is very similar
but has larger, coarsely warted spores; it grows under oak in coastal California. G. com-
pacta is a similar but much paler (brown to yellowish-brown), knobby species with a
hollow, convoluted interior (see photo below). I have found it several times under oak
in the spring. It is edible but tasteless.
Genea ;ntermed;a (Red Geode Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-2.5 cm broad, sometimes roundish( especially when
young), but more often lobed or knobby, with or without an apical opening to the interior
and a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior reddish to reddish-brown, vinaceous, or vinaceous-
purple, the lobes or protuberances superimposed with minute warts. INTERIOR
basically hollow, but often interrupted by irregular projections of sterile tissue from the
outer wall; inner surface warted, pink to whitish; sterile tissue also white to pinkish.
SPORES averaging 36-40 microns, round, finely warted at maturity. Asci arranged in a
palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil in woods; known only from OregonandCali-
fornia. It is not uncommon under conifers in the Sierra Nevada in the spring; I have yet
to find it on the coast.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The beautiful reddish, lobedandwarted exterior plus the hollow interior
make this one of the few truffles that can be recognized instantaneously in the field. No
other Genea is as red, at least in California. (G. harknessii can be dark reddish-brown
when fresh but soon blackens after picking.)
Genea arenar;a (Hairy Geode Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 1-3 cm broad, usually irregularly lobed or coarsely
knobby (at least at maturity), with or without an opening to the interioranda basal tuft of
mycelium. Exterior brown to pale brown, divided into small, often pyramidal warts and
covered with scattered long brown to dark brown hairs. INTERIOR basically hollow, but
the cavity usually irregular in shape due to infolding ofthe outer wall; inner surface finely
wartedandcolored like the exterior or paler; sterile tissue whitish. SPORES averaging
22-32 x (16) 20-24 microns, mostly elliptical, with minute scattered warts. Asci arranged
in a palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in soil under trees (mainly live oak);
known only from CaliforniaandOregon. It typically fruits from the late fall through the
early spring (November-April)andis not uncommon in our area. However, it seldom
occurs in quantityandis easily overlooked because of its brown color.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This species is best recognized by the highly irregular shape at maturity,
the hollow (but usually folded) interior,andthe presence of hairs on the warted brownish
exterior. Other species: G. hispidula is a similar species known from eastern North
America; G. kraspedestoma is a reddish-brown to brownish Californian with a circular
apical opening that is fringed by stiff incurved hairs; it has small spores( only 12-20 microns
long)andwas originally collected near Almaden, California, under oak. G. compacta (see
comments under G. harknessii) is also similar, but lacks obvious hairs on its exterior.
Genabea cerebriform;s (White Geode Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.4-1.5 (2.5) cm broad (but usually under 1 cm); smaller
specimens often roundish, larger ones usually quite irregular (knobby, lobed, or brain-
like) in shapeandtypically with several openings to the interior; lacking a basal tuft of
mycelium. Exterior covered by small, more or less conical warts superimposed on each
knob; white to yellowish-white or yellow-gray. INTERIOR often a single cavity in small
specimens, but in larger ones usually consisting of a mazelike system of canals formed by
infoldingandinward projections of the wall; colored more or less like exterior. Odor
mild or strong. SPORES 28-44 microns, round, smooth at first but covered with long,
slender spines at maturity; hyaline (colorless) to grayish-yellow (in age) under the micro-
scope. Asci arranged in a palisade (hymenium), typically 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or humus in woodsandunder trees; fairly
common (for a truffle) in western North America under various trees, but especially fond
of Douglas-fir. In California it fruits, like other truffles, in the winter, spring,andearly
summer. Although small, its light color makes it fairly conspicuous.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it; too small to be of much value.
COMMENTS Formerly known as Genea (or Myrmecocyst;sj cerebriform;s, this is one
of our most distinctive truffles. The yellowish-gray to white color plus the irregularly con-
volutedandwarted exteriorandcomplex interior with open canals (in larger specimens)
distinguish it. The interior is vaguely reminiscent of Geopora cooperi. but that species is
much largerandhas a fuzzy brown exterior. Other species: Genabea frag;lis (the type
species of the genus) is a blackish species reported from EuropeandQuebec; G. sp;no-
spora is a whitish species that has been found in Virginia.
Balsamia magnata
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-2 cm broad, round to somewhat compressed or
flattened, the apex usually infoldedandthe base often with a tuft of mycelium. Exterior
divided into numerous rounded to pointed warts, occasionally with small depressions;
color variable: bright orange to reddish-brown to brownish-pink or occasionally black
(but may be whitish when very young). INTERIOR white to pale yellowish, even when
mature; composed of crowded folds which form maze like canals, the canals united or
separated into several chambersandeither open or filled loosely with cottony hyphae;
canals usually converging at the apex or sometimes at several points. SPORES 20-24 x
12-14 microns, variable in shape (cylindrical to elliptical to nearly round), smooth at
maturity, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, usually with three oil droplets. Asci
mostly imbedded in the tissue between the veins or canals; typically 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious (usually the latter) in soil under various trees and
shrubs (oak, pine, madrone, etc.); common (for a truffle) in CaliforniaandOregon in the
winterandspring; also reported from Arizona.
EDIBILITY I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS The prominently warted orange to reddish-brown exterior plus the pallid
interior composed of open or stuffed, often united or converging canals are characteristic
of this rather common truffle. It is most likely to be confused in the field with Pachyphloeus
citrinus (which can also be bright orange), but the smooth sporesandpale interior dis-
tinguish it. Pseudobalsamia magnata is an older alias,andthe names P. albaandP.
nigTens have been used for the whitishandblack forms (species?), respectively.
Barssia oregonensis (Depressed Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 1-2.5 cm broad, roundish but usually more or less flattened or slightly
lobed, typically with a prominent depression or cavity at the top; firm but not hard, without
a mycelial tuft at base. Exterior smooth to roughened or finely warted, pale ochre-buff to
orange-cinnamon to brick-red or reddish-brown. INTERIOR composed of empty, un-
connected, broad or narrow canals, many of which empty into the depression (i.e., more
or less solid except for the canals); white to pale gray, even at maturity. SPORES 24-36
x 12-21 microns, oblong-elliptical, smooth, colorless under the microscope. Asci mostly
8-spored, forming a palisade (hymenium) that lines the canals.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups in soil in woods, associated with Douglas-fir and
possibly other trees; known only from the West (California, Oregon, Idaho). Like most
truffles, it is commonest in the springandearly summer. I have yet to find it in our area,
but see comments.
EDIBILITY Presumably edible; I haven't tried it.
COMMENTS This truffle is best recognized by its color, the frequent presence of a
prominent depression into which several canals empty,andthe white or pallid interior. It
might be mistaken for a Genea or Genabea, but is differently colored, not as warted, and
has smooth spores at maturity. An unidentified yellowish to pale orange Barssia with a
prominent broad apical depression has been found recently in the Guadelupe Mines area
near Almaden, California (an area as richly endowed with truffles as it is with mercury).
Picoa carthusiana (Oregon Black Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-4.5 (8) cm broad, round or nearly round to slightly irregular,
without a mycelial tuft at the base. Exterior minutely warted, black to dusky slate-violet.
INTERIOR more or less solid, composed of large pockets of fertile tissue marbled with
paler (whitish to buff) sterile veins; fertile tissue whitish to buff when young but becoming
grayish-green to greenish-blue in age; sometimes exuding a clear latex when fresh which
slowly (overnight) stains white paper pale violet. SPORES (56) 74-84 x 20-35 microns,
lemon-or spindle-shaped, smooth, typically with one giant oil droplet at maturity; pallid
to greenish-yellow becoming brown at maturity (under the microscQpe). Asci typically
8-spored, imbedded in the tissue (not forming a palisade).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in soilandhumus in woods; known
from Europeandthe western United States. In OregonandCalifornia it favors Douglas-
fir. In our area it fruits in the springandsummer, but is more common in Oregon, where it
occurs earlier. It has been found at Point Reyes by Herb SaylorandDennis Desjardin,
in July.
EDIBILITY Edibleanddelicious raw, according to truffle connoisseur Gary Menser.
COMMENTS In the words of Herb Saylor (Mycena News, May 1983), "The general
aspect of this fungus is that of a piece of animal dung, with which we frequently confused
it while making the collection. It is possible that this may be one reason why it is infrequent-
ly collected, as animal dung of similar sizeandcolor was common in the area." The solid
interior might lead to confusion with Tuberandallies, but its greenish to grayish color
at maturity plus the large, smooth, spindle-shaped sporesandminutely warted, blackish
exterior form a distinctive set of characters.
Pachyphloeus citrinus
(Berry Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-3 cm broad, more or less round (spherical) to
slightly lobed or tapered below, firm but not hard; apex often with a depression, circular
furrow, or cluster of furrows; base often with a tuft of mycelium. Exterior usually divided
into polygonal warts; color variable, but usually bright to dull orange to brown. IN-
TERIOR more or less solid, composed of sterile veins which often converge toward the
apex or depressionandform elongated pockets of fertile tissue between them; entirely
whitish when young, becoming grayish to grayish-olive with paler (white to yellowish)
veins,andeventually becoming dark olive to blackish with yellow to pale olive veins. Odor
of mature specimens sometimes pungent ("'like rotting weeds"-Herb Saylor) after col-
lecting, at other times mild. SPORES (11) 13-21 microns, round, smoothandhyaline
(colorless under the microscope) at first, becoming spiny,andat maturity the spines
enlarging into broader, conical to truncate warts or "pegs" that look like miniature golf
tees; usually yellowish at maturity. Asci typically 8-spored, forming an irregular palisade
(hymenium) along the sterile veins and/or randomly imbedded in the surrounding tissue.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil under both hardwoodsandconifers; very widely
distributed (throughout most of North AmericaandEurope). In our area it fruits, like
other truffles, in the winter, spring,andearly summer. I have found it several times under
tan oakandmadrone in JuneandJuly,andit has turned up repeatedly under live oak in
the Guadelupe Mines area near Almaden, California.
EDIBILITY Specimens I sampled had little taste, but were immature.
COMMENTS This species appears to be one of the most widespread of all the truffles.
The combination of orange to brown, warted exteriorandsolid, grayish-olive to blackish
interior is distinctive. The "pegs" on the spores are also unusual-at maturity each is
usually tipped with a small depression that makes it look like a golf tee. The fruiting bodies
are not nearly as hard as Tubers,andare usually rounder. Local material is usually bright
orange when immatureandhas the aspect of a madrone berry (see color plate) or the fruit
from a strawberry tree (a European madrone). Other species: P. v;rescens is said to be
similar, but has a dull green exteriorandyellower interior. It was originally collected in
Los Gatos, California, but is also reported from Nebraska! P. melanoxanthus of eastern
North AmericaandEurope has a black to greenish-black, warted exterioranda grayish
to blackish interior marbled with hollow or greenish veins (at maturity)andsometimes
has a short "stalk" of mycelial fibers. P. conglomeratus has slightly amyloid asci.
Hydnobolites californicus (Gristly Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-4 cm broad, roundish to oval, usually lobed or
folded but quite compact. gristly or fattyandrubbery in texture (especially the interior),
not hard. Exterior often roughened but lacking warts, whitish to buff or dingy yellowish,
often becoming ochre-tan or dingy brown in age or as it dries. INTERIOR more or less
solid, with several narrow, meandering sterile veins or canals; white to slightly grayish,
but often discoloring brown when cutanddried or in old age. Odor mild or sometimes
musty at maturity. SPORES 14-18 (24) microns, round, very coarsely alveolate at
maturity, the ridges of the alveoli (pits) projecting like needles from the edges of the spore;
hyaline (colorless) to yellowish or pale brown under microscope. Asci mostly 8-spored,
imbedded in the tissue between the veins, not arranged in a palisade (hymenium).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or pockets of several individuals in soil and
humus under treesandin woods. As its name implies, it was originally discovered in Cali-
fornia, but appears to be widely distributed in North America. In our area it is fairly com-
mon from January to July under many trees, but especially oak.
EDIBILITY Prized by slugs, despised by humans. The texture is fatty but the flavor is not.
COMMENTS This truffle is easily recognized by its pale colorandgristly or fatty con-
sistency. The latter feature is particularly strikingandalmost without parallel among
the truffles. The interior is whitish except in old ageandthe fruiting body is never as hard
as a Tuber. The very coarsely alveolate spores re also diagnostic. Other species: H. cere-
briform;s of Europe is said to have larger spores; it has also been found in Iowa.
Cho;romyces alveolatus (Hard Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY usually underground, (0.5) 1-10 cm broad, nearly round or more
often lobed or knobby (potato-like); very hard, without a mycelial tuft at the base. Exterior
usually roughened or minutely downy, whitish when very young becoming yellowish to
tawny, brown, or rusty-brown in age. INTERIOR more or less solidandvery firm, consis-
tency rather like hard wax; at first white or pallid, but becoming marbled with darker
(yellowish to orange, yellow-brown, or rusty-brown) veins or chambers which are usually
solid but occasionally empty. Odor mild or distinctive (see comments). SPORES 20-30
(36) microns, round, smooth at first but covered with numerous rounded pits (alveolate) ==
like a golf ball at maturity; yellowish to brown underthe microscope. Asci mostly8-spored
(but many appearing 1-4-spored in younger specimens), arranged in a palisade (hy-
menium) lining the veins or chambers (but see comments).
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil under treesandin the woods; known only from
western North America, occasional (if you're looking for truffles) in the late winter, spring,
and early summer. I t is particularly numerous in the Sierra Nevada, but also occurs along
the coast. Like the Tubers, it takes several weeks or months to mature.
EDIBILITY : Temptingandprobably edible, but I can find no mention of anyone eating it.
COMMENTS This is a variable species as evidenced by its plethora of pseudonyms (e.g.,
C. cooke;, P;erson;a alveolala, P. b;spora). It is likely to be mistaken for a Tuber because
of its solidity, but microscopic examination reveals that the spores are finely pitted like
golf ballsandthe spore-bearing cells (asci) are arranged in nests or a palisade rather than
being randomly imbedded in the tissue. (Apparently the spores tend to form first in" nests"
which represent the inner termination of the veins; it is only in older specimens that they
line the entire lengths of the veins.) It is one of our largest truffles, capable of attaining the
size of a fist! The odor is sometimes distinctive. Helen Gilkey says of one collection: "Odor
at first resem bling desiccated coconut, changing as [it] dries to that of strongcream cheese."
Tuber g;bbosum (Oregon White Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY usually underground, 1.5-5 (8) cm broad, nearly round to irregularly
knobby or potato-like; firm or hard, without a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior minutely
downy or irregularly roughened but not warted, whitish when young becoming pale buff
to tan or brown, then usually developing darker (reddish to purple-brown) areas when
fully mature; often cracking in age. INTERIOR solid, marbled, crisp; whitish when
young, the fertile tissue becoming brown to dark brown to brick-red when mature, the
meandering sterile veins remaining whitish. Odor usually strongandgarlicky whenfu//y
mature. SPORES 35-52 x 17-40 microns, elliptical or elongated, reticulate-alveolate
(ridgedandpitted with shallow depressions) when mature but smooth when very young;
dark yellow-brown to brown under the microscope when mature. Asci mostly 1-to
6-spored, randomly imbedded in the tissue between the veins.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woodsandat their edges, associated
mainly if not exclusively with Douglas-fir (usually trees between the ages of 8and65
years); found from California to British Columbia, but especially common in Oregon.
Although it normally grows underground, I have found specimens on the surface. (They
were probably dug up by squirrels, then rejected for reasons known only to squirrels.)
EDIBILITY Edibleandchoice, but widespread collecting can be destructive! It smells
like the white truffle of Europe (T. magnatum),andsome people proclaim it just as good.
It can now be bought-for a slightly more reasonable price than T. magnatum.
COMMENTS Species of Tuber are often difficult to identify in the field, but this one
can be told by its growth with Douglas-fir, relatively large size (when mature), tendency
to develop cracks in age,andstrong garlicky odor (when present). Like other Tubers,
it has a marbled white-and-brown (or reddish-brown) interior when mature. The narrowly
elliptical spores are also very distinctive, providing you have a microscope. Other species:
T. besseyi is similar, but has an .. olive-buff' exteriorandslightly longer spores. T. canali-
culatum is a sizable choice edible with a distinctly warted, brown to reddish or tawny
exterior. It is found in the summerandfall in eastern North America{a region not known
for its truffles). Several western truffles also have a warted exterior (e.g., T. murinum,
T. linsdalei, T. gardneri,andT. harknessil), but they are difficult to distinguish without
a microscope. T. texensis{ofTexas, naturally) should also be mentioned. For other species
with elliptical, alveolate spores, see T. separans.
Tuber separans (Acorn Truffle) Color Plate 212
FRUITING_BODY underground, very firm or hard; (0.7) 14.5 cm broad, round to oval
or sometimes lobed (potato-like), but usually with no more than three major lobes; lacking
a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior smooth to very minutely roughened but not warted; whitish
when very young but soon becoming uniformly pale brown to dingy yellow-brown (about
the color of an oak gall), then eventually developing dark reddish-brown to dark brown
areas (or darkening overall) as it reaches full maturity. INTERIOR solid, very firm and
crisp, flaking or chipping like wax, marbled; white when young, the fertile tissue becoming
light brownandthen dark brown with ageandthe meandering sterile veins remaining
whitish. Odor at maturity slight, difficult to describe. SPORES (30) 34-58 x 28-50 (56)
microns, broadly elliptical to round, brownandalveolate (pitted-reticulate) at maturity,
with few to many pits. Asci 1-4 (6)-spored, imbedded randomly in tissue between veins.
HABITAT Widely scattered to-gregarious in soil under oakandother hardwoods; known
only from the west coast, fruiting mainly in the springandearly summer (at least in our
area). I have found more than sixty specimens growing together in loose soil, associated
with tanoak or possibly madrone, in JuneandJuly.
EDIBILITY Edible. It is mild or slightly nutty like Boletus edu/is, but much crisper.
Slice it thinlyandsaute very briefly (about one minute) or the flavor will be lost.
COMMENTS The above description is drawn from a single large collection made near
Santa Cruz, California,andthus may not represent the full range of variation within the
species. The yellowish to brown color of the hard, marble-to walnut-sized specimens was
quite constant,andthey were frequently confused with acorns buried in the duff (see
photo on p. 860). The growth with hardwoodsandlack of a strong odor at maturitydistin-
guish it from T. gibbosum, while the exterior is not pubescent as in T. californicum
and the different colorandalveolate spores separate it from T. rufum. However, there are
many very similar species with elliptical to nearly round, alveolate spores that can only be
differentiated with great difficulty. Part of the problem is that there are no up-to-date
keys available for the North American species,andthe spore sizes (an important
feature) are useful only when correlated with the number of spores in each ascus. In other
words, the identification of most Tubers is best left to truffle experts such asJ ames Trappe
(who identified the above-mentioned collection as T. separans). Among the many other
Tubers with elliptical, alveolate spores are: T. mont;cola, a rare species found under
conifers in the Sierra Nevada; T. c;tr;num, also rare, with a smooth, pale yellow exterior
in youth; T. dryoph;lum, a very widely distributed species with smaller, coarsely alveolate
sporesanda yellowish-brown exterior at maturity; T. leviss;mum, a thicker-skinned
species that is also widespread; T. shear;;' with large, coarsely alveolate, broadly elliptical
spores;andT. irrad;ans, with many nearly round, coarsely alveolate spores. All of these
species have spores about the same size as T. separans or smaller. See also T. gibbosum.
Tuber calijornicum (California Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, (1) 1.5-3 (5) cm broad, round to oval or more often
irregularly lobed and/or pitted; very firm, without a basal mycelial tuft. Exterior minutely
but evenly pubescent (covered with tiny hairs)andwhitish when young, becoming mot-
tled with darker (olive to dingy ochre to brown) areas as it matures, but usually retaining
patches of the white pubescence; sometimes cracked in age. INTERIOR solid, firm,
marbled, chipping like wax, whitish when young, becoming dark brown with large
meandering white sterile veins at maturity. Odor often distinctive when old (rather cheesy
or like "gourmet" crackers). SPORES (30) 39-52 microns, round, alveolate (reticulate-
pitted), brown at maturity. Asci 14 (6)-spored, imbedded randomly in flesh between veins.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in or on soil (but under humus) in woodsandat their
edges; common (for a truffle) in CaliforniaandOregon, also reported from Idaho and
Ohio. In our area it is sometimes abundant under oak in the late winterandspring, but I
have also collected it on numerous occasions under Douglas-firas lateasJ uly. The fruiting
bodies are often attacked by slugs, nematodes,andfly larvae.
EDIBILITY Edible. Some people detect a bitter taste, but the specimens I sampled had
a very strong mushroomy flavor that would go well in sauces or gravies.
COMMENTS The critical feature of this Tuber is its uniformly round( not round to ellip-
tical), alveolate spores. However, it can usually be told in the field by its pubescent or
downy exterior (use a hand lens!)andtendency to be quite knobby. T. sphaerosporum
also has uniformly round spores, but it lacks the pubescent exterior of T. californicum and
has fewerandlarger pits on its spores. It occurs in eastern North AmericaandGary
Menser has found it under willow in Colorado. For alveolate-spored species with at least
some elliptical spores, see T. separansandT. gibbosum.
Tuber rujum (Cinnamon Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 0.5-2.5 (3.5) cm broad, round to somewhat irregular or
potato-like, with or without one or more furrows; very firm or hard, without a basal tuft
of mycelium. Exterior smooth or broken up into patches or "eyes" but not conspicuously
warted, color variable: brown to cinnamon when mature (brown to orange-or reddish-
brown), usually dullerandlighter (whitish to light brown) when young; sometimes with
whitish, pinkish, or golden areas mixed with darker shades. INTERIOR solid, firm, chip-
ping like wax, marbled; whitish when young becoming grayish-brown to brown in age;
sterile veins large, remaining whitish. Odor not very distinctive. SPORES 20-48 x 17-32
microns, elliptical to nearly round, brownandcovered with spines at maturity. Asci
1-4 (7)-spored, randomly imbedded in the tissue between the veins.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered beneath the soil under oaksandother
trees; widely distributedandcommon. In California it occurs principally with live oak
and is our most commOn Tuber. I have collected hundreds of marble-sized specimens
under oaks in the spring. It also fruits in the late winter, but takes several weeks to mature.
EDIBILITY Edibleandfairly good; it has a faintly nutty flavor.
COMMENTS Also known as T. candidumandmore exactly called T. rufum var. niti-
dum, this common truffle is best told in the field by its modest sizeandbrown to cinnamon-
colored peridium (at maturity),andin the laboratory by its spiny rather than pitted or reti-
culate spores. The latter feature sets it apart from most other North American Tubers. As
in other Tubers, the interior is solidandmarbled. Other species: T. harknessii is an oak-
loving western species with spiny sporesanda distinctly warted exterior.
Elaphomyces muricatus group (Marbled Deer Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 2-5 cm broad, round to oval or somewhat lobed, very
firm. Exterior yellow-brown to ochre-brownandcovered with minute, hard, pointed
warts that give it a pimpled appearance, but the warts usually obscured by a crust of soil
and tiny rootlets (mycorrhizae) that is easily stripped or brushed away. Peridium (skin)
thick (2-5 mm), hardandrindlike, marbled when sectioned (dark brown to purplish-
brown with whitish to vinaceous-tinged veins). INTERIOR at first hollow, soon stuffed
with cottony white hyphae, then darkening to grayish, lilac, or purplishanddivided into
chambers by sterile bands, finally become brownish-black to blackanduniformly
powdery. Odor not very distinctive. SPORES 18-30 x microns, round, warted or warted-
spiny, dark brown to black under the microscope. Asci round to pear-shaped or irregular,
mostly 8-spored, not forming a palisade (hymenium)anddisintegrating soon after the
spores form (and before they are completely mature).
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious in soil or duff in woods; widely distributedandfairly
common (if you're digging for truffles). It is said to prefer pine woods, but in our area I
have found it as early as October under knobcone pineandmanzanitaandas late as July
under tan oakandmadrone.
EDIBILITY Unknown (but see comments on edibility of E. granulatus).
COMMENTS This lesser-known cousin of E. granulatus is best told by its marbled
peridium (see photographs). Like other Elaphomyces species, it is sometimes parasitized
by Cordyceps.andis easily told from other truffles by its thick rind like skinanddark,
cottony to powdery mature spore mass (interior). The latter features can lead to confusion
with the earth balls (Scleroderma). which, however, do not have a marbled peridium.
Other species of Elaphomyces with a marbled peridium (e.g., E. verrucosum, E. var;e-
gatus) differ from E. muricatus microscopically.
Elaphomyces granulatus group (Common Deer Truffle)
FRUITING_BODY underground, 2-5 cm broad, round to somewhat oval, very firm.
Exterior usually covered with small hard warts (but these often hidden by a crust of soil,
yellowish mycelium, and/or mycorrhizal rootlets); sometimes pallid when young but
usually pale to dingy ochraceous or yellow-brown. Peridium(skin) rindlike, very firm and
thick (2-5 mm), showing a very thin yellowish outer layer (when sectioned)anda thick
white to grayish inner layer that may feature darker (brown) zones, but not marbled.
INTERIOR at first hollow, soon stuffed with cottony tissue, eventually becoming
powdery when spores mature; white at first, soon grayish to purplish (and often separated
into chambers by whitish bands), finally becoming blackishandpowdery. Odor not very
distinctive. SPORES 24-45 (65) microns, round, thick-walled, blackish-brown to very
dark reddish-brown under the microscope, ornamented with short spines or warts. Asci
mostly 8-spored, round to pear-shaped, not forming a hymenium, disintegrating before
the spores are fully mature.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in soil or humus under conifers or less
commonly hardwoods; widely distributedandvery common, but seldom seen by the
average mushroom hunter because it grows underground. It is usually found 2-3 inches
(5-8 cm) below the surface, often imbedded in or resting on clay soil at the point where it
meets the humus layer. In many regions it is parasitized by species of Cordyceps-which
serve as an above-ground indicator of its presence-but I have yet to observe this in our
area. It fruits throughout the mushroom seasonandcan sometimes be gathered by the
bushel. I have found it under hemlockandpine in northern California,andHerb Saylor
reports prolific fruitings from Mendocino County. Alexander Smith calls it "perhaps the
most common hypogeous [underground] fungus in North America"-and he should
know, since he has collected so many of them!
EDIBILITY Edible according to some reports, but not choice. In Europe it has been used
for centuries as an aphrodesiacandtruffle-substitute.
COMMENTS The thick rindlike skinandpurple-gray to black, cottony to powdery
interior distinguish Elaphomyces from all other underground Ascomycetes. E. granulalUs
and its close relatives differ from the E. mur;catus group in having a non-marbled peridium
(as seen in sectioned specimens). The earthball genus Scleroderma is similar, but produces
spores on basidia, usually has a distinct base or point of attachment to the substrate, lacks
the small hard wartsandouter crust of soilandmycorrhizae so frequently found in E.
granulatus,andusually grows nearer to the ground surface (or often above it). Other spe-
cies of Elaphomyces with a non-marbled peridium are best differentiated microscopically.
One, E. subviscidus, has a smooth skin, dark brown mature spore mass,andsmaller spores.
Geoglossum glutinosum (Viscid Black Earth Tongue)
FRUITING_BODY 1.5-6 cm tall, cylindrical to club-shaped. Upper (fertile) portion 3-6
mm wide, often flattened or slightly twisted but otherwise not sharply differentiated from
lower portion (stalk); surface black, smooth, viscid (at least when moist). Flesh tough,
usually brownish, not gelatinous. STALK occupying lower 1/3-2/3 of fruiting body, 2-3
mm thick, dark brown to black, viscid when moist, usually smooth. SPORES 60-90x 4-5
microns, greatly elongated, smooth, brown under the microscope, with 0-7 (usually 3 or 7)
septa (partitions).
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in small groups in humus, moss, or sometimes rotten
wood, usually in the woods; widely distributed but infrequently encountered. I've found
it several times in our area in the late fall, winter,andearly spring, but never in quantity.
EDIBILITY I know of no one who bothers collecting Geoglossums, but Captain Charles
McIlvaine says of this species: "Over a quart found in one patch. Stewed it is delicious."
COMMENTS This dark earth tongue has many look-alikes (see below), but is one ofthe
few species with a distinctly viscid, glistening surface when moist. Similar viscid species
include: G. affine, rare, with shorter spores;andG. difforme, larger (3-12 cm tall), whose
spores have 8-15 septa. The genus Geoglossum also includes many similar dark brown to
black, non-viscid earth tongues that can only be differentiated microscopically. These
species are not as velvety as Trichoglossumanddo not often have a well-defined "head."
Some of the more commonandwidespread ones are: G. glabrum, a smooth-stalked species
up to 10 cm tall; G. simile, the most common species in eastern North America, stalk often
scurfy or minutely scaly;andG. nigritum (see photo), the most common species in our area
(but more widely distributed), with strongly curved paraphyses (sterile cells) whose tips
are scarcely enlarged. All of these have brown spores, but some Geoglossums have both
brownandhyaline (colorless) spores, including: G.fallax, whose hyaline spores are non-
septate;andG. alveolatumandG. intermedium, whose hyaline spores are septate. There
are also several similar, dark Microglossum species whose spores areal/hyaline, including:
Microglossum atropurpureum, fruiting body dark brown to purplish or black; M.
fumosum, yellow-brown to brown;andM. olivaceum (see comments under M. viride),
greenish-brown to dark brown with very short spores (10-18 microns long).
Trichoglossum hirsutum (Velvety Black Earth Tongue)
FRUITING_BODY 2-8 cm tall, cylindrical to club-shaped or more often with a distinct
"head" (i.e., fruiting body shaped more orIess like the tongue ofa bell). Fertile"head" when
distinct 3-8 mm broad, usually flattened laterally or compressed, oval or elongated to
spade-or arrowhead-shaped; surface dry, minutely hairy or velvety, sometimes wrinkled,
black. Flesh thin, tough, usually brownish. STALK thin (1-4 mm thick), more or less
equal, densely velvety, often twisted or curved, tough, black. SPORES 80-195 (210)x 5-7
microns, greatly elongated, smooth, brown under the microscope, typically with 15 septa
(partitions) when mature, but some varieties with consistently fewer or more septa. Both
stalkandhead lined with long brown sterile cells (setae). Asci 8-spored.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, gregarious, or tufted in humus, moss, or soil (or occa-
sionally on rotten wood), usually in woods; very widely distributedandcommon. It is the
most abundant earth tongue in our area, sometimes carpeting large tracts of humus with
its little black clubs. In seems to favor habitats shunned by other mushrooms (e.g., red-
wood),andusually fruits in the winter or spring. Like other black fungi, it is difficult to see.
EDIBILITY Supposedly edible, but much too tough to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS This dainty earth tongue is easily recognized by its black velvety fruiting
body. In California specimens the fertile portion is usually (but not always) set off from
the stem as a thickened or flattened, often spade-shaped ""head." The wonderful velvety
texture is caused by hundreds of minute projecting hairs or spines (setae)andis most
evident on the stalk, especially in dry weather. Geoglossum species are very similar, but
are not as velvetyanddo not normally have such a well-defined ""head." Other species of
Trichoglossum can only be differentiated microscopically. They include: T. velutipes,
with 4-spored asciandmostly 7-1 I-septate spores;andT. farlowii, with 8-spored asci
and 0-5 (usually 3)-septate spores.
Microglossum viride (Green Earth Tongue) Color Plate 214
FRUITING_BODY 1-5.5 cm tall, clublike to tongue-or spatula-shaped (i.e., with an
enlarged "head" at maturity). Fertile "head" 4-12 mm broad, dark green to pea-green,
green, olive-green, or even bluish-green, smooth or furrowed, often flattened or com-
pressed in older specimens. Flesh greenish, rather tough. STALK 2-5 mm thick, colored
like the head or paler green, usually thinner; surface minutely scurfy or scaly, but some-
times smooth in age. SPORES 14-22 x 4-6 microns, sausage-shaped to spindle-shaped,
smooth, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, not septate or septate only when old.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or tufts in soil, moss,andduff under both
hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributed. It is not uncommon in coastal California in
the winterandearly spring, but is often overlooked because of its small sizeandgreen
color. I find it most often under redwoodandtanoak.
EDIBILITY Too small to be worthwhile.
COMMENTS The striking green color sets apart this petite, farflung earth tongue. The
specimens in the color plate are rather youngandclub-shaped, but as they grow older their
"heads" will become flatter (laterally)andmore distinct. The minutely scaly or scurfy stalk
is also distinctive. M. olivaceum is a somewhat similar but smoother species with an olive-
buff to greenish-brown to dark brown (not truly green) fruiting bodyandshorter spores.
I have found it twice in our area, but it is more widely distributed. Other species of Micro-
glossum are either yellow to orange (see M. rufum under Neolecta irregularis) or brown
to blackish (see M. atropurpureumandM.fumosum under Geoglossum glutinosum).
Mitrula abietis (Miniature Earth Tongue)
FRUITING_BODY 0.5-4 (5) cm tall, with a stalkandsharply differentiated "head." Fertile
"head' 1-7 (10) mm broadandhigh, roundish to cylindrical (elongated), with a smooth
surface; pinkish-buff to pale flesh-colored to light brown. Flesh thin. STALK 0.5-3 (4)cm
long, 1-4 (7) mm thick, equal or tapered slightly, thin, light to dark brown (usually darker
than cap), smooth or slightly powdered above, often with brown hairs at base. SPORES
10-14 x 2-2.5 microns, elongated, smooth, not septate, hyaline (colorless) under the
microscope.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious in needle duff under northernandmountain
conifers; common in western North America in the spring, summer,andfall, but absent
in our area.
EDIBILITY Fleshlessandprobably flavorless.
COMMENTS This little mushroom sometimes grows in large carpets on the forest floor.
The sharply differentiated "head" distinguishes it from most earth tonguesandfairy clubs,
and it is usually smaller than Cudoniaandlacks the abrupt cap marginandsterile under-
side of that genus. M. elegans, sometimes called the "Swamp Beacon," is a similar, widely
distributedandcommon species that fruits in very wet humus or soil or on leaves in shallow
pools. It has a creamy to bright yellow or pale orange "head"anda white or pinkish-tinged,
sometimes viscid stalkandcan often be found under mountain conifers in the spring and
early summer. It has long passed under the nameM. paludosa, a similar European species
that differs microscopically. Other species: M. gracilis is a northernandmontane species
with an ochraceous to orange-buff "head"; it usually grows in moss. M. borealis, also
northern, has a golden-yellow "head" like that of M. elegans. but has elliptical or crescent-
shaped spores. M. lunulatospora is an eastern springtime, water-loving species with a
flesh-colored to yellowish "head"andcrescent-shaped spores. Jlibressea truncorum looks
like a Mitrula or a miniature Leotia. but usually grows on sticks in running water (often
in cold mountain streams). It is even smaller than Mitrulaandsomewhat gelatinous.
N eolecta irregularis (Irregular Earth Tongue) Color Plate 200
FRUITING_BODY 1-7 cm tall, clublike to very irregular (lobed, sparingly branched,
groovedandtwisted, etc.), usually flattened or compressed, 0.4-2.5 cm broad at apex.
Fertile surface pale yellow to bright yellow or orange-yellow. Flesh white or yellowish,
rather tough. STALK sometimes absent but usually present as a sterile, pale yellow to
white base beneath the fertile portion; 1-6 (10) mm thick (usually thinner than fertile area).
SPORES 5.5-10 x 3.5-5 microns, elliptical to nearly round, smooth, not septate, hyaline
(colorless) under the microscope. Asci lining at least the upper part of (and sometimes
the entire) fruiting body.
HABITAT Widely scattered to gregarious or occasionally tufted on ground, moss, or
duff, usually under conifers; widely distributed. Along with N. vitellina (see comments),
it occurs throughout much of the West, but is apparently absent in our area. I have seen
large fruitings under spruceandfir in New MexicoandOregon in the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY In my opinion, not worth collecting. McIlvaine, as usual, dissents: "Those
fortunate enough to find this species will hunt for it again assiduously. Even raw, when cut
in strips, it makes a picturesqueanddelicious salad."
COMMENTS The bright yellow colorandhighly irregular shape are usually enough to
identify this species, which is also known as Spragueola (or Mitrula) irregularis. Club-
shaped specimens can be mistaken for fairy clubs (Clavulinopsis), but bear their spores
in asci rather than on basidia, are usually broader,andoften have irregularly-shaped
fruiting bodies growing nearby. Microglossum rufum is a farflung earth tongue with a
bright yellow to orange fruiting body. It is much more uniform in shape (usually with a
slender stalk 2-4 mm thickanda wider, flattened "head")andhas much longer spores
(20-40 microns). It is especially common in eastern North America in the summer and
early fall. Other species: N. vilellina closely resembles N. irregularis. but is slightly smaller
and paler,anddiffers microscopically.
Spathulariaflavida (Fairy Fan)
FRUITING_BODY 1-10 cm tall, with a stalkandfertile "head." Fertile "head" very com-
pressed or flattened laterally, spatula-or fanlike, 1-3 cm broad, decurrent (running down)
on opposite sides of the stalk; surface (sides) smooth or wrinkled, sometimes lobed or
contorted or with a notched apex, pallid when young becoming pale yellow to yellow, buff,
or cinnamon-buff to brownish (or occasionally pale orangish). Flesh white, not gelatinous.
STALK (I) 2-8 cm long, 2-10 mm thick, variable in shape but often thicker or swollen at
base, usually hollow; surface smooth to finely mealy but not velvety, white to yellowish or
colored like the "head" but usually paler, with white to pale yellow mycelium at base.
SPORES 30-75 (95) x 1.5-3 microns, very longandnarrow (needle-like), smooth, with
one to several septa (partitions) or none at all; hyaline (colorless) under the microscope
but often yellow-brown in mass, especially when dry.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or even clustered, sometimes in lines or circles, on
humus or rotten wood under conifers (especially pine) or sometimes hardwoods; wide-
spread. It is common in the summerandfall in the Pacific NorthwestandSouthwest and
occurs in northern California in the fall, winter,andspring, but I have yet to find it locally.
EDIBILITY Said to be edible, but rather tough. Captain Charles McIlvaine describes
it as "tenacious but tender."
COMMENTS The peculiar flattened, paddle-or fanlike "head" that extends down oppo-
site sides of the stalk is unique to this little mushroomandits close relatives (see next page).
It might possibly be confused with Neolecta irregularis or a Microglossum. but is not as
brightly coloredandhas a more consistently compressed "head." S. c1avata is a synonym.
Other species: S. spathulata is said to be similar but has smaller sporesanda somewhat
darker (yellow-brown to reddish-brown) fruiting body. Its cap ranges from flattened to
rounded (as in Cudonia) but is fertile over its entire surface rather than just at the top. It
was originally collected in Big Basin State Park, California, but I have not seen it there.
S. (=Spathular;ops;s) velut;pes of eastern North America is a commonanddistinctive
"fairy fan" with orange myceliumanda velvety dark brown to reddish-brown stalk that
may be thicker at the bottom or top, plus a yellow to yellow-brown flattened "head" that
is covered by a "veil" when very youngandoften retains "veil" remnants at maturity.
Cudon;a c;rc;nans (Common Cudonia)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 0.5-2 cm broad, usually rounded or convex,
sometimes with a central depressionandsometimes convoluted; surface wrinkled or
smooth, creamy to pinkish-buff, cinnamon-buff, vinaceous-buff, pale brown, or occa-
sionally darker; margin usually curved downandin toward the stalk. Underside sterile,
often with radiating veins that extend up from the stalk. Flesh thin but firm, not gelati-
nous, rather tough or leathery when dry. STALK 1.5-7 cm long, 2-12 mm thick (but
usually less than 6 mm at apex), equal or more often thicker below, stuffed or sometimes
hollow in age; drab to dark brown (usually darker than cap), usually minutely scurfy, often
longitudinally striate or ridged, especially above. SPORES (28) 32-40 (46) x 2 microns,
very longandthin (needle-like), smooth, sometimes septate (partitioned), but usually not;
hyaline (colorless) under the microscope.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or often in dense clusters in humus, soil,andon rotting
wood; particularly common under conifers, but also found with hardwoods; widely
distributed. It is said to be the most common member of its genus, but I have yet to find it
in our area. In the Pacific Northwest it is fairly common in the late summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Poisonous, at least raw. It is said to contain high concentrations of MMH
(see pp. 799and893 for details).
COMMENTS The small size, convex to somewhat convoluted cap,andnon-gelatinous
flesh are the hallmarks of this species. It is reminiscent of a dry Leotia. but is not as brightly
colored. It can also be mistaken for an elfin saddle (He/vella), but the shape is different
and it often forms dense groups or clusters untypical of He/vella (see photo on p. 872).
C. monticola is a similar, pinkish-cinnamon to pinkish-buffto grayish-brown westerner.
It is the largest Cudonia(upto 10 cm high, cap 1-3 cm broad), but has much smaller spores
than C. circinans (only 18-25 microns long)anda frequently compressed oreven somewhat
saddle-shaped cap. It is common under conifers in northern Californiaandthe Pacific
Northwest, usually in the springandsummer (whereas C. circinans is more frequent in
the fall). C. grisea also occurs under conifers in the Pacific Northwest, but has a gray to
dark grayish-brown or fuscous fruiting bodyandusually fruits in the spring. C. lutea is a
yellowish to olive-buff eastern species that sometimes shows "veil" fragments on the
margin of the cap. It grows scattered to gregarious, usually under hardwoods.
Leotia /ubrica (Jelly Babies) Color Plate 215
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 0.54 cm broad, round to convex to slightly
lobed or knobby; surface smooth or wrinkled, viscid to slimy when moist (but sometimes
drying out), buff to yellow, ochre, olive-ochre, or sometimes cinnamon or greenish-brown;
margin usually curved in toward stalk, often lobed or wavy. Underside sterile, paler. Flesh
gelatinous (at least the central core), often translucent. STALK 2-8 cm long, 0.3-1 cm
thick, equal or somewhat thicker below, smooth or scurfy (with minute granules), hollow
or more often filled with a gel; surface viscid when moist, colored like cap or sometimes
yellower. SPORES 16-25x 4-6 microns, spindle-shapedandsometimes curved, smooth,
hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, septate (partitioned) at maturity.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered in duff, soil, or very rotten wood under
both hardwoodsandconifers; widely distributed. It is the most common Leotia in North
America, but is not as frequent in our area as L. viscosa. I usually find it in the winter and
spring, but in other regions it fruits in the summerandfall. Alexander Smith describes
finding massive clusters buried in sand dunes!
EDIBILITY Harmless but glutinous. It might be more useful as a lubricant than a
condiment!
COMMENTS This farflung fungus is unlikely to be mistaken for any other. The com-
bination of rounded or wrinkled cap. viscid fruiting body with gelatinous flesh,andoverall
yellowish to ochre-buff color set it apart. Greenish-tinged forms approach L. viscosa,
and the two species may intergrade.
Leotia viscosa (Chicken Lips)
FRUITING_BODY with a capandstalk. CAP 0.5-3 cm broad, round to convex to slightly
lobed or knobby; surface smooth or slightly wrinkled, viscid or slimy when moist, dark
green to olive-green; margin usually incurved toward the stalk, often lobed or wavy.
Underside sterile, usually pallid or paler. Flesh (at least the central core) gelatinous,
often translucent. STALK 2-9 cm long, 0.3-1 cm thick, equal or tapered slightly upward,
smooth, hollow or filled with a gel, viscid to slimy when moist; white to yellow or orange,
sometimes with minute green dots or particles, especially above. SPORES 16-28 x 4-6
microns, spindle-shapedandoften slightly curved, smooth, usually septate (partitioned)
at maturity, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or in groups or clusters in humus or on rotten wood;
widely distributed. This is the most common Leotia in our area. It fruits in the winter and
early spring under oakandvarious other trees.
EDIBILITY Harmless but gelatinous.
COMMENTS This gelatinous Ascomycete with the green headandwhite to orange stalk
can hardly be confused with any other. In dry weather the surface of the capandstalk may
not be obviously viscid, but slicing open the fruiting body will usually reveal gelatinous
tissue within. The nickname "Chicken Lips" was obviously given to it by the same person
who dubbed Tricholomaflavovirens the "Man On Horseback!" Other species: L. atTo-
viTens (=L. chloTocephala) is a similar but smaller eastern species with a greenish to dark
green capandgreen to pale green stalk. L. lubrica (see description) is usually yellower.
Bulgaria inqu;nans (Poor Man's Licorice; Black Jelly Drops)
FRUITING_BODY 1-4 cm broad and/or high, rubbery; at first rounded to somewhat
cylindrical to shallow cup-shaped or top-shaped, the top then broadening into a flattened
or broadly convex, flabby "cap." Fertile (upper) surface blackishandoften shiny when
wet. Exterior or underside brown to blackishandroughened. Flesh gelatinous or at least
very rubbery; pliantandtough, not brittle. STALK absent or present as a narrowed base,
continuous withandcolored like the exterior or underside of the "cap." SPORES 11-14
x 6-7 microns, more or less kidney-shaped, smooth, not septate; brown or black in mass,
but only the upper four in each ascus brown under the microscope, the other four hyaline
(colorless); asci typically 8-spored, their tips blueing in iodine.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, in rows, or densely gregarious or clustered on dead hard-
wood logsandbranches, especially of oak; widely distributedandcommon. In our area
it fruits throughout the mushroom season, especially on live oakandtanoak,andcan be
seen on almost any wintertime trek through the woods.
EDIBILITY Unknown, but as the common name implies, not worth eating except in
desperation!
COMMENTS Also known as Phaeobulgar;a ;nqu;nans, the flabby, funky fruiting
bodies of this fungus look something like licorice drops, or in the concise words of Judith
Scott Mattoon, ..They remind me of rubber parts that fit into things by squeezing through
and then popping back into shape-you know what I mean?" The texture is reminiscent
oflndia rubber, or can be gelatinous, leading to confusion with the jelly fungi. However, it
bears its spores in asci rather than on basidia,andcan be told in the field by its distinctive
shapeandcolor. Its growth on dead hardwoodsandsmaller size distinguish it from the
conifer-loving "Starving Man's Licorice" (Sarcosoma mexicanaandS. latahensis). Des-
pite its uncanny resemblance to Sarcosoma, it is classified with the earth tongues because
of its inoperculate (lidless) asci. Other gelatinous species: Ascocoryne (=Coryne) sar-
coides is a widespread, more or less top-shaped, gelatinous, flesh-colored to dark purplish
or reddish-brown species. It is smaller (up to 1 cm broad), has septate spores,andgrows
on dead wood. Neobulgaria pura (=Ascotremella turbinata) is a flesh-colored to reddish,
top-shaped eastern species with non-septate spores. Ascotremellafaginacea is a larger,
raisin-colored, gelatinous species that is lobed or brainlikeandoften forms continuous
masses on beech trunks in eastern North America. All of these look like jelly fungi and
are keyed out under that group.
Ciboria amentacea (Catkin Cup)
FRUITING_BODY with a stalkandcuplike cap. "Cap"O.5-1.2cmbroad,atfirstshallowly
cup-shaped, expanding to nearly flat in age. Fertile (upper or inner) surface light brown to
yellow-brown, smooth. Exterior of cup similar in color, also smooth. STALK 1-5 cm
long, 1-2 mm thick, light brown to yellow-brown, equal, smooth, often curved, not arising
from a sclerotium. SPORES 7.5-13 x 4-6 microns, elliptical, smooth.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on old, fallen alderandwillow catkins; widely
distributed but seldom collected, usually fruiting in the spring.
EDIBILITY Who knows?
COMMENTS The growth on alder or willow catkins rescues this little brown cup fungus
from the anonymity it so richly deserves.
Chlorociboria aeruginascens (Blue Stain)
FRUITING_BODY 3-7(10) mm broad, at first cup-shaped, then becoming flat ordisc1ike
or with a slightly elevated margin. Fertile (upper) surface bright to pale blue-green or
turquoise, sometimes with a yellowish or orange-yellow tint developing in age; smooth or
slightly wrinkled. Exterior (underside) similarly colored (but not yellowish). Flesh thin,
also bluish-green. STALK usually present as a short, narrowed, typically off-center base;
up to 3 (6) mm longand1-2 mm thick, same color as rest offruitingbody. SPORES 6-10 x
1.5-2 microns, spindle-shaped or elongated, smooth, with an oil droplet at each end.
HABITAT Gregarious (several often arising from a common base) on dead or barkless
wood (usually oak); widely distributedandquite common, but easily overlooked because
of its diminutive dimensions. In our area it fruits mainly in the winterandearly spring.
EDIBILITY Indisputably inconsequential.
COMMENTS This petite Ascomycete merits mention in this book because of its unusual
color. C. aerug;nosa is a very similar, widely distributed species that is smaller (less than
5 mm broad), has a shorter, more or less central stalk,andorange-yellow flesh. Both
species can be detected when they are not fruiting because their mycelium stains the host
blue-green. The stained wood was once used in the manufacture of inlaid wooden objects
known as "Tunbridge Ware." Both species have also been placed in the genus Chloro-
splenium.
Podostroma alutaceum
FRUITING_BODY 1-5 cm talland0.5-1 cm thick, cylindrical to club-shaped, without a
well-defined cap. Surface dry, minutely roughened by the slightly protruding perithecia
(fIasklike nests of asci), whitish to yellowish to pale ochre, usually paler (white) at the
base. SPORES elongated, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, finely warted and
septate (with one partition), breaking up into one-celled, round to elliptical segments
averaging 4-4.5 x 3-4 microns. Asci 8-spored, but each spore breaking in two to make 16.
HABITAT Solitary or in small groups on rotting wood; widely distributed but rare.
I have found it only once in our area, on dead oak in the late winter.
EDIBILITY Who cares?
COMMENTS This forgettable club like fungus can be recognized by its yellowish color,
growth on wood,andpresence of perithecia (flask like "nests" of asci) on the upper
portion of the fruiting body. It is most likely to be mistaken for a fairy club (Clavaria or
Clavulinopsis), but the above-mentioned features distinguish it.
C ordyceps capitata (Truffle Eater)
FRUITING_BODY arising from certain underground truffles (Elaphomyces), 2-8 (12)
cm tall, with a well-defined cap or "head"andstalk. Fertile "head" 0.5-2 cm broad and
high, nearly round to convex or slightly conical; surface dark reddish-brown to brown,
dark olive-brown, or even blackish, roughened or minutely pimpled by protruding peri-
thecia (flasklike nests of asci). Flesh white. STALK 1.5-8 cm long, (0.2) 0.4-1.5 cm thick,
more or less equal, sometimes slightly flattened, often bent or curved, occasionally forked
(with two "heads"), rather tough; surface usually fibrillose of fibrillose-scaly, yellow to
yellow-ochre to yellow-olive, sometimes darker (olive to olive-black) in age; base often
whitish. SPORES threadlike, hyaline (colorless)andsmooth under the microscope,
usually breaking up into one-celled segments averaging (8) 12-27 (32) x 1.5-3 microns.
HABITAT Solitary, tufted, or gregarious on ground, but arising from underground deer
truffles (Elaphomyces species); widely distributedandone of the more common members
of the genus. Scattered fruiting bodies are the norm, but sometimes it fruits prolifically.
I have not found it in our area, but it may well occur(Elaphomyces certainly does). In the
mixed coastal forests of northern California it can be found in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Possibly worth trying since it is larger than most species of Cordyceps. but
I can find no information on it.
COMMENTS This is one of several Cordyceps species that grow only on Elaphomyces.
The latter can occur several inches deep in the soil, but specimens close to the surface are
more apt to be parasitized. The reddish-brown or darker cap which is sharply differen-
tiated from the yellow to olive stalk are the principal fieldmarks. C. canadensis is a very
similar truffle-eater with much larger spore segments; it is known from eastern North
AmericaandEurope. C. ophioglossoides is another species that parasitizes Elapho-
myces. but it has a clublike fruiting body that lacks a sharply defined "head." The club is
sometimes yellow when very young but soon becomes reddish-brown to olive-brown to
nearly black except for a yellow baseandyellow mycelial threads that extend into the host.
It is said to be the most common Cordyceps in eastern North America, but is rather rare
in California.
Cordyceps myrmecophila (Ant Fungus; Ant Eater)
FRUITING_BODY arising from an ant (often buried), 0.8-5 (10) cm tall, with a thin stalk
and small "head." Fertile "head" 2-8 mm broad, usually oval; surface ochre to ochraceous-
salmon, sometimes with short longitudinal ridges or furrows in dry weather, minutely
pimpled from the slightly projecting perithecia (flasklike nests of asci). STALK 0.8-9.5
cm long, 0.5-] (2) mm thick, very thinandmore or less equal, colored like the "head" or
often paler (pale yellow, sometimes shading to white near base, or entirely white if not
exposed to light). SPORES threadlikeandmultiseptate, smooth, hyaline (colorless)
under the microscope, breaking into one-celled segments averaging 8-10 x ].5 microns.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious on the mummified, often buried carcasses of ants
(usually one per ant); widely distributed, fruiting in damp weather, usually around ant
nests in the woods. Although rare, it is sometimes prolific when it fruits. It has been found
in British Columbia, Washington,andOregon (as well as Europe, China,andBrazil), and
may well occur in California; there is certainly no shortage of potential hosts!
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS This is one of several Cordyceps species that are capitate (i.e., that have
a differentiated "head")andparasitize insects. The ochre to yellow colorandgrowth on
ants distinguish it. As in other species, the length of the stalk depends largely on whether
or not the host is buried,andif so, how deep. Other capitate species include: C. spheco-
cephala, a very similar southeastern species that grows on waspsandhas a very thin,
creamy to yellow or yellow-brown fruiting body; C. entomorrhiza, brownish orvinaceous-
tinged with a very warty "head," growing on beetle larvae in the Pacific Northwest, rare;
and C. gracilis, growing on larvae of beetles, moths,andbutterflies in eastern North
America, with a yellow stalkandochre to mahogany-colored "head," also rare. For
capitate species that grow on truffles, see C. capitata.andfor the club like (non-capitate)
types that grow on insects, see C. militaris.
Cordyceps militaris (Caterpillar Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY arising from buried mothandbutterfly larvae or pupae, 2-8 cm tall,
cylindrical to spindle-or club-shaped (i.e., with a slightly swollen upper fertile region, but
lacking a well-defined "head"); often with a longitudinal furrow. Upper (fertile) portion
of club 2-6 mm broad, orange to orange-buff to orange-red, finely roughened or pimpled
by the slightly protruding perithecia(flasklike nests of asci). STALK (sterile lower region)
smooth, usually paler, often curved or wavy. SPORES threadlikeandmultiseptate,
smooth, hyaline (colorless) under the microscope, breaking up into one-celled, barrel-
shaped segments averaging 2-6 x 1-1.5 microns.
HABITAT Solitary to gregarious or clustered on buried pupae or less commonly larvae
(caterpillars) of mothsandbutterflies; widely distributed. It is one of the more common
species in the genus, but is rare in California. In eastern North America I have found it
several times in-the summerandfall.
EDIBILITY Unknown.
COMMENTS The orange to orange-buff, club-shaped fruiting body that arises from
mummified pupae or larvae is most distinctive. It might be confused with other clublike
fungi (e.g., Clavulinopsis. Microglossum) if it isdug upcarelesslyorthehostis overlooked,
but the pimpled upper portion (see photo on p. 883) will still identify it. Other species that
parasitize insectsanddo not have a clearly defined "head" or cap include: C. wash-
ingtonensis of the Pacific Northwest, also growing on mothandbutterfly pupae or larvae,
and very similar, but with a whitish to yellow fruiting body; C. melolanthae, growing on
beetles (usually buried grubs), sometimes in huge numbers, in eastern North America,
often larger than C. militaris. with a whitish to yellow to orange fruiting body that has a
sterile tip; C. ravenelii, a rare eastern species with a brown to chocolate-brown, purple-
brown, or blackish, club like fruiting body, also growing on beetle grubs; C. unilateralis, a
minute (up to 3 cm tallandless than I mm thick) brown easternandsouthern species that
feeds on ants, bees,andwasps;andC. clavulata, growing on scale insects. There are many
other species, particularly in eastern North Americaandthe tropics; some can only be
identified with a microscope. For species that parasitize insectsandhave a well-defined
"head," see C. myrmecophila.
Hypomyces chrysospermum (Bolete Eater)
FRUITING_BODY beginning as a white moldy-looking growth that attacksandquickly
engulfs boletes, then turns bright yellowandpowdery, then finally becomes reddish-
brown (but this last stage rarely seen)andbecomes pimpled. Flesh of the host often soft
or mushy. SPORES in white stage 10-30 x 5-12 microns, elliptical, smooth; in yellow
stage, 10-25 microns, round, thick-walled,andwarted; in final (sexual) stage, 25-30x 5-6
microns, spindle-shaped, hyaline (colorless) under the microscopeandusually I-septate
(partitioned). Perithecia only present in final stage.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious on boletes; widely distributedandvery
common in our area whenever boletes are out; also reported on Paxil/usandRhizopogon.
EDIBILITY Not edible, possibly poisonous. It is often associated with bacterial decay.
COMMENTS This is the white to bright yellow fungus you see so often on boletes, and
which you've probably cursed a hundred times for depriving you of your meal. The spores
produced in the whiteandyellow stages are asexual; only those in the final stage are per-
fect spores (sexually produced inside asci). This final stage is seldom seen, however, be-
cause it occurs only after the host is decayed beyond recognitionandis very unpleasant
to handle. The different stages of the fungus have been given different names, e.g., Sepe-
don;um chrysospermum was originally applied to the yellow stage. Other species: In our
area, H. cerv;n;genus commonly attacks the black fluted elfin saddle (Helvella lacunosa),
covering it with white or pinkish tissue. H. transformans performs a similar transfor-
mation on several species of coral fungi (particularly Ramaria). Neither of these should be
eaten. For species that attack gilled mushrooms, see H. lactifluorum.
Hypomyces lactifluorum (Lobster Mushroom) Color Plate 216
FRUITING_BODY growing onandengulfing gilled mushrooms {species of Russula and
Lactarius) in a layer of roughened or pimpled, bright orange to orange-red to purple-red
or occasionally yellow-orange tissue which is firm to the touch. Overall shape of the host
mushroomandparasite often like an inverted pyramid. Flesh (of the host) crisp, white.
SPORES 30-50 x 4.5-8 microns, spindle-shaped or shaped like caraway seeds, hyaline
(colorless) under the microscope, septate (with one partition), warted. Perithecia im-
bedded in the tissue that covers the host, but protruding as small pimples.
HABITAT Solitary, scattered, or gregarious in woods, often partially buried in the duff,
usually on the fruiting bodies of LactariusandRussula (especially the large white species
like R. brevipes); widely distributed. It is common in some regions, but rare in our area.
The largest fruitings I've seen were under ponderosa pine in the Southwest.
EDIBILITY Rated highly by many peopleandsold in markets in Mexico. There is no
absolute assurance that the host species is edible, but I can find no mention of poisonings
by this species. Perhaps it only attacks edible species! Material I sampled was fairly good.
COMMENTS This fungus is best recognized by its bright orange to reddish color and
minutely pimpled surface. The gills of the host are often reduced to blunt, chanterelle-
like ridges, but the pimpled appearance caused by the numerous peritheciaandcrisper
texture distinguish it. The bright fluorescent color of H. lactifluorum make it the most
spectacular member of its clan. H. luteov;rens is a somewhat similar yellow-green to
greenish species that covers the gillsandupper stalk of various LactariusandRussula
species. It is more common in our area thanL. lactifluorum, but not nearly as conspicuous.
H. hyal;nus is a white to pinkish or flesh-colored species that attacks species of Amanita
(particularly A. rubescens), turning them into pimpled or warty upright clubs (see photo
above). It should not be eaten because its host might be deadly poisonous! It is common
in eastern North America, but I have yet to find it on the west coast.
Xylaria hypoxylon (Candlesnuff Fungus)
FRUITING_BODY 2-8 cm high, very tough, erect, slender, cylindrical or narrowly club-
like when young but usually becoming antlerlike(branched sparsely or forked at the tip)
in age. Upper portion or tip (or occasionally entire surface) whiteandpowdery when
young, eventually becoming blackandminutely roughened (use hand lens!). Flesh very
tough, white or pallid. STALK (lower sterile portion of fruiting body) thin, usually 1-3 (5)
mm thick, black, minutely hairy, very tough or wiry. SPORES (sexual) 10-14 x 4-6
microns, bean-shaped, smooth, black in mass but brown under the microscope; asexual
spores (conidia) smoothandelliptical or elongated, white in mass but hyaline (colorless)
under the microscope. Perithecia imbedded in the upper part offully mature fruiting body.
HABITAT Scattered to densely gregarious or clustered on rotting logs, stumps, buried
sticks, etc.; very widely distributedandcommon. In our area it occurs year-round in many
habitats, but especially on oakandtanoak in the fallandwinter.
EDIBILITY Much too tough to be of value.
COMMENTS Also known as X ylosphaera hypoxylon, the candlesnuff fungus is easily
told by its very tough, slender, antlerlike fruiting body that is black belowanddusted with
white powder above. The powdered appearance of young specimens is caused by masses
of asexual spores (conidia) that form directly on hyphae instead of in asci. Later on, the
asci form inside "flasks" (perithecia) at the top of the fruiting body. There are many
Xylarias that more or less resemble this species (e.g., X. cornu-damae), but they are best
differentiated microscopically. Some are shortandcylindrical, others are branched or
clustered. All grow on wood (sometimes buried)andare very tough, For thicker club-
shaped species, see X. polymorpha.
Xylariapolymorpha (Dead Man's Fingers)
FRUITING_BODY 2-8 cm tall, 0.5-3 cm thick, very toughandhard or carbonaceous;
erect, club-or finger-shaped to somewhat irregular or twisted, the tip usually blunt or
roundedandoccasionally lobed. Outer surface hardandcrustlike, usually wrinkled,
roughened, and/or cracked, black when mature but often covered witha whitish to grayish
or brownish powder when very young. Flesh (interior) hard or corky, white or pallid.
STALK present as a short sterile base, usually well-definedandnarrower than fertile part;
black. SPORES (sexual) 20-32 x 5-10 (12) microns, spindle-shaped, smooth, dark brown
to black; asexual spores (conidia) when present smaller, elongated or elliptical, smooth,
hyaline under the microscope. Perithecia imbedded in upper portion of fruiting body.
HABITAT In groups or clusters on hardwood stumps, logs, etc., but often appearing
terrestrial if the wood is buried; widely distributedandcommon, but apparently absent
or very rare in our area. In eastern North America, where it favors beechandmaple, the
fruiting bodies usually appear in the springandmature (blacken) by the summer. They
last for months without decaying.
EDIBILITY Much too toughandrough to be edible.
COMMENTS Also known as X ylosphaera po/ymorpha, this fungus is easily recognized
by its hard, dark fingerlike fruiting bodies. They are much thicker than those of X. hy-
poxylon. Geoglossum.andTr;choglossum.andthe white or pallid interior is also dis-
tinctive. There are several very similar temperateandtropical species that are collectively
called "Dead Man's Fingers." These are differentiated primarily on microscopic charac-
teristics. One, X. long;pes, is similar but consistently slimmer (0.3-1 cm thick) than X.
polymorpha. It occurs across the continent, usually on hardwoods.
Daldinia grandis (Crampballs; Carbon Balls; King Alfreds Cakes)
FRUITING_BODY very toughandwoody or charcoal-like, 1-6 em broad or sometimes
larger, hemispherical to nearly round to somewhat lumpy or irregular, stalkless. Exterior
black (or sometimes dark brown when young), roughened or pimpled by the perithecia,
often cracked in age. Flesh (interior) brown to grayish-black, somewhat lustrous, with
lighteranddarker concentric zones; very brittleandcharcoal-like. STALK absent.
SPORES (sexual) 14-17 (27) x 6.5-11 microns, elliptical or elongated, smooth, dark brown
to black; asexual spores (conidia) minute, smooth,andhyaline (colorless) when present.
HABITAT Scattered to gregarious or in masses on dead logs, branches, or bark of hard-
woods; widely distributed. It is abundant year-round in our area, especially on oak.
EDIBILITY Unequivocally inedible-but perhaps useful as a substitute for charcoal!
COMMENTS The distinctive charcoal-like fruiting bodies of this fungus can be found
on almost any walk through the woods. The pimpled surface of mature specimens (see
photo) is caused by the protruding tips of the perithecia (flasks of asci). As in Xylaria,
younger specimens are sometimes coated with pale, asexual spores (conidia). The nick-
name "Crampballs," incidentally, can be attributed to the old folk belief that carrying
one around under your armpits would cure cramps! Other species: D. concentr;ca is the
common crampball of eastern N onh America. It is very similar to D. grandis. but has
slightly smaller sporesandis more apt to be dark brown to bronze-black when young
(and black in age). D. vern;cosa is also similar, but usually has a narrowed base beneath
the fertile ponionandan interior zoned with dark brownandwhite or gray. Other species
can only be differentiated microscopically.
